1208  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
political nature as it undertook to lead the Venezuelan people back to 
democratic constitutional government. While his Government had not 
entirely agreed with the U.S. position, the talks had made it easier to 
explain to the Venezuelan people the reasons for the U.S. program.
The Minister then alluded to the steps taken by the United States 
Government since the March consultations, (1) additional restrictions 
on crude oil imports and extension of the Buy American Act2 to the 
purchase of petroleum products by U.S. Government agencies, both 
announced on March 25, 1958; and (2) the announcement of yesterday 
of the inclusion of certain refined products on the list of items to be 
restricted for import into the United States.
The Minister said that he had been instructed to propose to the 
Secretary that the United States Government issue a statement of 
intent to take no further restrictive measures affecting the importation 
of petroleum products. He said that he had also been asked to raise 
the question of revising the list No.1 of the U.S.-Venezuelan Trade 
Agreement, i.e., the items on which Venezuela has granted concessions 
to the United States, as compensation for the reduced oil exports to the 
United States due to the U.S. voluntary restrictions.
The Secretary then carefully analyzed the approach which the 
United States has taken to the subject of trade with Venezuela and 
the other nations with which it maintains friendly relations, making 
the following principal points: (1) his own philosophy was perhaps 
best expressed in a statement in which he collaborated when he was 
a member of the Commission for the Establishment of a Durable and 
Just Peace on Sept. 18, 1941 in which the principle was clearly set forth 
that the U.S. should consult with its trading partners prior to taking 
any important steps affecting their joint trade in order to avoid as far 
as possible damaging the economy of its friends; (2) governments, by 
their very nature, are expected to defend the interests of their own cit-
izens and, unless this is done, they will be unable to govern; (3) at the 
same time that the domestic interests are being considered, govern-
ments should take into account the economic and political effects of 
important decisions on their trading partners who must also look after 
the interest of their own people, and this the United States has under-
taken to do; (4) one of the best examples of our dedication to the prin-
ciple of free and unrestricted trade is the reciprocal trade legislation, 
extension of which is now being debated in the Congress; (5) no nation 
in the world has taken as enlightened an attitude toward trade as the 
United States, nor has any other nation ever shown as much concern 
2 Reference is to Title III of the Appropriation Act of 1933 (Public Law 428), enacted 
March 3, 1933. For text of the Act, see 47 Stat. 1439.
