210  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
SPECIFIC COMMENTS:
a. Conclusions:
1. The first conclusion that “The United States has the capability to 
deal successfully with situations requiring limited military operations” 
is not completely supported by the remaining conclusions and the dis­
cussion. It would seem that the conclusion requires qualification.
2. Reference Para. 4. The intent of the first sentence, i.e., “No mil­
itary tasks were found to be unique to limited military operations,” 
is not clear. Certainly many of the tasks which may have to be per­
formed under such conditions would be vastly different from those 
in the event of general war. This raises the question as to whether the 
present trend of weapons is such that U.S. forces will become increas­
ingly more inflexible. In this connection, it would appear that this 
Para. was written primarily from a viewpoint of air operations and 
does not give due recognition to the problems arising in connection 
with ground forces.
3. Reference Para. 7. It is noted in this Para. that “initial reliance 
was placed upon Air and Naval forces because they were in position 
and most capable of fast reaction.” While the Air and Naval forces may 
be positioned and capable of fast reaction in certain instances, there is 
a question as to their capability to react effectively under all situations. 
In this connection it is pointed out that in the early days of Korea the 
initial U.S. position was to counter the aggression by use of Air and 
Naval forces. It soon became evident that such action was not sufficient 
and that ground forces had to be deployed to the Peninsula at an early 
date. Although this Para. recognises that in many cases the intervention 
of U.S. ground forces will be essential, the timely availability of these 
forces is predicated on their proximity or on available air/sea lift.
4. Reference Paras. 9 and 11. These conclusions indicate that for U.S. 
forces to be most effective, they must be applied quickly. Yet the rapidity 
with which ground forces can be committed to action is depend­ent upon 
availability of sea/air lift, a questionable capability.
5. Reference Para. 15. This conclusion raises a question as to 
whether or not the U.S. stocks of “low yield weapons” and “clean 
weapons” are available in sufficient quantities for use in the operations 
as visualized to allow the U.S. to carry out defense without generating 
adverse reactions referred to in Paras. 17 and 18. A more complete fac­
tual exploration and exposition of the subject seems indicated.
b. Recommendations:
1. Reference Para. 2. This Para. points out that “even though nuclear 
weapons are not used in limited military operations, public reaction 
world-­wide, based primarily on fear of general war, will be adverse to 
U.S. military intervention.” This recommendation would seem to be
