466 Foreign Relations, 1958ŌĆō1960, Volume III, Supplement The Consumption Program 63. A third major economic task is fulfillment of KhrushchevŌĆÖs consumption goals, which are more ambitious and more specific than those embodied in MalenkovŌĆÖs economic policy of 1953ŌĆō54. In place of MalenkovŌĆÖs emphasis upon light industry; priority is now focused upon agriculture and housing. The goals are unlikely to be attained on schedule, but even the effort required to make substantial progress toward them may involve sharp competition with other priorities. In the distribution of state investment, for example, agriculture and hous┬Ł ing together, which received less than one-┬Łfourth of the total in 1953, got almost one-┬Łthird in the 1957 plan. Again, in its attempt to increase peasant incentives, the state markedly increased the prices it pays for deliveries of agricultural products. Great priority is being attached to the state farms, which are currently being rapidly expanded, partly at the expense of the collective farm sector. 64. The major agricultural target is to reach American levels of per capita production of milk and meat, the former by 1958, the latter by 1960ŌĆō61. Fodder supplies are the primary obstacle, but a large increase in the grain harvest is hoped for. This increase is to be obtained from reduced losses as more machinery makes possible faster harvesting, from higher yields resulting from better cultural practices, and from some further expansion of cultivated area. A plan has been launched to increase the New Lands acreage by about one third in the next two years, partly to provide for proper crop rotation, and Khrushchev may be considering even further expansions of cultivation into marginal areas. The New Lands and any future additions will produce lower crop yields than those obtainable in the traditional areas of cultivation and will be subject to frequent failures, but we estimate that they will increase the total harvest at a cost acceptable to the Soviet authorities. 65. While many of the major commodity goals cannot be met, agricultural production as a whole will increase faster than population growth and may by 1962 be nearly one-┬Łfifth over the peak year 1956. Achievement of US levels of per capita meat and milk output on the stipulated schedule is out of the question, but the progress recently made and the great emphasis now being placed on these branches sug┬Ł gest that the Soviet consumer will note a substantial increase in sup┬Ł plies of animal products. 66. The housing decree of mid-1957 raised the Sixth Five-Year Plan target from 289 million to 329 million square meters. While the state left its own house-┬Łbuilding target virtually unchanged, it did increase by about one-┬Łfifth the allocation devoted to meeting that target, and it also committed itself to provide additional materials to private builders. If the housing goal is to be met, either a substantial above-┬Łplan increase in production of building materials or diversion of them from other
