Chapter 4, February–April 1990 561 Shevardnadze: Maybe we can decide this way. I will go ahead and convey this to Moscow and then give you an answer back on all this after my return to Moscow. Baker: We can work out the details of the schedule through normal diplomatic procedure. Tomorrow we will announce only that there will be a Summit in the United States and we will announce what the timeframe is from Wednesday, May 30th to June 3rd. Shevardnadze: That’s fine. We might also announce the next ministerial. Baker: Well, we need not do that as part of the White House statement. We can do that at the conclusion of our meeting in our press statements. Shevardnadze: That’s fine. What is important to me is that the May 16th–19th dates are acceptable to you for the ministerial. The only disadvantage that I see of those dates is that they are too close to the Summit. On the other hand, that gives our delegations a chance to work and to prove themselves; they are going to have a lot to do so that the Summit is well-­prepared by the end of that meeting. I brought with me a letter2 from President Gorbachev that responds to President Bush’s letter.3 I’ll give the original to President Bush in the meeting but I wanted to give you an advance copy so that you could tell the President about the contents. Let me make some preliminary comments on the letter. You will see in the letter that we are providing some answers to some of the questions you have raised. I would like to emphasize that we gave very close consideration to the letter and we take a very broad view of the problems and of the issues that will come up in the future talks after the 50% reduction treaty is concluded. Overall, our approach is that we need to really focus on concluding the 50% reductions treaty. I know this is a view that you share as well. This will enable us to initial the treaty at the Summit so that we can sign the treaty by the end of the year. As I have said, we still have quite a few issues that have to be worked out in the treaty, and they are both of a substantive and technical nature. It is going to require a lot of work to get that done. I know that your people have proposed that we should take an inventory of all the issues between us and see where we stand on each of them. I support this. I think it is a practical and appropriate way to proceed. I’d like to direct our people to do this exercise. Baker: Good. 2 See Document 91. 3 See Document 90.
