900 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Finally, there is the ever-present anxiety about the future after Tito, now exacerbated by unease over the approaching demise of Brezhnev. 4. Yet in many respects Yugoslavia continues to be a rather amazing success story. Robust real economic growth continues at about 7 per cent annually. The people enjoy access to a wide range of consumer goods and seem to find little difficulty in paying the skyrocketing prices for them. Travel to the West—and the input of Western ideas here—is virtually unhindered. Intellectual and academic exchanges with the West grow annually; exchanges with the US are especially valued. There are few barriers to artistic creativity. In sum, the “quality of life” for the average Yugoslav is good, and he expects it to get better. If it doesn’t, a post-Tito regime could find itself facing political consequences. But the converse is true: so long as the standard of living continues perceptibly to improve, this will be an important element of stability after Tito. 5. Tito and the succession. NIE 15–79,3 just published in Washington, gingerly concludes that Yugoslavia is only “marginally” more [garble—likely?] to make it through a transition period without major turmoil. We, too, are guarded in our prognosis—but continue to believe that the centripetal forces in post-Tito Yugoslavia will prevail over the centrifugal. The forces acting to hold the country together include an acutely felt “hang together or hang separately” syndrome; economic imperatives; an experienced, pragmatic—if undistinguished—collective leadership accustomed to brokering regional interests: and the vested interest of the “new class” which has expanded since Djilas’ classic exposition in 1953 to include an acquisitive, consumerist, thoroughly Western-oriented middle class. 6. The greatest danger is nationalism. Despite Tito’s heroics, intercommunal hatreds have not been extinguished in the 34 years since WWII. Small but fanatic and determined emigre extremist groups stand eager—perhaps with KGB help—to foment and exploit internal turmoil. They are too weak, and sympathy for terrorism within the country too slight, to create by themselves a major problem within the country after Tito dies. They could, nevertheless, exploit a deteriorating situation and, with Soviet help, pose a potentially serious problem. 7. Two factors, difficult to predict, will greatly influence the situation when Tito dies: the domestic economic situation, and the international political scene. As indicated, Yugoslavia is now facing serious economic problems, but it has survived similar difficulties in the past. The Yugoslav nightmare is that the Tito and Brezhnev transitions coincide, although Tito seems in much better health than Brezhnev. While 3 See Document 269.
