366
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
rights; in much of the area there has been a deterioration in human
rights situations; and our past support for military regimes in the area
does identify us with their excesses. It may also be true, however, that
some human rights activists (in and out of government) are more inter-
ested in castigating those rightist dictatorships supported by previous
US Administrations than in an evenhanded application of the policy.
Whatever our motives, we do risk letting the human rights policy ap-
pear to be yet another incarnation of traditional big-stick interven-
tionism, while we shy away from more risky problems in other parts of
the world.
Sticks vs. Carrots
We are on record as being more interested in helping governments
who are trying to improve their human rights situations than in de-
nying assistance to offenders. In practice, however, we are doing far
more of the latter than the former.
Especially in foreign assistance—our chief concrete source of influ-
ence—we have been mostly responding to human rights violations.
That possibly was inevitable during this first year of a new policy. We
have had to decide what position to take on loans as they came forward
in the international financial institutions; changing the internal focus of
the IFI’s so that their lending programs would do more to promote
human rights would be harder, and take a lot more time. Even in our
bilateral aid programs, which we can control, it is difficult and time
consuming (years rather than months) to develop and obtain local and
Congressional approval of new programs. Similarly, it is easier—and
makes us look better—to reduce or end military programs than to con-
sider how or whether some of them (and especially the training pro-
grams) can be used to promote human rights. Thus across-the-board
the “reward” approach is lagging well behind the punitive.
Our Criteria: Rhetoric vs. Actions
Finally, we say that all three aspects of human rights (integrity of
the person; economic rights; political rights) are equally important. But
our loan decisions are in fact much tougher on governments which
practice torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, and other violations of
the person, than on countries where there is little political liberty.
Moreover, while we try to promote economic human rights by sup-
porting “basic human needs” loans even to most serious human rights
offenders, we do not give a government’s own efforts to promote eco-
nomic development or equity equal weight with its record on political
liberties when assessing its overall human rights performance. (South
Korea, most socialist states of Eastern Europe, and Vietnam might rank
quite high if we did.)
