Afghanistan Uncoordinated Rebellions There is little cooperation among the various rebel groups operating in Afghanistan’s tribal areas. Along the Pakistani border, however, there has been limited cooperation between neighboring tribes, [2 lines, classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified] Coordination is better among the exile groups in Pakistan, but despite an announcement on 11 March that the three most important factions would cooperate, there has been little indication that they are actually working together. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The tribal rebels alone have little immediate prospect of overthrowing the Taraki government. The tribes can hold their own in the mountains and may even win minor victories against the government, but they have little chance of capturing a major city or waging a successful campaign outside the tribal areas. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The government was confronted with a different and more threatening challenge in western Afghanistan last month when mobs, aided by personnel from the local military garrison, took over parts of Herat, the country’s third largest city. After several days, reinforced government troops regained control of the city, but not the surrounding areas. This appears to have been a largely spontaneous uprising not directly related to the tribal insurgencies. ([classification marking not declassified]) In the cities and those rural areas where the government has traditionally maintained control, the people have fewer arms and are more poorly organized than the tribesmen. Popular unrest could again erupt into rioting as it did in Herat, but sustained resistance will depend on the refusal of government troops to oppose the rebels. A few organizations—such as the Muslim Brotherhood—may still be able to stage isolated terrorist acts in the cities. ([classification marking not declassified]) Foreign Support Foreign backing for the insurgents is limited. Exile groups in Pakistan claim—and probably have received—some support from Saudi Arabia. They also assert that China has offered them arms. This cannot be confirmed. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) Pakistan has permitted Afghan exiles, Pakistani religious organizations, and tribesmen to funnel some help to the Afghan tribes. There is little Islamabad could do to prevent Pakistani tribesmen from assisting their Afghan neighbors across the very porous border, and it is not inclined to try. The evidence, however, suggests no significant Pakistani military support for the rebels. Occasionally, when exile groups have been too open in their activities, the government has
