Afghanistan
149
Uncoordinated Rebellions
There is little cooperation among the various rebel groups operat-
ing in Afghanistan’s tribal areas. Along the Pakistani border, however,
there has been limited cooperation between neighboring tribes, [2 lines,
classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]
Coordination is better among the exile groups in Pakistan, but
despite an announcement on 11 March that the three most important
factions would cooperate, there has been little indication that they are
actually working together. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
The tribal rebels alone have little immediate prospect of overthrow-
ing the Taraki government. The tribes can hold their own in the moun-
tains and may even win minor victories against the government, but
they have little chance of capturing a major city or waging a successful
campaign outside the tribal areas. ([classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified])
The government was confronted with a different and more threat-
ening challenge in western Afghanistan last month when mobs, aided
by personnel from the local military garrison, took over parts of Herat,
the country’s third largest city. After several days, reinforced govern-
ment troops regained control of the city, but not the surrounding areas.
This appears to have been a largely spontaneous uprising not directly
related to the tribal insurgencies. ([classification marking not declassified])
In the cities and those rural areas where the government has tradi-
tionally maintained control, the people have fewer arms and are more
poorly organized than the tribesmen. Popular unrest could again erupt
into rioting as it did in Herat, but sustained resistance will depend on
the refusal of government troops to oppose the rebels. A few organiza-
tions—such as the Muslim Brotherhood—may still be able to stage
isolated terrorist acts in the cities. ([classification marking not declassified])
Foreign Support
Foreign backing for the insurgents is limited. Exile groups in Paki-
stan claim—and probably have received—some support from Saudi
Arabia. They also assert that China has offered them arms. This can-
not be confirmed. ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
Pakistan has permitted Afghan exiles, Pakistani religious organiza-
tions, and tribesmen to funnel some help to the Afghan tribes. There
is little Islamabad could do to prevent Pakistani tribesmen from assist-
ing their Afghan neighbors across the very porous border, and it is
not inclined to try. The evidence, however, suggests no significant
Pakistani military support for the rebels. Occasionally, when exile
groups have been too open in their activities, the government has
