190
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ofir5 for civilian purposes only; d) the right of free passage by ships of
Israel and other nations through the Strait of Tiran, the Gulf of Suez
and the Suez Canal; e) the construction of an international highway be-
tween the Sinai and Jordan near Eilat; and f) the stationing of military
forces; steps listed below (will be resolved by negotiations between the
parties.)
Stationing of forces
—Within an area lying approximately 50 kilometers (km) east of
the Gulf of Suez and the Suez Canal, no more than one division of
Egyptian mechanized or infantry armed forces will be stationed.
—Only United Nations forces and civil police equipped with light
weapons to perform normal police functions will be stationed lying
west of6 the international border and the Gulf of Aqaba, varying in
width from 20 km to 40 km, and east of the same border approximately
5 km in width.
—in the area not included above, border patrol units, not to exceed
three battalions, will supplement the civil police in maintaining order.
The exact demarcation of the above areas will be as mutually
agreed during the peace negotiations.
Early warning stations may exist as mutually agreed to insure
compliance with the terms of the agreement.
United Nations forces will be stationed in the Sharm el Sheikh area
to insure freedom of passage through the Straits of Tiran, and will be
removed only if such agreement is approved by the Security Council of
the United Nations.
Normal relations will be established between Egypt and Israel, in-
cluding: full recognition; termination of economic boycotts; and mutual
protection of citizens by the due process of law.
INTERIM WITHDRAWAL
Between three months and nine months after the signing of the
peace treaty, all Israeli forces will withdraw east of a line extending
from a point east of El Arish to Ras Muhammad, the exact location of
this line to be determined by mutual agreement.
5 In brackets above this word, Carter wrote “Sharm al Sheikh.”
6 The remainder of this phrase was inserted from an attached typed page.
