326 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 116. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, December 29, 1979, 1701Z 8680. Subj: Sitrep No. 12: Soviet Occupation of Kabul. 1. (C—Entire text.) 2. As the second full day of the Soviet occupation of Kabul draws to a close, there is one overwhelming fact evident to all observers here. All meaningful authority in this city is exercised by the Soviet Army, with Afghan participation limited to the traffic police, and a diminishing number of machine-gun toting civilians with white arm bands who apparently are supposed to give the current situation some semblance of legitimacy. We hesitate to risk belaboring this point, but we think it is worth emphasizing that heavily armed Soviet troopers and armored equipment are stationed at every important point throughout the city, they control traffic around the important arteries and crossroads, and they continue to move at will individually and in large units to various destinations. In short, the Afghans do not exercise even a modicum of real control over their own capital. 3. Embassy personnel late today observed an almost uninterrupted stream of Soviet armored equipment and troops moving into Kabul from the north over the only paved road heading to the Salang Pass and the USSR. At this point, we are unable to say whether these forces were flown into Bagram Air Base about 25 miles north on the same highway, or whether they came overland all the way from Central Asia. At about 1615 a contingent of twenty-one BMDs, some with towed artillery, and supporting equipment passed the Embassy heading into the center of the city. At 1800, at least twenty BMPs and fifteen BMDs, each with about 6–8 Soviet troopers riding on top, passed the Embassy, also heading in the direction of downtown Kabul. We doubt that these units are ultimately destined for deployment in the city, and presume that they may be on their way to some position on the outskirts to augment the Soviet perimeter now encircling the capital. These movements, however, give some feel for the magnitude of the Soviet Army’s activity today as it apparently reinforces and repositions its forces in order to ensure its grip on Kabul. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 12/30/79. Confidential; Niact Immediate; Sensitive. Sent for information Priority to Ankara, Beijing, Islamabad, London, Moscow, New Delhi, USNATO, CINCPAC (also for POLAD), CINCEUR (also for POLAD), and USICA. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
