Chile  241
CH–10.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Chile (Howe) to the 
Department of State1
 
Santiago, October 28, 1958, 7 p.m.
169. IMF cabled Central Bank October 22 to effect further draw-
ings under stand-­by arrangement contingent upon “adequate action” 
to bring Chile into compliance with its undertakings.
Mackenna Central Bank advised Embassy that funds decision 
placed Chile in serious foreign exchange situation. He has obtained 
executive approval raise Central Bank’s selling rate immediately by 
20 points to 828 (maximum possible without causing price increases, 
especially of gasoline). Central Bank is so advising fund and calling 
their attention compliance on agreed issue limit. Proposed depreciation 
would narrow spread between bankers and brokers market to around 
150 pesos, compared with spread of around 300 pesos in September.
Without scheduled fourth quarter drawings from IMF, private 
banks, EXIM Bank and ICA totaling 13 million dollars, Central Bank 
faces estimated exchange deficit of 11.1 million dollars at end of year. 
Without further drawings bank estimates its foreign exchange reserves 
(other than gold) will be exhausted by around November 8 due in part 
necessity meeting 2.5 million dollar payment EXIM Bank October 31.
Timing IMF cut-­off most unfortunate. Ibanez administration will 
take no steps alter situation beyond what Central Bank proposing to 
IMF. Embassy believes it neither fair nor wise to force new administra-
tion within its first days of office to meet critical exchange situation due 
irresponsibilities old administration.
There is great optimism in Chile over Alessandri government. 
Believe one of his first acts will be endeavor bring order Chilean 
finances. Embassy urges Department encourage IMF take account 
political implications suspension at this time and permit October draw-
ing in order give Alessandri opportunity work out new arrangements 
with IMF mission early November.
Howe
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 398.13/10–2853. Confidential.
