32
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
forces. This course of action would involve little risk and if successful
would produce considerable gain at little cost. It would leave United
States forces uncommitted in Iran and hence available for other and
possibly more urgent missions. It is understood that the United
Kingdom stands ready to send a small force into Iraq or southern Iran
in such an emergency and this might be sufficient to accomplish our
purposes without the use of United States forces. Use of United
Kingdom forces probably would not have the same degree of provoca-
tion as the use of United States forces; but would give the USSR a pre-
text to invoke the 1921 Irano-Soviet Treaty of Friendship. On the other
hand, should this course prove ineffective in restoring the legitimate
government, the United States would have to accept loss of all or part
of Iran or pass to the course of action noted in the following sub-
paragraph.
c. To support the legitimate government of Iran by measures which in-
clude, inter alia, the deployment of United States armed forces (1) as a show of
force or (2) in sufficient strength to restore the legitimate government. A
show of force could be limited to air and naval action, and might be
successful in restoring the legitimate government and preserving Iran’s
alignment with the West. However, United States armed forces in suffi-
cient strength to restore the legitimate government might lead to pro-
gressively heavier commitments that the United States could not af-
ford. In any event, United States armed forces in strength to restore the
government will not be available in the foreseeable future. Commit-
ment of United States forces even in a show of force might provoke mil-
itary action by the USSR which could well lead to hostilities between
the United States and the USSR.
Third Contingency: The establishment of pro-Soviet provincial governments
in Iran by subversive or other means not involving the use of Soviet
military force.
18. The provincial administration of Iran is still subject to a high
degree of centralized control from Tehran, and the local communist
leadership in northern Iran was largely broken up when Soviet forces
retired in 1946. Therefore, even though renewed communist activity
has been reported in some parts of the area, it is doubtful that commu-
nist leadership could be re-installed in the provincial administrations,
in the absence of renewed entry of Soviet forces, unless the central gov-
ernment virtually ceased to function or was overthrown and replaced
by a pro-Soviet puppet regime. Nevertheless, establishment of pro-
Soviet provincial governments is by no means impossible if confusion
and maladministration in the Iranian Government continue for an in-
definite period and if political leadership is not greatly improved.
19. If this contingency did occur we would be faced with intensi-
fied Soviet subversive activities in the remaining free areas of Iran and
