National Security Policy  1131
pointed out that the Russians had entrapped one individual who, in his 
confession, had stated that there was an international group of homo­
sexuals. Action in this area was so distasteful that you hated to take it, 
but we needed do be more on the alert. The Attorney General said that 
he would do something. Mr. Hoover agreed that there should be some 
kind of follow-­up procedure.
Mr. Dulles pointed out that the polygraph provided clues in this 
area which often led to confessions. Mr. Hoover noted that the poly­
graph had been used on Mitchell and that it had shown that he had 
homosexual tendencies. The Attorney General agreed that the poly­
graph worked well in such cases. Mr. Dulles noted that he got a report 
every month which listed all those who had been rejected for employ­
ment by CIA for such reasons. The President expressed the view that 
such lists should be given to someone who would have responsibility 
for watching to ensure that such individuals were not employed by 
other Government agencies. Everyone who applied for a job should 
be fingerprinted. Then if you had a fingerprint and an indication that 
the individual had been rejected for such reasons, you would have a 
basis for preventing his future employment. Mr. Hoover agreed that 
this was a useful idea. Mr. Harr then noted that in the Planning Board 
discussion of the Martin-Mitchell case, reference had been made to cer­
tain studies now going on the Government looking toward a tightening 
up of security procedures. The President concluded the discussion by 
observing that it was difficult to get rid of such people once they were 
employed and that the time to catch them was when they came into the 
Government.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted and discussed the report on the status of the Internal 
Security Program as of June 30, 1960, prepared jointly by the 
Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference and the Interdepartmental 
Committee on Internal Security and transmitted as Part 7 of NSC 6013, 
as summarized orally at the meeting by the Acting NSC Representative 
on Internal Security.
b. Noted that studies are presently under way in the U.S. 
Intelligence Board and in the Interdepartmental Committee on Internal 
Security concerning, respectively, personnel and physical security mea­
sures for the protection of sensitive U.S. information from unautho­
rized disclosure.
c. Agreed that the personnel security programs of the most sensitive 
Departments and Agencies of the Executive Branch should be appro­
priately strengthened and maintained with a view to insuring against 
unauthorized disclosures of classified Government information, includ­
ing recognition of the principle that in making determinations as to the 
qualifications for employment or retention in employment of persons in 
the Federal service, all doubts must be resolved in favor of the national 
security interests of the United States.
