German Democratic Republic 131. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Vest)1 Washington, July 9, 1979 SUBJECT The GDR’s Backward Steps on Human Rights Summary The GDR appears to be going through a period of intellectual ferment characterized by an open break between the regime and some of its most prestigious writers. The Government has responded with expulsions from the writer’s union and perhaps more ominously with a series of laws late last month all tending to discourage East Germans from contact with the West. There have been some positive signs, most notably, as pointed out by Embassy Berlin, the East German public has been treated to the rare sight of something of an open debate within the GDR cultural establishment on the role of literature and writers. On the whole, however, the trend here and in the related matter of foreign journalistic activity is retrograde. It is particularly unfortunate that the areas affected are those where the GDR had been most liberal, namely the relatively easy access to Western ideas and the Western media. We seek a constructive dialogue with the GDR on human rights. One tactic that has appeared to offer some prospect is initial concentration not on the areas in which the GDR has hitherto been most nervous, the Wall and issues related to free movement of people, but on those areas where the GDR has been relatively tolerant. It is this area, however, the freer movement of ideas, that is now under attack. Our ability to make a difference in the internal debate that is occurring in East Berlin is very limited. The GDR will continue to be influenced far more decisively by its own perception of its security problems, whatever advice the Soviet Union is providing, and its judgement of the special needs of its relationship with the FRG. Nevertheless, there are several reasons for us to find an appropriate means to state our views. The GDR does have an interest in improving relations with the U.S. It should be aware of the negative impact that recent actions 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian
