1955 431 that they would be willing to agree to renunciation of force declaration in exchange for withdrawal of U.S. forces from Taiwan. He has never defined or been specific about this. I am not sure whether he is talking just about the air unit which we have stationed there, which is, I under­ stand, our only tactical unit on the island, or whether he is talking about the whole complex of the MAAG and the Seventh Fleet. It might be, as indicated in my today’s telegram, that they are will­ ing to keep these talks going indefinitely as an alternative to making decisions on these problems which are even more difficult for them than for us. However, it is too early to come to any firm conclusion on this. I am not sure where all of this leads us but simply wanted fully to share with you some of our talk on the subject. If the opportunity arises, I hope to talk some of these things through with the Secretary while he is here, but before doing so would appreciate having FE reactions to some of these hypotheses. Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador P.S. In case you haven’t seen it, I thought you would be amused at the enclosed FBIS. You should have somebody get out the original New York Times story to which it refers. 308. Letter 21 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 21 Washington, October 21, 1955 Dear Alex: The Secretary is due to arrive in Geneva on Wednesday afternoon, October 26. I have just talked to Rod O’Connor for the second time regarding contacts with you. We think the arrangement for the handling of your instructions during the Foreign Ministers Conference should work all right. The regular instructions to you will continue to be han­ dled in the Department, but will be repeated to the Secretary in the TEDUL series. We will take particular pains to get these instructions out on the Tuesday before the Thursday meetings, so there will be time for the Secretary to amend or comment on the instructions if he wishes to do 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­Informal.
