308 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 4. Nimetz told Johanes that the 10th anniversary of 1968 is not the only difficulty. The problem is the general atmosphere in Czechoslovakia and its hostility to the US and to US journalists. Nimetz said he personally would like nothing better than to be able to begin spending time in improving relations with Czechoslovakia. He reiterated that there is no impediment on the US side to improved relations, citing his own participation in arrangements to return the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary and in negotiations to extend it MFN tariff status. The key was that the USG thought that Hungary had worked out problems in a constructive way. Even Bulgaria and East Germany have found it possible to improve relations with the US. Czechoslovakia could, too. Relations cannot become much worse. 5. Pavel Vosicky case. Nimetz raised Vosicky’s case as an example of GOC actions which harm relations. Nimetz explained that Vosicky wants to visit his dying mother but has been unable recently to obtain a visa. The GOC, on humanitarian if no other grounds, could have given Vosicky a visa. Its refusal has produced a markedly negative reaction in the USG which contributes to a further deterioration of relations. 6. Claims/Gold. Johanes said the GOC is eager for a settlement; American claimants need the remainder of their compensation. He said the GOC thought the 1974 Agreement was a good one; even the State Department said so until recently. The 1974 Agreement provided for roughly the same percentage settlement as those the USG has negotiated with other EE states. Johanes stressed that the Czechoslovak people do not accept the USG’s refusal to release the gold and it is difficult to explain why the USG refuses when France and Britain have agreed to do so. Johanes noted that the UK and Czechoslovakia do not yet have a claims settlement agreement yet there is no dispute over the gold. Although it disliked the idea, the GOC agreed in 1974 to the USG’s desire to link the issues. Johanes emphasized that the GOC regards this issue as most important. Until it is resolved, it will be impossible to improve relations. 7. Nimetz responded that the State Department’s attitude to the 1974 Agreement is academic; the Congress requires renegotiation and any agreement must be acceptable to the Congress. This will take some time. The USG is working on its position. Clearly, the 1974 Agreement is no longer adequate. The price of gold has increased, and the dollar has depreciated.Theclaims settlementagreementswithother EEstateswere negotiated years ago. The settlements were worth much more then. The GOC loses nothing on the gold. The American claimants lost their properties and deserve compensation. Nimetz asked if the GOC wants to discuss the issue. Johanes said yes, that Ambassador Byrne had said he would return to Czechoslovakia last year with a new proposal but had
