148 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 number of these people will have emotional problems for the balance of their lives because of the extreme strain on their emotions; —I believe that Khomeini should be held indirectly responsible for the deaths of the two Americans in Pakistan; it was certainly the example of the Iranian Embassy that stimulated the Paks to overrun our embassy at Islamabad;5 —If there is not a successful political solution to this crisis, SALT II will not be ratified, and the cost of not having a SALT relationship with the Soviets will work an additional hardship on our own country not to mention the great threat to the cause of world peace; If we are ultimately successful in getting our people back via the UN channel, the balance sheet will be far from even. I would argue that we have to do something that is measured and reasonable to meet domestic political pressures and to serve as a deterrent to others who might be tempted to test us in the months and years ahead. If and when we get our people back safely, there will be tremendous pressure for you to do nothing. People who urge us to do nothing will use the Soviet threat as a primary excuse. But, if after such an outrageous act directed against us by another country, we are compelled to sit silent and not retaliate, then perhaps we really have become a helpless giant.6 There is certainly less respect at home and abroad than there should be for U.S. military and economic strength. We can certainly argue that our nation’s cumulative strength is greatly underestimated but at some point that perception becomes reality. I believe that a measured punitive act is absolutely essential to your own re-election and to America’s image in the world. I don’t think that the break in diplomatic relations is particularly relevant to the American people and that economic measures are difficult to explain and/or appreciate. Thirdly, implied in all of this is the fact that we will probably not have good relations with Iran for some time to come. We will obviously have to be concerned about Soviet attitudes and actions in that area of the world, but we will have to accept the fact that it will probably be difficult to have good relations for some time to come. Even after Khomeini falls, his great legacy will probably be that he personally engendered an anti-American xenophobia that will remain among Ira- 5 On November 21, Pakistani protestors attacked the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad, then broke into the compound, killing one Marine Security Guard. The riots may have been triggered by a radio address by Khomeini alleging that the United States was responsible for the occupation of the Grand Mosque in Mecca on November 20. President Zia ordered the Pakistani Army to rescue the trapped Americans. For documentation on the incident, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia, Documents 376–388. 6 If we don’t act in such a clear-cut example of international bad behavior, what would it take for our country to act? [Footnote is in the original.]
