Afghanistan
29
nant family in the dominant tribe of the Pushtun ethnic group.
Although some of the leaders of the new government—including Prime
Minister Taraki—are Pushtuns, they have no claim to prestige and
respect on the basis of their position in the tribal hierarchy.
This lack of experience and tribal status need not be fatal, but will
make it more difficult to deal with other problems. The new rulers are
trying to overcome this weakness. Their slaughter of Daoud’s family
and their denunciations of misrule by Daoud and his ancestors and
relatives is designed both to eliminate rivals and to discredit the entire
concept of selecting rulers on the traditional basis.
Probably more important will be the policies of the new govern-
ment. Their initial pronouncements, especially support for Islam and
national independence, are a clear indication that the new leaders are
aware of the risks of running counter to the xenophobia and deeply
religious sentiments of most of the population. Some observers believe
that the Communist leaders are basically nationalists despite their long-
standing ties to Moscow. If so, they might pursue a policy aimed at
preserving at least some opening to the West.
Any direct attack on religion in Afghanistan would be risky. Right-
wing Islamic groups, such as the Muslim Brotherhood, may increase
their activities and further assassination attempts are likely. Although
the government denies that it is Communist, popular suspicion of the
government will grow as word spreads that the Communists—i.e., the
atheists—are in power.3 Past efforts at modernization have brought
strong reactions, and any major effort by a Communist government to
tamper with tradition or institute strong central government control
could bring widespread popular unrest, despite the normal lack of
interest in politics by most of the populace.
Iran and Pakistan
The probability of at least limited foreign meddling in Afghanistan
is high. The Shah of Iran has long argued that the Soviets are attempting
to encircle Iran, and to use their position in Afghanistan to break up
Pakistan, thereby allowing them the use of southwestern Pakistan as
an outlet to the Indian Ocean. The Shah sees the recent coup as confir-
mation of his worst fears, and it is highly likely that he will order some
kind of clandestine operation against the new government. Iranian
capabilities are limited, however, and probably would become a threat
to Kabul only if the government already faced significant resistance
3 Reporting from Kabul described the new regime’s self-identification in more mod-
erate terms. For example, in telegram 3311 from Kabul, April 29, the Embassy noted that
the new regime was “still avoiding the use of obvious Communist claptrap.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780184–0066)
