142 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Subject to your separate decision on the advertising component, we recommend that you approve the general outline of the program. Approve3 Disapprove Let’s discuss this further Advertising Component of the Program Commerce proposes to spend about $1 million per year ($3 million total) to provide financial support for increased advertising by the domestic industry. Commerce argues that there is precedent for U.S. Government financial support for advertising (tourism and certain agricultural products) and that such advertising will be helpful in securing retailer support of the program. Charlie Schultze argues that subsidized advertising is a questionable Government activity and sets a bad precedent for other industries that may seek similar assistance. On balance, we do not think it would be good policy for the Administration to spend money for domestic advertising. Approve advertising component of the program (Recommended by Commerce) Disapprove (Recommended by Charlie Schultze and us)4 Presidential Announcement of the Program Ambassador Strauss believes that you should not personally announce the program. He is skeptical about the viability of the program and thinks there is insufficient reason for you to undertake what he regards as risky personal exposure. Under Secretary Harman believes it is important that you personally announce the program. He thinks that your personal involvement will increase the chances that the program will work, particularly in solidifying the moral obligation of the major retailers to increase their purchases from the affected shoe companies. We agree and would add the following points: (1) your personal involvement will demonstrate your commitment to developing good trade adjustment assistance programs and enhance the Administration’s credibility in this area generally; 3 Carter checked this option and wrote in the adjacent margin: “Kreps announce— not much fanfare. Emphasize ‘one-time trial’ basis. No precedent being established. No extra budget requests. J.C.” 4 Carter checked this option.
