1978 223 IV. READINESS I should emphasize that, while the prospect of short, intense wars makes it necessary to have our main conventional forces in being, that alone is not sufficient. We must also maintain a high level of readiness in our active forces. Otherwise, we will have the facade rather than the reality of collective security. I consider our forces to be ready when they are well trained, have modern unit equipment in good operating order, hold war reserve stocks on which they can draw for the early stages of any conflict and are capable of timely response to crisis. Unfortunately, I cannot report that our forces, by this definition, are as ready as I would like them to be. There are several reasons for the current state of affairs. Our necessary efforts to conserve fuel have meant reductions in ground combat training exercises, Navy steaming hours, and flying hours for all services (although we have been able to make some substitution for these losses, using simulators). Modernization, in some cases, has brought with it shorter mean-­times to failure, longer repair times, and increased training requirements, as well as greater sophistication and capability of equipment. Inflation, increased pay, and the need to modernize our forces have meant curtailed funds for operation and maintenance. The conventional wisdom has been that, in an emergency, the neglect of readiness can be quickly overcome by a rapid infusion of resources. Whatever merit this wisdom may have had when the United States had ample time for extended mobilization, it is now out of date. We have not yet developed the methodological tools to show the precise sensitivity of readiness to changes in our commitment of resources. But loss of readiness is a cumulative process that takes time as well as money to reverse. Accordingly, we must keep up our training not only because U.S. forces may be sent into action with very little advance warning, but also because we rely increasingly on the sophistication of our equipment to compensate for potential superiority in enemy numbers. It is equally essential that our war reserve stocks be maintained, mostly for our own needs, but to some degree for Asian allies as well. At the same time, we must raise the percentage of our equipment that is combat-­ready because, owing to unit costs, we have less of it to bring to bear in an emergency. To put the matter bluntly, unless we are prepared to maintain these components of readiness, collective security and deterrence will be seriously undermined. The increased resources in the FY 1979 budget will permit us to get on with the job.
