Romania 545 The Cult of Personality Intensifies The earthquake provided Ceausescu with an unparalleled opportunity to display his complete dominance of party and state activity. The press provided saturation coverage of his highly visible control of relief and rescue operations, which extended to personal supervision of (and sometimes participation in) individual rescue operations. Praise of Ceausescu’s “titanic” leadership reached a new pitch of intensity. The eulogies even took on quasi-religious overtones, as when the Foreign Minister announced that the “miracle” of recovery from the earthquake did not come from heaven but from “the great force of mobilization and action of our party Secretary General Nicolae Ceausescu whose example in those tragic days has already entered the heroic history of our people.” Attempts were also made to include Ceausescu’s wife Elena (appointed to the Permanent Bureau in January) in this glorification campaign. The increasingly prominent role played in recent years by Mrs. Ceausescu, who by most evidence is the most unpopular member of the leadership, has been a political liability for her husband.4 Evidently her appointment on March 10 to head a “National Committee of Assistance” to coordinate internal and foreign donations was not well received. Nothing further has been heard about the committee or about Mrs. Ceausescu’s role in earthquake assistance. Popular Discontent in Post-Earthquake Period Ceausescu’s political exploitation of the catastrophe clearly alienated the Romanian elite. For the average Romanian, however, political issues remain secondary to pocketbook issues, and in the aftermath of the earthquake the latter took on added significance and sensitivity. Any hopes the public may have had that the trauma would prompt a fundamental reevaluation of economic priorities were disabused within a few days. Even before the full extent of economic loss could be assessed, Ceausescu emphasized that the five-year plan targets would have to be met “in accordance with the initial provisions.” Subsequently, however, the need to give a psychological boost to a weary and disillusioned population was recognized, and in May the regime announced a program of wage and pension increases designed to put more money in consumers’ pockets. The program as a whole has nonetheless been greeted with skepticism because of uncertainty 4 An unflattering portrayal of a character thought to represent Elena in a 1971 novel by Paul Goma caused the book’s rejection and completed Goma’s alienation from the regime. Ceausescu’s three children—Valentin, Zoe, and Nicu are—less prominent, and therefore less unpopular than Elena, but their personalities and penchant for high living are further liabilities for Ceausescu. [Footnote is in the original.]
