December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
697
try to get a peaceful resolution of the differences. I would like to end
my visit with a peace treaty, following which we need to prepare for a
massive interaction between our two governments, not only in the mili-
tary and economic relationships, but only in the private sector. We
need to get American business leaders to the White House to get them
to come to Egypt to work on problems of food, housing, and infrastruc-
ture. It would be good for us both. The prospects are good if Israel
wants peace. If they don’t, I can’t help. I’ll represent your interests and
concerns.
President Sadat: I am happy. Let me express the gratitude for your
sincerity and your generosity. You have shown brotherhood to my
people and have held out the promise of peace. I was with my aides
and I told them that I gave two directives for the negotiations. This trip
of yours, which is very daring and very courageous, should end in a
smashing success. Second, we shall always feel proud and happy to
keep our positions identical. This is our intention. What you saw today
and yesterday is the magic of the word peace. Last Christmas, in 1978, I
was in upper Egypt and I visited a small remote village. I saw there the
same feelings that you saw today.3 You even feel this in the remote
areas.
My people admire you, your principles, your morals, your assist-
ance and your help. We have suffered from foreign domination here.
The last were the Soviets, before then the British. For two thousand
years Egypt has been ruled by foreign rulers until the Egyptian Revolu-
tion. That was the first time that Egyptians could take pride. It was
really something to be proud. Now we are proud that the relations be-
tween Egypt and the United States have been established. In the bottom
of the heart of each Egyptian is a feeling of friendship for the United
States. We had 18 years of confrontation, but you saw the sentiments
that they expressed today. Any American citizen can feel how much
they cherish American friendship. When we started in 1973 with the
peace process, my people were proud to have the United States as
friends. I got hundreds of letters from ordinary American citizens.
I want you to know that we shall always be friends. I will always
be proud of your friendship and brotherhood whatever happens. To
make this trip a success is a success for all who value morals. I would
like to show you more of my country.
President Carter: I’d like to come back.
President Sadat: You know our position. You have spent your time
on this problem in a marvelous way. We shall never be able to meet
3 Carter wrote in his memoirs that he and Sadat were met in Alexandria, having
traveled by special train from Cairo on March 9, “by the largest and most enthusiastic
crowds I have ever seen.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 419)
