National Security Policy  225
we do not. This doubt is increasingly expressed by governments and 
demagogic mass leaders. Reads Sandys’ statement at Copenhagen 
(based on Cabinet submitted paper) to above effect (i.e., after U.S. is 
under USSR ICBM capability of attack, will it go to help Turkey or 
Western Europe). Cannot rely indefinitely on our nuclear retaliatory 
attack to preserve peace?
c. France pushing nuclear programs (a) to get in nuclear club; (b) 
sharing Sandys’ doubts, it wants own capability to invoke nuclear 
defense of France. What will JFD say when he visits de Gaulle in July.
d. Time is soon coming when our NATO allies will not be satis­
fied that U.S. will surely go to general nuclear war to defend them, if 
attacked, and risk American devastation; and will demand a surer stra­
tegic concept. They do not yet know what they will do:
(1) Probably try to develop own nuclear stocks so as to create 
nuclear war, if they wish, regardless of U.S.
(2) Dangerous situation if we do not have common strategic concept 
to use in defending our common alliance.
(3) France can’t financially afford to be an independent nuclear 
power. Can the British or Italians? Will public opinion permit West Ger­
mans to do so? Perhaps the four together could.
e. Is an area defense in Europe based on use of tactical nuclear 
weapons a feasible enough arrangement to calm our allies? If they have 
somewhat greater right to use nuclear weapons in area defense, would 
that suffice? Otherwise, a futile brief effort on their part to become 
nuclear powers, followed by trend to neutralism. Dulles feels this trend 
is inevitable, within a few years (not in next one or two).
f. The European doubt is rational—­will U.S. return to isolationism? 
Would another President than Eisenhower take the awful risk of dam­
aging so much America to go to help Turkey?
g. Dulles does not have answer to problem. All he says is to doubt 
whether Europeans will long continue to rely on the military concept 
that U.S., after ICBM capability of USSR to plaster U.S., will come to 
help an attack on Europe by USSR.
5. McElroy: Is not the continued presence of U.S. troops in large 
numbers in Europe a gage that the U.S. will respond to protect them in 
Europe.
Dulles: If a conventional war starts in Europe, would we involve in 
nuclear retaliation or would we consider slaughter of U.S. troops over­
seas? Neither he nor McElroy could answer this question.
He does not consider preventive war as a solution to the problem. 
(Even with preventive war, the U.S. cannot be safe from terrible harm. 
(Quarles))
6. Quarles: Does not neutralism endanger a European country more 
than association with the U.S., and punishment resulting?
7. McElroy: Can you use tactical nuclear weapons in Europe with­
out spreading into general nuclear war? Dulles thinks not. But he says 
many people might think the U.S. more likely to get into defense of 
Europe, if gradually by using tactical weapons, instead of a massive 
sudden nuclear retaliation.
