I replied to all of them that I was without specific instructions, but that the impartiality of the United States was beyond question and that the honor of the American Nation required guarantee of fairness to both Chile and Peru; that I could make no report as I had no personal knowledge; that General Pershing could give the Government of the United States full information and that the Chilean Ambassador in Washington was the one to make such representations as Chile wished to make to the American Government; that Chile’s right to govern the territory carried with it the responsibility of maintaining order; and that if either Chile or Peru withdrew from the plebiscite, the step would be disastrous for it as it would be condemned by the public opinion of the world. President Alessandri has telegraphed most emphatically to the intendente to maintain order at all costs and to safeguard the rights of the Plebiscitary Commission, of its agents, and of every qualified voter; and he has telegraphed an appeal to civic organizations to refrain from violence and from retaliation for murder of two Chileans allegedly by two Peruvians, and to give the Peruvian voters all their rights, etc. It is said that Alessandri is once more considering advisability of going to Arica and inviting President of Peru to join him there. Collier. Referring to request in your telegram of September 6, do you, in the light of Collier’s telegram, still wish me to make representations through Embassy at Santiago? I feel that his telegram somewhat alters the situation and might make it advisable to wait to see if Government of Chile takes action that President Alessandri has promised Collier would be taken. If you still desire me to make representations, however, shall I cover the whole ground of your message to Edwards and protest against the conditions in Tacna and Arica which you say prevent a fair election, or do you wish me merely to cover matter in your concluding paragraph, that is, to ask the President of Chile to refrain from making inflammatory speeches, to abstain from anything by which difficulties of situation would be increased, and to lose no opportunity to give calm and pacific counsel to the people. I thought that if, perhaps, I limit myself to this statement, your position might be weakened and Chilean Government will not get the idea that we believe its action will prevent a fair election. In my understanding, however, representations to the President of Peru should merely correspond to last paragraph your telegram. In view of your telegram of August 16, 8 p.m., in which you request that no representations be made without your approval, I hesitate to make any in present instance without your further advice. I suggest also that whatever I do should be done as Secretary of State rather than in the name of the Arbitrator. KELLOGG
