540 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement EC–9. Editorial Note In despatch 30 from Quito, July 22, 1958, the Embassy reported on a trip of Ecuadoran Minister of Defense Alfonso Calderón Moreno to the United States, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, Brazil, and Chile, June 7–July 18, 1958, presumably to buy arms for Ecuador. (722.00(W)/7–2258) At a news conference which he held immediately upon his return to Quito, according to the Embassy’s report, he stated that in the United States he arranged to pay an old Ecuadoran debt to the Department of Defense, arranged to buy a Landing Ship, Medium (LSM), and had fruitful talks with General Lemuel C. Shepherd, Jr., Chairman of the Inter-American Defense Board. No record of Minister of Defense Calderón’s talks during his unofficial visit to the United States was found in Department of State files. EC–10. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Santiago, August 16, 1959. US/MC/102 SUBJECT Peru-Ecuador Boundary Dispute PARTICIPANTS 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/EP Files, Lot 67 D 566. “Peru Relations- Ecuador-Peru Boundary.” Official Use Only. According to information on the source text, Secretary Herter approved this memorandum on August 25. This conversation took place in the Hotel Carrera at 6:00 p.m. Secretary Herter and Foreign Minister Tobar attended the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Foreign Ministers of American States at Santiago, August 12–18. 2 The designation US/MC/10 stands for the tenth of fourteen memoranda of Secretary Herter’s conversations with Foreign Ministers attending the meeting at Santiago. United States The Secretary Mr. Rubottom Ecuador Foreign Minister Tobar Ambassador Chiriboga, Amb. to the U.S. The Ecuadoran Foreign Minister called at the invitation of the Secretary, accompanied by Ambassador Chiriboga. After several complimentary remarks, Foreign Minister Tobar raised the problem of the
