712 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 225. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 PA M 80–10166 Washington, April 7, 1980 ROMANIA: A SITUATION REPORT Summary Romania, as it has developed under the direction of state and Communist Party chief Nicolae Ceausescu, has become an anomaly among Communist countries. It combines such “orthodox” attributes as full membership in the Soviet alliance system, party domination of domestic political life and a highly centralized economy, with a freewheeling and relatively independent foreign policy and a one-man dictatorship that in its personalization and concentration of power harks back to Romania’s pre-war, monarchical past. There are signs that Ceausescu’s authoritarian and austere domestic policies are wearing thin with the Romanian public and that his independent-minded foreign policies are in danger of becoming hostage to Romania’s mounting economic problems. Ceausescu has thus far managed to keep his programs intact despite external and internal pressures by dint of his remarkable ability to gauge both the limits of Soviet tolerance and the extent to which his people will bear privations. His political and diplomatic skills will increasingly be put to the test as Romania enters the 1980s. Foreign Policies Ceausescu’s principal foreign policy objective is to achieve as much independence from Moscow as possible, given Romania’s geopolitical realities. The basic strategies employed by Bucharest in pursuit of that goal are to resist those Soviet policies that promote dominance over Romania, while avoiding any action so antagonistic to Moscow as to provoke retaliation, and to cultivate relations with as many non- Communist countries and independent-minded Communist parties as possible to counter Soviet pressure. By taking this course, Romania has succeeded in gradually extending the limits of acceptable autonomous activity, but it has also come into conflict with Soviet policy preferences. Romanian-Soviet relations, as a result, have come under some strain, particularly during the past two years. Since Romania’s leaders proclaimed their country’s foreign policy independence in the early 1960s, one of their major preoccupations has 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job 85T00287R, Production Case Files, Box 1, Folder 91, Romania: A Situation Report. Confidential. The memorandum was requested by the Department of Commerce. It was prepared in the Office of Political Analysis and coordinated with the Office of Economic Research.
