3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
727
252.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Vice President Mondale,
Secretary of State Vance, and Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Results of the NSC Meeting, January 2, 1980
The following decisions were reached as a result of the meeting:
1) The SALT II Treaty will be left on the Senate calendar. There will
be no effort to bring it to the Floor for a vote. Our public posture will be
to reaffirm that SALT is important irrespective of the tone of our rela-
tionship with the Soviet Union but, at this time, we do not believe it is
advisable to bring it to a vote.
2) We will make no announcement concerning other bilateral arms
control negotiations but, if asked, will take the position that they
should proceed. The Indian Ocean talks will remain moribund. We will
proceed with CSCE. In MBFR, we are awaiting a Soviet response to our
initiative. CTB negotiations will continue at a slow pace. CW/RW ne-
gotiations will be pursued since they are in our interest. The proposed
meeting next week of the heads of delegation for the Conventional
Arms talks should be postponed.
3) The recall of Ambassador Watson will be announced today.
4) The Department of State will forward its proposal2 for reducing
the Soviet diplomatic staff in the U.S., excluding the Soviet UN Mission,
to the level of the United States in the USSR. This should include meas-
ures to tighten restrictions on Soviet official travel in the U.S. to the
equivalent of those imposed on the U.S. officials in the USSR.
5) Preparations for opening the Consulates General in Kiev and
New York will be suspended.
6) Radio Liberty, Radio Free Europe and Voice of America broad-
casts will be stepped up along the lines proposed in the State Depart-
ment’s December 31 paper.3 The necessary funds will be made avail-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR,
and East/West, Brement Subject File, Box 46, Afghanistan: 10/79–1/80. Secret. Copies
were sent to Turner and Jones. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter attended
the meeting. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
2 Vance sent the proposal, in the form of four backup papers, to the President under
a January 13 memorandum. The proposal, which called for reciprocity in all U.S. and So-
viet diplomatic, media and commercial personnel, is in the Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 1, Afghanistan: Measures Taken
Against USSR After Invasion: 1/9–14/80.
3 See Document 249.
