Yugoslavia with another power and that such cooperation should not be directed against another power. He then continued into the standard explanation of the Yugoslav nonalignment policy. Secretary Brown replied that his influence in the USG should not be overestimated. Brown pointed out that the US military relationship was part of a general relationship which had as its objective the support of Yugoslav independence. Brown hoped that his presence in Belgrade would be the beginning of an increased military relationship. Brown invited Ljubicic to the US for a reciprocal visit. Ljubicic quickly accepted the invitation. After stating that the time for the Ljubicic visit would be worked out, Brown pointed out that US-Yugoslav military arms negotiations have had difficulties in the past primarily because of trying to determine what procedures should be followed. Brown said that sometimes the US has had a long list of Yugoslav requests to which it has not responded promptly. However, when the US responded positively, the US has not heard from the Yugoslavs. Brown said that the US should respond “Yes” or “No” to the Yugoslav requests promptly, but when the US responds “Yes” to the Yugoslav requests, the Yugoslavs should buy. Brown emphasized the point by stating, “If you don’t want to buy, don’t ask us to sell. In return, the US will not take too much time coming up with an answer.” Brown then turned to the subject of Yugoslav tank transfers to Ethiopia. He said that he was referring to this subject to put it behind both countries; that by law the Congress had to be notified; that every effort was made not to embarrass the Yugoslav Government in public; that the issue is closed. Ljubicic responded that the tank issue was unpleasant; that it was a Yugoslav mistake in administration; that he was glad that the tank difficulty had been overcome; that the tank issue should not affect other arms negotiations; that it was a one-time failure in thirty years. Ljubicic, however, defended the Yugoslav action as follows: He said that the tanks were ready for scrap; that the US officials were advised of this, but the GOY received no answer nor did the USG express any interest. He repeated that the Yugoslavs made a mistake on the issue and that he was not trying to justify the mistake. He pointed out, however, that when the Yugoslavs provided tanks to Ethiopia, Soviet military instructors were not in Ethiopia but only in Somalia; that at that time the Ethiopians were more involved with nonaligned countries and less with the Soviet Union. Now there are Russian tanks and Russian military instructors in Ethiopia; the country is more under Russian control. Brown interjected that the problem was solved.
