National Security Policy 351 6. It is not intended to imply that the questions raised have not already been considered by the services. Rather its purpose is to exam­ ine the basis for decisions on specific budgetary items and the extent to which relationships have been considered among alternate weapons systems designed to perform similar military missions. 7. The memorandum has organized the questions listed in the fol­ lowing four categories: a) the strategic striking force b) the defense of the striking force and home base c) ground and sea forces d) general military support Determination of the balance of expenditure between the four cat­ egories presents many difficult issues. One class of issues is basically scientific, dealing with the estimation of probable consequences of allo­ cation of military resources in the face of an assumed threat. The other class of issues involves value judgments as to what consequences, and hence what resource allocation are to be preferred. Military policy must be based upon decisions of both kinds. Examples of technical questions relating to probable consequences are: 1. What is the most economical division of funds between the striking force and the defense of it, with the object of achieving a given strike force capability? Elements of the striking force are so expensive that a small expenditure on hardening, active defense, or quick reac­ tion capability may significantly increase effectiveness per dollar of the striking force system. 2. What kind and what size of overseas war capability is needed to deal with the expected threat and what would be the costs of alterna­ tive assumed levels of capability? Examples of questions requiring value judgment are: 1. What should be the proportion of the striking force directed to enemy attack bases as opposed to industrial or population targets? 2. What fraction of the military budget should be devoted to pop­ ulation defense against air attack? Other questions of balance within each category are discussed below where relevant. OUTLINE I. Strategic Striking Force A. General Discussion B. Strategic Missiles Atlas Titan
