Article VI. Compulsory military service. This provision stands as originally
drawn, though Schüller’s colleagues came back to the original suggestion of
dropping the provision and taking care of the subject matter by an exchange
of notes.
Article VII. Importations, exportations, most favored nation clause, etc. The
consideration of this article, which has been greatly amplified, as the
Department is aware, by Instruction 566 of April 2 last, required numerous
conferences and sessions. I may say in this connection that the greatest
obstacles were interposed by the Department of Commerce, and the Foreign
Office felt that the desires of a coordinate branch of the Government, in
some cases strongly expressed, could not be lightly waved aside. The
argument which I had so often invoked with respect to other articles,
namely the desirability of uniformity so as to have the Austrian provisions
correspond with the German and Hungarian, was in this instance turned
against me. Nevertheless it was conceded that the Austrian Government had
been a party to the International Agreement concluded at Geneva on
November 3, 1923, which dealt in article 3, as the Department is of course
aware, with import and export prohibitions and restrictions, and there was
no real objection to concluding a similar agreement with the United States. I
herewith submit a revised draft of Article VII (sometimes expressed in the
alternative) to conform to the Austrian views:
“Between the territories of the High Contracting Parties there
shall be freedom of commerce and navigation. The nationals of
each of the High Contracting Parties equally with those of the
most favored nation, shall have liberty freely to come with their
vessels and cargoes to all places, ports and waters of every kind
within the territorial limits of the other which are or may be open
to foreign commerce and navigation. Nothing in this treaty shall
be construed to restrict the right of either High Contracting Party
to impose, on such terms as it may see fit, prohibitions or
restrictions of a sanitary character designed to protect human,
animal or plant life, or regulations for the enforcement of police
or revenue laws.
