630
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the White House for which I would receive the visitors on behalf of the
White House (sometimes with Brement present). They were often
sponsored by the Council on Soviet Jewry, although other organiza-
tions have asked to visit on behalf of notable Soviet dissidents, ranging
from Lev Mendlevitz, who remains in prison, along with one Christian,
for insisting on practicing their religion, after the other “Leningrad hi-
jackers” have been let out;9 to the daughter of Sakharov (for whom we
were able to do very little). In one case (Ida Nudel) a personal letter
from Mrs. Begin to Mrs. Carter led to my taking Mrs. Nudel’s sister to
meet the First Lady. Unfortunately, we have been able to do less and
less to influence or pressure Moscow with respect to tough cases. Nev-
ertheless, I have been in occasional contact with Marina Neumeyer-
Wallach, who represents the Council on Soviet Jewry, and numbers of
Ukrainian, Evangelical and other national and church groupings which
take an interest in those cases.
One operational demand in which we are importantly involved
concerns the annual country human rights reports mandated of the
Secretary of State by the Congress. This last year, instead of just re-
porting on conditions in countries to which the United States furnishes
aid, the Congress changed the requirement to reports on all countries—
154 in all. The deadline for submission to the Hill was January 31st, and
I worked out with Patt Derian a procedure (which we did not formally
entitle clearance) in which every report was carried to my office as soon
as it had been cleared in the Department and before being put into final
form. I reviewed many of them myself, particularly the sensitive ones,
and in every case circulated them with a form covering note to appro-
priate NSC colleagues for review and comment.10 My arrangement
with Patt was that I would call her directly if we had any real agony.
There were a number of points that we felt ought to be taken up, and I
would say we batted about .500, all in all. However, the really hot ones
this year (Pakistan, Afghanistan, China, Argentina, you can imagine
the rest) I and relevant colleagues really labored over. In the case of the
Argentine report, with Tom Thornton’s help we put in a fair amount of
effort to ensure that it retained its integrity, on the ground that 153
other reports could be undermined if one were to be too badly fudged. I
9 Reference is to the 1970 attempt by a group of Soviet refuseniks to hijack a Soviet
airplane and fly it to Sweden.
10 Bloomfield, in the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s January 28 evening report, high-
lighted his “continued intermediation between colleagues and State on especially painful
pieces of country reports. (Be clear that all the reports will, when published, be embar-
rassing in varying degrees. Consoling thought: U.S. remains faithful to universal concern
for governmental abuse of citizens.)” Brzezinski wrote the following note on the report in
the margin next to this bulleted point: “careful on Argentina.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 37,
Evening Reports: 1–3/80)
