Arms Control and Disarmament  1633
political and technical problems involved in extending the agreement 
as quickly as possible to cover all nuclear weapons tests. In the mean­
while, the world would have assurance that nuclear weapons tests in 
the atmosphere with their attendant addition to levels of radioactivity 
had been discontinued, and we would be gaining practical experience 
and confidence in the operation of an international control system.
I trust that one of these paths to agreement will commend itself to 
you and permit the resuming negotiations to make at least an initial 
response to the hopes of mankind. UNQUOTE.
OBSERVE PRESIDENTIAL HANDLING
Herter
Acting
453.	 Letter From McCone to Herter1
Washington, April 4, 1959
Dear Chris:
I have noted your letter of March 28 to the President reporting 
on our meeting of the previous day during which we discussed the 
Geneva negotiations.
I agree with points 1 and 2 as stated in your letter. With respect to 
point 3, the final sentence in the paragraph concerns me. This sentence 
states, “A limited program for underground testing, perhaps under 
international participation, might be undertaken as part of this effort 
to see whether the problem of detecting underground tests might be 
simplified.” While we agree completely with the idea of international 
participation in a program to prove underground detection methods, 
we feel that during this period when investigations are being made 
and improved monitoring systems developed and installed, we must 
be free to carry out essential weapons tests which are not forbidden by 
treaty and which do not contribute to atmospheric fallout.
To do otherwise would permit the Soviets unrestricted latitude 
for weapons development through underground, and possibly higher 
altitude, testing during a period when we would be deprived by our 
own injunction of opportunity to advance our own weapons program. I 
1 Source: Believes U.S. should test during interim period; U.S. should not accept 
a detection system that only deters testing. Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 
700.5611/4–459.
