468 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement sound, it is sound for its own sake and not proper to link it with any particular form of negotiation. Neither UN Charter, portions of which he had quoted, nor any other principle I know of, states problems must be negotiated between Foreign Ministers of countries. 9. I said UN Charter and other statements this subject refer to peace­ ful settlement disputes. Many ways of peacefully settling disputes and many channels through which negotiations between govts can be carried on for purpose peacefully settling disputes. As we both knew, normal channel is between Ambassadors or between Ambassador and Foreign Office. 10. I said my govt had suggested the present talks for purpose peacefully discussing and settling disputes. I did not see how question of another level of talks arose until we had completed the talks here. 11. I said the important point was that whatever words were used or whatever form we adopted, it be perfectly clear that neither of us would use force in Taiwan area. 12. I said that in my original statement I had said we should both of us clearly renounce force to make policies of either of us prevail over those of other. We considered that this applied particularly to Taiwan area. 13. I said this involved no third parties, nor did it involve justice or injustice of conflicting claims. 14. I said I would appreciate his observations on whether his announcement intended to cover points I had raised in my original statement, which was proposal his side declare it would not resort to force in Taiwan area except defensively. As I had said at time, US pre­ pared make corresponding declaration. 15. I concluded that whatever answer he might give me would be of great help in considering his proposal. 16. Wang replied that he shared my view that purpose of talks is to settle disputes between two countries peacefully, and in particular disputes in Taiwan area. 17. Wang continued with prepared statement on this subject, which he elaborated extemporaneously. He said that I had said at the previous meeting that Taiwan had been restored to China from Japan. That is exactly what former President Truman said in statement of January 5, 1950. No matter what was then Chinese Govt, no one can deny Taiwan is Chinese territory. As this is case, liberation of Taiwan cannot but be admitted as domestic affair of China. 18. Wang said US cannot cover up US armed encroachment Taiwan and interference Chinese People’s liberation Taiwan and coastal islands by concluding treaty with Chiang Kai-­shek clique. Nevertheless I had gone so far as to try to mix up civil conflict in China with international
