618
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
III. CBMs
As did many of the smaller nations at CSCE, the Romanians saw
in confidence building measures a means of enhancing their own secu-
rity vis-a-vis the larger powers surrounding them, particularly the
Soviet Union. The Romanians tabled a CBMs resolution which included
proposals for notification of major military movements, air and naval
maneuvers, banning of multinational maneuvers near borders, and
banning the establishment of new nuclear sites. The Romanians noted
to us in general terms that they were putting forward many CSCE
ideas as trial balloons.
They recognized that some of their proposals were the subject of
negotiation in other fora, the U.N. Special Session on Disarmament,
the Geneva and Vienna negotiations, SALT, etc. However, the Soviet
refusal after the New Year to discuss security issues other than in their
proposed “special joint consultations” which commanded no support,
made any discussion academic. The Romanians have made it clear that
the Soviets, and not the Allies, are to blame for any lack of progress
in the CBMs field. They also viewed the Allied CBMs resolution, which
emphasized improvement of the Helsinki CBMs, as evidence of an
Alliance commitment to moving forward in a realistic fashion.
If President Ceausescu raises CBMs, the President might assure
him of our continuing commitment to CBMs for the next CSCE Confer-
ence. I would caution, however, that the Romanians were in favor
of a post-Belgrade CBMs working group. We viewed that possibility
unfavorably as it would have institutionalized CSCE between the con-
ferences in a field where the Soviets would have made proposals useful
only for the propaganda value to them.
Further, our NATO Allies were also cool to the Romanian proposal.
To include provision for such a working group without equivalent
substance in other important areas, such as human rights, would pro-
duce a seriously unbalanced document. The U.S. pointed out that since
no agreement in principle had been achieved on any of the substantive
security measures discussed in Belgrade, there was no basis for work
by experts on CBM matters. It also warned that parcelling out work
to experts groups where substantive argument was stymied could
threaten the coherence of the CSCE process. In any event, as I have
mentioned, the Soviets denied consensus to the Romanian and similar
proposals offered by the Yugoslavs, Sweden and others.
IV. FOLLOW-UP
The Romanians argued vigorously for a firm commitment to ensure
perpetuity for the CSCE process (periodicity). Again, the Soviets denied
consensus. We were able to negotiate a satisfactory compromise incor-
porated in the concluding document. The next Belgrade-type meeting
