1034  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
probably being developed and could become operational in the 1963–
1966 period, we cannot estimate what its capability would be against 
Western ballistic missiles.
22. The USSR is probably also exploring unconventional tech­
niques for active defense against ballistic missiles. We cannot predict 
the nature or success of such studies. In any case, continuous research 
and development in antimissile defenses will be under way during the 
next five years and beyond.
23. Antisatellite. The USSR may also develop a ground or air 
launched system to counter Western satellites with relatively low, 
established orbits. However, the Soviets could adapt for this purpose 
an antiballistic missile system such as that discussed in the preceding 
paragraph.
24. Air-­to-­Air. We continue to estimate that the Soviets have sev­
eral types of short range (up to 6 n.m.) air-­to-­air missiles with HE 
warheads, for employment with their interceptors. There are some 
indications that one or more of the foregoing types are now operational 
with Soviet interceptors, and it is possible that they have been supplied 
to the East German and Chinese Communist Air Forces. The USSR will 
probably develop, during the period of this estimate, additional types 
with ­longer ranges, more sophisticated guidance, and larger payloads 
(including nuclear).
Air-­to-­Surface Missiles
(See paragraphs 40–49, NIE 11–5–59)
25. The current Soviet air-­to-­surface missile (the subsonic, 55 n.m. 
AS–1) is designed primarily for use against ships. It could also be used 
against well-­defined radar targets such as prominent coastal installa­
tions. It imposes severe limitations on the launching medium bomber 
aircraft. We believe, however, that a new, transonic missile (AS–3), 
designed for similar purposes and with a range of about 100 n.m., 
will probably be ready for operational use in about 1961. It should 
overcome the limitations of the AS–1, and may be intended to supple­
ment and eventually replace it. We continue to estimate that the USSR 
will also have available in about 1961 a supersonic missile ­(AS–2) of 
at least 350 n.m. range, primarily for use against land targets. This 
system will probably be compatible with currently-­operational Soviet 
heavy bombers and possibly medium bombers, as well as any fol­
low-­on bombers entering service in the next few years. The Soviets 
could also have in current use an air-­launched decoy to simulate 
medium or heavy bombers, but evidence is still lacking on such a 
vehicle.
