290
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
for the holidays. Each of these groups will have a reassembly plan
which will provide us with the capability to reconstitute the rescue
force within 24 hours. As a result, our reaction time for the rescue
option would be extended by a like amount of time.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
Harold Brown
109.
Editorial Note
In late December 1979, Panama and Iran cooperated to establish a
new channel between Washington and Tehran for negotiations on the
hostage crisis. This channel was slow to develop, but from early on it
appeared to have the backing, on the Iranian side, of the Ayatollah
Khomeini and the active engagement of Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghot-
bzadeh. On the Panamanian side, it had the full support of President
Aristides Royo and at least the acquiescence of Panamanian Military
Leader General Omar Torrijos. Neither Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
nor President Jimmy Carter initially supported the channel. However,
creation of this channel introduced as emissaries two lawyers, Christian
Bourguet and Hector Villalon, both of whom were in close cooperation
with the Iranian revolutionary government, and who would play an
extremely visible role in hostage negotiations early in 1980.
Within days of the Shah’s December 15 move to Contadora Island
in Panama, Iran requested his extradition. Panamanian President Royo
telephoned U.S. Ambassador Ambler Moss to inform him that Kho-
meini had given his approval for an Iranian representative to travel to
Panama and negotiate a face-saving means of extraditing the Shah and
freeing the hostages. Moss, who felt the Shah would panic on hearing
this plan, wanted urgent instructions. It should be noted that, although
the telegram refers to the Iranian Prime Minister, that post was empty;
the reference is presumably to Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh. (Telegram
10253 from Panama, December 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P840148–2166) Royo insisted that Panama would
not agree to any extradition but wanted to help free the hostages.
(Telegram 10306 from Panama, December 18; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 60, Panama
6/79–1/80)
On December 19, Royo received a message through contacts in
France that Ghotbzadeh had also proposed a coordinating committee
