Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II ation, if a Group member believes that the decision reached is no longer justified, that Group member shall initiate an action memorandum, and clear it with all interested Group members. This memorandum must reach the Deputy Secretary at least one full week and preferably two weeks before Bank Board action. —A.I.D. or Treasury5 will be designated to recommend whether a project meets BHN criteria in time for this determination to be included on the agenda of the Inter-Agency Group. —The BHN determination will be based on information available at the time. Treasury will cooperate by obtaining information from bank staffs if necessary. (This will have the added spin-off of sensitizing the Banks to the USG interest in questions of equitable development and greater attention to meeting basic human needs, a stated goal of Treasury in its policy speeches and reports to the Congress. If, however, Treasury wishes to minimize the need of going directly to Bank staffs, an alternative would be to have the Banks submit final project papers to all Executive Directors at least four weeks prior to Board consideration. Currently, there is a ten working day rule in the World Bank and the IDB. Often lesser lead time is available in the ADB and we usually can’t get information in the AFDF until the last minute). —In the absence of sufficient data to support the conclusion that a project meets the BHN exception provided in the law, the recommendation of the designated agency (A.I.D. or Treasury) will be that the BHN exception does not apply. Such a project will be considered by the Inter-Agency Group as if it were a non-BHN project. 5 A.I.D. is bureaucratically the most appropriate agency to review projects on BHN grounds. It has the most expertise in this area and it is a less interested party than Treasury. If Treasury was tasked with the responsibility of making BHN recommendations on all controversial projects, however, it can be assumed that, since Treasury may have to defend such determinations before Congress when it goes up for MDB appropriations, it will be judicious in its application of BHN criteria. [Footnote in the original.]
