1956 665 26. I said at our last meeting I had offered consider any alternative formulation he might have in mind. I certainly didn’t see how it possi­ ble for me be any more reasonable this regard. 27. I said there are two things that I had considered essential. One is that we make it clear that there no concealed reservations with regard Taiwan area. I had welcomed his statement last meeting that he will­ ing consider inclusion of words that would make it clear Taiwan area included in scope any declaration we made. This seemed to me be very encouraging step towards final agreement. 28. I said that seemed to me leave only one obstacle. That obstacle did not seem be matter of substance but rather matter of finding words express substance. I had reference to matter of individual collective self defense. 29. I said we had both in these meetings expressed concurrence with this as principle. I had clearly expressed to Wang my intent that in stating principle, it should not prejudice his position with re nature our dispute in Taiwan area. I honestly felt I had accomplished that purpose in suggested amendments I proposed at last meeting. However I had said if he felt differently I was willing consider other suggestions he might have that regard. 30. I said having agreed on substance it certainly seemed to me not unreasonable and not beyond ingenuity of two of us to find words express that substance. 31. I said it had never occurred to me that this principle so long recognized in international law, embodied in U.N. Charter and gen­ erally accepted throughout world could be objectionable anyone. It never occurred me that any country which genuinely concerned with own sovereignty and willing respect that of other countries would be opposed to it. 32. I said it hard to see how any country would desire go on public record as admitting its policies were inconsistent with legitimate exer­ cise by other countries of right self defense. 33. I said I repeated that in stating this it never had been and still was not my intention demand that his government abandon any of its claims or its views or its right to peaceful pursuit its policies, no matter how strongly I might disagree with some of those policies. 34. I said however as our negotiations upon this subject had devel­ oped, and particularly in light of public statement made by Wang’s government yesterday, it appeared that intent of his government was to demand that in negotiating this statement my government renounce its legitimate right of individual collective self defense. I wanted make it perfectly plain that my government cannot and will not under any circumstances agree to do this.
