Panama 915 President make clear that we intended to treat Panama fairly but that continued public attacks on the United States would have the effect of tying our hands and reduce our capacity to cooperate with them in the future.5 The President at the close of the meeting said that his orders were to have the Panama Canal Company desist in its purchases from third countries and to reduce to the greatest extent possible the handling of luxury goods in commissaries and PX’s. 5 The President conveyed this message to Ambassador Arias in the course of their conversation. A memorandum of the conversation, dated October 12, is in Presidential Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 66 D 149. PM–21. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of State1  Washington, undated. SUBJECT Implementation of Decisions Taken on October 12 at White House Meeting on U.S.–Panama Relations. In accordance with the President’s wishes expressed at his meeting on October 12, and responsive to Brigadier General Goodpaster’s memorandum of October 14 to you (Tab B)2, a meeting was held at the Pentagon on October 14 during which plans were discussed for implementation of the President’s desires for improvement of U.S.–Panamanian relations. Attached at Tab B3 is a Memorandum of Understanding as agreed to by State, Canal Zone Government, and Army representatives present at that meeting. You will have already 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.19/10–2859. Confidential. Drafted by Frederick D. Sharp III, the Officer in Charge of Panamanian Affairs, on October 21. The source text is an uninitialled carbon copy that was attached to a Memorandum of Understanding dated October 19, the contents of which had been agreed to by representatives of the Department of State, the Canal Zone Government, and the Department of the Army at a meeting at the Pentagon on October 14. 2 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of Goodpaster’s memorandum is in the Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary Records, “Panama.” 3 Not printed. See footnote 1 above.
