272
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
—Hashemi in London is in touch with his contact in Qom and
says they are having “encouraging” meetings. We have the opportunity
to put any scenario we devise through that channel as well.
The key substantive issue now that the Shah’s return to Iran has
been removed from the negotiating agenda is the relative timing of a
hearing for Iranian grievances and the release of the hostages. This
was one of the issues on which the Waldheim/Salamatian negotiations
foundered. Now the Iranians are trying to put together a forum for
their hearings and seem to be thinking of releasing a number of hostages
before long but at the same time seem to be thinking about holding a
few of them to appear before their international tribunal.
Our basic position has been negative on the tribunal on grounds
that it would prolong Iran’s illegal action in holding hostages and delay
their release. We repeatedly stated that once all hostages are released
Iran can have a hearing in any reasonable forum. The problem now is
that our position may not be sufficiently nuanced to allow for the
possibility of a scenario in which some preliminary steps toward a
tribunal could be connected with the release of the hostages.
Specifically, the questions arise as to whether we should encourage
or discourage private Americans from responding to invitations to
participate in the tribunal and whether we should discourage some-
thing like a Findley visit to Tehran which might lead to the release of
some of the hostages.
We obviously want to bargain hard for the release of the hostages
before a tribunal begins. A proposal such as the one included in our
longer memo yesterday3 may have to include willingness to have some
group—whether a UN group or a group such as that proposed for
Findley—engage in some kind of hearing on Iranian grievances.
The next issue is whether we are prepared to let such a group go
without assurance that it will be able to bring hostages back home with
it. A third issue is whether to allow any group to go if it can only bring
a small number of the hostages home with it.
3 Not found.
