Chapter 5, May–June 1990  723
Are these reports correct, and, if so, do they meet the spirit and 
legal requirements of the Jackson Amendment?
Similarly, did the United States agree to a Soviet-­proposed range-­
limitation on sea-­launched cruise missiles (SLCMs) which allowed the 
Soviets to keep several thousand short-­range SLCMs against which the 
U.S. has no equivalent force?
If so, does this agreement meet the spirit and legal requirements of 
the Jackson Amendment?
Secondly, the Helms Amendment to the INF Treaty states:
“Any joint statement by the United States with the USSR of a frame-
work for the negotiation of strategic arms treaties contemplated hereby, 
and such framework itself, shall serve for the purpose only of guiding 
the conduct of negotiations which the United States herein has declared 
its desire to pursue expeditiously, and shall not constrain any military 
programs of the United States [emphasis supplied] unless otherwise 
provided for in accordance with Section 33 of the Arms Control and 
Disarmament Act.”
Section 33 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act, of course, 
states that U.S. armed forces may be limited only through the treaty-­
making power or through further affirmative legislation. Nevertheless, 
press reports state that Secretary Baker did agree to constrain U.S. mili-
tary programs in a so-­called “side letter” to the proposed START frame-
work statement in which the United States agrees not to modernize the 
U.S. “Tacit Rainbow” ALCM, and also not to equip this ALCM with a 
nuclear warhead.
Is it correct that Secretary Baker did agree to such a side letter con-
straining U.S. military programs? If so, does such a letter meet the spirit 
and legal requirements of the Helms Amendment to the INF Treaty and 
to Section 33 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act?
Mr. President, we would appreciate a response on these matters 
before the framework statement with the Soviet Union is signed at the 
forthcoming summit.
Sincerely,
Jesse Helms
Chuck Grassley
Jim McClure
Strom Thurmond
Trent Lott
Steve Symms
Orrin G. Hatch
Larry Pressler
Malcolm Wallop
