Comprehensive Test Ban
373
Verification
[1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified]
There must be agreed and emplaced, the best possible verification
system. It must be capable of the highest degree of certainty that explo-
sions can be properly identified and categorized. This will require max-
imum upgrading of our current National Technical Means in all pos-
sible test environments. National means must be supplemented with
the required number of tamperproof seismic observatories to form an
effective network internal to the Soviet Union and rights must be pro-
vided to perform mandatory on-site inspections which would act as an
effective deterrent to clandestine explosions. Even a few surreptitious,
very low yield, explosions could permit weapon design improvements
and permit the maintenance of high quality weapon design and design
surveillance teams.
Negotiating Tactics and Cessation of Testing
I remain concerned over the continuing trend in other agencies to
establish negotiating objectives designed to reach tactical agreement on
only the key elements of a CTBT and take them into the CCD for devel-
opment of treaty text through multilateral negotiation, while, at the
same time, it is indicated that a cessation of testing or a moratorium
could be declared during such a multilateral negotiation.
It is our conviction that such an arrangement could lead to a cessa-
tion of testing, under conditions and at a time, when it would not be
possible to verify that clandestine nuclear explosions are taking place.
Certain member states of the CCD have consistently maintained
that national technical means alone will provide adequate verification.
This position was reestablished by the Soviet Union during the explor-
atory talks. The Soviets and the Swedes have already tabled draft treaty
texts in the CCD to which the U.S. could not agree.4 There is danger in
involving the CCD too early. It is essential that the U.S., UK, and USSR
reach full agreement on the details of verification prior to involving the
CCD in multilateral negotiation of a treaty text. In fact, if it is intended
to declare a cessation of testing concurrent with multilateral negotia-
tions in the CCD then it would be preferable to refer a tripartite treaty
4 Telegram 1281 from Geneva, February 22, contains the Soviet draft text of a CTB.
The Soviets proposed that compliance would be verified by each signatory’s “own
national technical means of control, in accordance with the generally recognized rules of
international law.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770061–
0674) Telegram 1148 from Geneva, February 16, contains the Swedish draft text of a CTB.
The Swedes proposed that compliance would be verified by “inspection on its territory or
territory under its jurisdiction, such inspection to be carried out in the manner prescribed
by the inviting party.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770055–
0918)
