Chapter 6, June–December 1990  949
is the assessment of the entire Soviet leadership, personally of Mikhail 
S. Gorbachev.
Our text of the provisions that constitute the substance of this 
package and take into account both your letter and the discussions in 
Houston and Washington is being transmitted to the Soviet delegation 
in Geneva. We are assuming that, acting on the basis of the tradeoffs in 
concerns that we have made, our negotiators and yours shall undertake 
a vigorous effort to work out an agreed Treaty language.
In accordance with the practice that has proved useful it would 
be advisable that we instruct our Deputies (R. Bartholomew and 
A. Obukhov) to meet to discuss the details of the technical solutions 
to the outstanding issues. They could be accompanied by appropriate 
senior experts.
This would make it possible for the delegations to wrap up all the 
issues that are still outstanding and prepare the Treaty text and the 
related documents in their entirety before the end of January. Thus, 
both sides would have time to go through this landmark agreement 
over again and without hurry.
As for the meeting at the ministerial level prior to the Moscow 
summit, I intend to advise you on this matter at a later stage.
Let me now briefly respond to your comments on the “Houston 
package” that you made during our conversations on December 11–12 
in the United States.
First. On the issue of heavy ICBMs, which you raised again 
during our last meeting in the US, I would like, in addition to the 
letter of December 6 signed by myself and Defense Minister Yazov, 
to make the following clarifications. When the Soviet side talks about 
a conceivable need for building new heavy ICBM silo launchers, it 
does not mean the possibility of an extensive construction of new silo 
launchers. What this means is that construction of new silo launchers, 
within the limits permitted by the START Treaty, could be done only 
to replace those heavy ICBM silo launchers that have been eliminated 
under the Protocol on the Conversion or Elimination Procedures. The 
need for such a replacement could arise, in particular, as a result of 
an accident at a silo launcher, of a silo launcher destruction resulting 
from an accident, or when emergency situations of an internal politi-
cal nature could require a relocation of silo launchers, including heavy 
ICBM silo launchers, from one part of the country to another. We agree 
that in the event it becomes necessary to relocate such silo launchers 
the side that plans to build a new silo launcher would provide rele-
vant information to the other side through the Joint Commission on 
Compliance and Inspections.
Second. At our meeting in Houston you expressed concern that 
during the data exchange in Geneva on strategic offensive arms for
