Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
369
importance to your Administration. Such a schedule will provide op-
portunities for comprehensive articulation of the basic philosophy and
direction of your Administration. You could focus on a series of issues,
spelling out to the American people where you’re going, how you in-
tend to get there, and what kinds of problems you see in the way.
I suggest you put Stu Eizenstat in charge of a small task force,
which would work closely with Jody, to map out a long-term public
speaking strategy. It would recommend forums for and prepare
speeches on such matters as government reorganization and respon-
siveness, the economy, education and the environment. The series
might appropriately begin with a speech on the difficulties of grap-
pling with many of today’s difficult problems, emphasizing that you
became President in order to tackle tough issues such as government
reorganization, health care, tax reform, illegal immigration, social secu-
rity financing, Panama Canal, SALT, and others which have been fes-
tering for years but which cannot be ignored.
I have sensed a much greater disposition on your part to articulate
comprehensively your positions on foreign policy than those in the do-
mestic area. I sense you are reluctant to define your own approach and
philosophy regarding domestic issues. I may be wrong, but I sense that
when you feel you are being characterized as being too liberal, you
react in a way designed to counteract that definition; similarly, when
you are being characterized as too conservative, you react in the oppo-
site way.
In short, I have the impression that you intensely dislike being de-
fined or “labeled”. That may have some value, but I fear it also con-
tributes to the feeling that people don’t know you, they can’t feel you,
they don’t know where you are going. I believe that by giving more
major speeches, you will not only perform your public education role
but it will require those of us serving you to help define and describe
the Administration’s goals more effectively than we do now. Also,
these speeches hopefully will become the documents on which the next
election is fought.
I believe a lot of work has to be put into your speeches. If Stu
mapped out a long-range schedule, we would have more lead-time to
prepare them and could make better use of thoughtful outsiders. Most
of your speeches tend to be descriptive and detailed demonstrations of
what you know and the amount of work that went into a particular de-
cision; but at the same time they tend to be, for many listeners, fairly
heavy and incomprehensible, lacking the eloquence and persuasive-
ness that a Presidential address should possess. I would hope a good
deal of thought could be put into how we can make these speeches
more persuasive and eloquent.
