328 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement we have received reports indicating that some were able to reopen in this manner. However, this has not proved to be a very satisfactory approach, since in many of these instances the Departmental and local authorities have recently re-­closed the churches and chapels—­ usually under pressure from the Catholic clergy—­on the grounds that the central government’s prohibition on Protestant activity in Mission Territory still stands. Apparently, even where the Departmental or Local authorities are favorably disposed toward a reopening of these churches and chapels, they cannot withstand Church pressure without the official backing of the central government in the form of a recision of the prohibitions. Nevertheless, there is some reason to suppose the present Government tacitly favors local action as a means of keeping the situation in hand and moving slowly toward greater liberalization in the treatment of Protestants in this country. 3. What is the emotional atmosphere? It seems to me essential that the Department should appreciate the emotional atmosphere in Colombia (as well as in the United States) in which this question must be settled. In regard to their Catholic faith, most Colombian Catholics tend to be fervent, and many are bigoted and fanatical. They belong, in far too many cases, to a generation which has passed in other countries and which thought that the only good non-Catholic was a dead non-Catholic. Even relatively moderate Colombian Catholics will rationalize their bigotry by claiming that they do not want the unity of the country to be affected by religious dispute or by saying that there is a link between Colombian Protestantism and Communism. A more respectable argument is that the troubles the Protestants have had in Colombia in the past ten years have merely been a by-­product of the general atmosphere of violence which has prevailed in large sections of the country during that period. There is undoubtedly truth to this argument since, among other things, it is a fact that the great majority of Protestants are Liberals, and political persecution was generally directed against Liberals. There is also indirect truth in it in that, when law and order have largely vanished, fanatics among the majority have a better chance to unleash mob passions against a hated minority with whom they would ordinarily live at peace. My impression is, however, that many cases cannot be exculpated on any such grounds; on the contrary, that much Protestant oppression has occurred in areas where there has been little or no violence. Catholic priests have in numerous instances preached violence against Protestants with impunity; Local authorities have yielded to Catholic pressure and taken arbitrary, oppressive action against Protestants. In the interests of fairness it should be added that the Protestants are by no means devoid of fanaticism; the Embassy is aware of cases where they have stirred up trouble.
