158
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
6. During these negotiations10 no new Israeli settlements will be es-
tablished, and there will be no expansion of facilities in existing
settlements.
7. Jerusalem, the city of peace, must not again be divided by the in-
struments of war. It is a city holy to Christian, Jew, and Muslim, and all
must have free access to it. For peace to endure, each community in Je-
rusalem must be able to express freely its cultural and religious values
in an acceptable political framework. An agreement on relationships in
Jerusalem should be reached in the negotiations dealing with the West
Bank and Gaza.
8. They agree to consult with each other and with other interested
parties on a just solution of the refugee problem.
9. Synchronized with the implementation of the provisions related
to withdrawal, they shall proceed to establish among them relation-
ships normal to States at peace with one another. To this end, they un-
dertake to abide by all the provisions of the Charter of the United Na-
tions. Steps taken in this respect include:
(a) Full recognition.
(b) Abolishing economic boycott.
(c) Ensuring the freedom of passage through the Suez Canal.
(d) Guaranteeing that under their jurisdiction the citizens of the
other Parties shall enjoy the protection of the due process of law.
(e) Encouraging the free movement of people and goods.
10. In all of the negotiations described above, they will arrange to
guarantee the security, sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviola-
bility and the political independence of each State negotiating peace
through measures such as the following:
(a) The establishment of demilitarized zones.
(b) The establishment of limited armament zones.
(c) The stationing of United Nations forces or observer groups as
agreed.
(d) The stationing of early warning systems on the basis of
reciprocity.
(e) Regulating the acquisition of arms by the Parties and the type of
their armament and weapons systems.
(f) The adherence by all the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Parties undertake not to manu-
facture or acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.
10 Vance put brackets around the phrase “During these negotiations,” underlined
“these negotiations,” and placed a checkmark in the left-hand margin adjacent to the
sentence.
