National Security Policy 133 of shelter as a means which will really contribute to the survival of the United States in a terrible nuclear war. While the Treasury Department agreed with the Interdepartmental Committee that the Government should go ahead with the proposed educational program for the American people on shelter, the Treasury also put very heavy empha­ sis on the creation of home shelters by private individuals, as well as on the research programs which the Interdepartmental Committee and the Planning Board had recommended. On the other hand, the Treasury Department did not believe that the Government could proceed to build prototype shelters all over the United States (as recommended in NSC 5807) without involving a serious popular and Congressional reaction which would eventuate in a hugh and costly Federal shelter program. If we proceed now to commit ourselves to such a program of prototype shelters, we shall presently find that we have committed ourselves to an economic program of such magnitude that it would be bound to have a significant bearing on the economic strength of the nation. In conclu­ sion, Secretary Anderson stressed the point that the Treasury was not prepared to oppose such a program of shelter-­building, but it was urg­ ing that we defer a decision until we know more about the implications of such a construction program. General Cutler thereafter briefly summarized Secretary Anderson’s view with respect to what portions of NSC 5807 Treasury did favor and the objections of the Treasury Department to the pro­ posed program to construct prototype shelters. Secretary Anderson concurred in General Cutler’s summation, and warned again that proceeding with the prototype construction program might commit us to a wholesale Federal shelter program whether we really wished to undertake such a program or not. General Cutler then asked General Twining to comment on the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff with respect to the comments and recom­ mendations of the Planning Board regarding NSC 5807. General Twining stated that the Joint Chiefs of Staff looked with favor on the three addi­ tional studies proposed by the Planning Board, but that the Chiefs did not agree with the proposal of the ODM Planning Board Member for a study “appraising what level of active defenses and of shelter, in any pro­ jected combinations, is required to limit casualties to a level which will permit the United States to survive as a nation.” In general, said General Twining, the Chiefs felt that such a study was too vague in its present terms of reference, and in particular that if such a study were to be made in the future, it should be done by the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group rather than by ODM, FCDA and the Department of Defense, as had been suggested by the ODM Planning Board Member. General Cutler then summarized the views of the Joint Chiefs as consisting of agreement with those recommendations of NSC 5807
