1048
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
414.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, May 26, 1977, 1:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
CIEC, LOS negotiations, Middle East, Treaty of Tlatelolco
PARTICIPANTS
Mexico
Santiago Roel, Secretary of Foreign Relations
Fernando Solana, Secretary of Commerce
Carlos Tello, Secretary for Programming and Budget
United States
The Secretary
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary (ARA)
Herbert B. Thompson, Charge de’Affaires, (notetaker)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.]
Treaty of Tlatelolco
Now that the United States has signed the Protocol I of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco, Mr. Todman asked what can be done to get others to sign
the treaty. Secretary Roel said that Mexico must try to persuade others
but cannot pressure them. He said Mexico has spoken to the Cubans
and the Argentines. He thought the United States example would be
very helpful in encouraging others to sign.2
Secretary Vance suggested that the U.S. signing would put some
pressure on the Soviets, who have shown considerable sensitivity at
our seizing the initiative in disarmament efforts. He suggested that if
the Soviets were to sign Cuba might very well follow. Secretary Roel
agreed.
Secretary Roel said that he had found this a very useful day and
thought it a very important one, given the significant events which it
had included. He noted that the events of the day revealed a marked
improvement in U.S.—Mexican relations. He asked rhetorically why
this should be so. Referring to his accompanying colleagues, he as-
serted that it is largely because Mexico now has a younger generation
which is mature enough to speak plainly with its United States counter-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P770115–2365.
Confidential. Drafted by H.B. Thompson (ARA/MEX); cleared by H.B. Lane (ARA/
MEX); and approved by William Twaddell (S) on June 23. The meeting was held in the
James Madison Room at the Department of State.
2 Carter signed Protocol I earlier that day. For the text of his statement see Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, p. 1027.
