78 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement corresponding Chinese Communist declaration. We are considering draft declaration reading as follows: QTE/1. The United States of America declares that Chinese nation­ als in the United States who desire to return to the China mainland are entitled to depart for the China mainland. 2. The Embassy of the Republic of India in the USA is authorized to assist in such return as follows: (a) If a Chinese National believes that, contrary to the above dec­ laration, he is encountering official obstruction in departure, he may so inform the Indian Embassy and the Indian Embassy will, if desired by the C.P.R., intervene on such civilian’s behalf with the Government of the United States. (b) If a Chinese national in the USA who desires to return to the China mainland has difficulty in paying for his return journey, the Indian Embassy may render him the financial assistance needed to per­ mit of his return. 3. The Government of the United States will give wide publicity to the foregoing provisions of this Declaration and the Embassy of India in the USA may also do so. 4. This Declaration shall remain in force for at least 90 days and thereafter until notice of termination has been given by the Government of the United States to the Indian Embassy in the USA. 5. The provisions of Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 hereof shall come into force when a corresponding Declaration (with the substitution of the Government of the United Kingdom for the Government of the Republic of India) has been made by the C.P.R. UNQUOTE. Transmit your reaction immediately so that we may have the bene­ fit of your views before instructions drafted tomorrow afternoon. Dulles 68. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy1 Geneva, August 11, 1955 Dear Walter: Just a very hasty note this morning before I leave for the meeting to thank you for your letter of August 8 which arrived yesterday. I find 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
