First Responses Unless it felt seriously threatened by the United States, Iran probably would prefer to take less drastic actions. These might include: • Refusing to accept dollars for payment of oil. With 70 percent of oil payments to Iran in dollars at present ($15 billion annually) this would cause minor, short-term disruptions in world currency markets. • Blocking debt payments to the United States. Total Iranian debt to the United States amounts to about $3 billion, with debt-service payments probably running over one-half billion dollars a year. US banks reportedly have seized an estimated $1 billion of frozen Iranian assets to cover themselves against this contingency. • Converting all liquid dollar assets to other currencies. This would put substantial downward pressure on the value of the dollar. [portion marking not declassified] Possible US Countermoves Most US economic countermoves would involve cutting Iranian imports. The Iranian import picture has changed drastically since the revolution. Exports to Iran, led by capital goods and semi-manufactures, have fallen about 70 percent in value so far this year compared with 1978. Food imports, down 25 percent from last year, still cover a quarter of Iranian requirements. [portion marking not declassified] Iran is especially dependent on imports for the following agricultural products: • Vegetable oil imports equal about 80 percent of domestic consumption; shortages have already been reported. • Corn, sorghum, and other feed grain imports cover nearly 60 percent of domestic consumption; stocks are low. • Rice imports provide about 40 percent of domestic consumption; current stocks are probably sufficient for one to two months. • Wheat imports provide 15 to 20 percent of consumption; current stocks probably equal one and one-half months of supply. • Mutton and beef imports supply about 20 percent of domestic consumption; current stocks are reportedly very low. [portion marking not declassified] The United States, West Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, Italy, and France (in that order) have been Iran’s major suppliers during the past several years. These countries provided roughly 70 percent of Iran’s imports in 1978. This year, because of the increased importance of food items and Iran’s attempt to diversify trading partners, Australia, New Zealand, and some less developed countries—especially sugar exporters—have grown in importance. [portion marking not declassified] About three-fourths of Iran’s international trade arrives at the Persian Gulf ports of Khorramshahr, Bandar Khomeini, Bushshr, and Bandar Abbas. Khorramshahr, traditionally the best equipped and most modern port (surpassed by Bandar Khomeini in traffic in 1978), primarily handles private sector trade, while Bandar Khomeini is the port of
