August 8–September 17, 1978 47 2. Quote: Dear Mr. President, Thank you for your letter2 of August 15, 1978 in which you kindly acquainted me with your views and thoughts regarding the future meeting at Camp David. Your initiative in arranging this meeting reflected your personal courage and profound sense of commitment to peace in our region and in the world. I am particularly grateful and satisfied at your assurance that your efforts at Camp David will be guided by your views on a just and lasting peace which have been the subject of our talks and contacts since the beginning. —Allow me, in return, to put before you our views of the present situation and the prospects of future progress. —Before President Sadat’s unprecedented initiative, Jordan was seeking to build a consensus among the Arab States [garble] people. These efforts I was conducting while in close consultation with you and within our agreed framework. The idea would have assisted in overcoming the serious procedural obstacles, the problem of coordination among the Arab parties and the issue of Palestinian representation in the peace talks. President Sadat’s surprising and unprecedented initiative, although brave, led to a deep eruption within the Arab world upsetting the atmosphere of cooperation necessary for achieving a comprehensive settlement. Israel’s negative attitude towards all the essential substantive questions in a future settlement, demonstrated in the talks following President Sadat’s trip to Jerusalem, caused a serious setback in the peace process and the atmosphere in general. It has increased the belief in the Arab countries that the Israeli Government is opposed to a total withdrawal from the Arab territories occupied by force in June, 1967 under any circumstances, and it does not intend to allow any reasonable solution of the Palestinian question based on recognition of the right of the Palestinian people, recognized in many United Nations Resolutions, or the right to participate under conditions of freedom in solving the Palestinian problem and in exercising their legitimate human right of self determination. More than at any time previously, Mr. President, I am now sadly persuaded of this. The revelations resulting from President Sadat’s initiative have brought us in the Arab world to this unavoidable conclusion. This is not to say that we in Jordan are any less convinced of the necessity and urgency of achieving a peaceful settlement and more precisely a lasting peace in the area. But we have now a more realistic assessment of the prospects of such a settlement. For us in Jordan, the situation has always been particularly unique and delicate in view of our special relationship 2 See footnote 1, Document 11.
