National Security Policy  831
198.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, September 16, 1959
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretary McElroy
General Goodpaster
Mr. McElroy first discussed with the President a draft memoran­
dum on space and satellite activities that General Randall had sent 
to me. After discussion, the President indicated his approval of the 
memo, on the basis of assurances given to him by Mr. McElroy. Mr. 
McElroy said that Defense is negotiating to turn AMBA over to some 
agency other than the Army—probably NASA—since it is getting so 
expensive to support. The President said that the assignments called 
for in the draft memorandum must be “mutually exclusive,” i.e., when 
one service has the assignment the others will not duplicate its proj­
ect. The President asked if all solid propellant work is being assigned 
to one service. Mr. McElroy said that the advanced research is being 
done in ARPA, with applications in each of the services. The President 
asked how Mr. McElroy now feels about the Minuteman project. Mr. 
McElroy said that Defense feels very good about it, expecting to have 
operational missiles delivered in FY–63. He commented that our sci­
entists are now expecting that both we and the Russians will achieve 
increased accuracy. As a result, we must give more consideration to 
dispersion and mobility, perhaps putting the Minuteman on rail-­road 
firing platforms. The President thought there would be great savings 
if we can get out of the hardening of missile sites. Mr. McElroy said 
Defense is going some distance in that direction already, cutting down 
its hardening to twenty-­five pounds to the square inch overpressure 
rather than one-­hundred pounds. The President added that the Titan 
may be becoming unnecessary. Mr. McElroy said it provides a bet­
ter booster for missiles of very long range. If our scientists do not 
see a way of attaining extremely large thrust with solid fuels, there 
will remain a need for high-­grade liquid rockets—undoubtedly using 
storable propellants.
The President then turned to our financial situation. He said it is 
getting quite serious, and some would in fact call it desperate. Within 
a few days we will be paying 5% for six-­months’ short-­term bills. This 
situation could be eased by printing additional money, but this would 
make further inflation inevitable. It was a terrible blow to the nation’s 
1 Source: Ballistic missiles; budget problems. Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, 
Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on September 18.
