Arms Control and Disarmament 1285 One rather disconcerting possibility in this connection would be for a Soviet submarine to deliver a nuclear device to the Marshall Islands and detonate it, fully aware that it would be detected. Such a maneuver would probably be followed up by Soviet propaganda that the U.S. had conducted another test in violation of a moratorium agree­ ment. Proving the national origin of such a test by any scientific means would be extremely difficult. With possibilities such as these in mind, a system is now described which would permit a greatly increased detection capability in the most remote areas of the world. This system includes acoustic, seismic, electromagnetic and air sampling components designed on the basis of availability of land masses in the Southern Hemisphere and in the large ocean areas of the Northern Hemisphere rather than being designed for a specific detection capability. The system has then been evaluated for its probable detection capability. a. Acoustic Net. It is estimated that about 22 acoustic stations (see ­Figure 12) would be required to supplement the present long range detection net in order to achieve a capability of 90–100 per cent to detect shallow sub-­surface, surface and air bursts with a yield as low as 40 KT anywhere in the world outside the USSR and China. This estimate is based on experience in detecting U.S., U.K and USSR nuclear tests which indicates that explosions as low as 40 KT can be detected with excellent reliability at a range of 2500 nautical miles. The requirement that at least two acoustic stations detect an explosion in order to establish the location and time of the event also influences the choice of stations. It should be noted that two factors make the capability estimates less reliable for places outside the USSR than for those within the USSR. One is the fact that there have been only 15 nuclear explosions conducted in the Southern Hemisphere, e.g., U.K. tests in Australia, and acoustic data on these are sparse. The other is the fact that a number of island locations for stations had to be chosen in order to cover the Antarctic and remote ocean areas. Noise levels at these locations will probably be considerably higher than at present sites, making detection more difficult. It is estimated that such a net could detect shallow sub-­surface, surface or air bursts with a capability of 90–100 per cent for 40 KT or larger, 60–90 per cent for 10–40 KT, 30–60 per cent for 5–10 KT and 0–30 per cent for less than 5 KT. b. Seismic Net. About 10 seismic stations (see Figure 12) of the type presently used by AFOAT–1 would be required to supplement the pres­ ent long range detection net in order to achieve a capability of 90–100 per cent to detect underground bursts with a yield as low as 20 KT any­ where in the world. This estimate is based on experience in detecting the Rainier shot and a number of underground high explosive charges. The limited data available indicate that seismic signal amplitudes expected from a 20 KT sub-­surface burst would be about twenty times larger than shown in Figure 6. Assuming good station locations could be found with
