Preface V relevant White House files at the Dwight D. Eisenhower Library in Abilene, Kansas, to which the editors had complete access. The Eisen­ hower Library contains, among other important collections, the memo­ randa of discussion at the NSC meetings, usually prepared by Deputy Executive Secretary S. Everett Gleason, and the memoranda of confer­ ence with the President, prepared by the President’s Staff Secretary, Andrew J. Goodpaster. Records of the National Security Council located at NARA include the numbered NSC papers and related documentation. Because White House and Department of State records contain many significant Depart­ ment of Defense documents, the editors sought only selected access to the Department of Defense files. The editors also perused the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the official papers of General Nathan F. ­Twining, General Thomas D. White, and Admiral Arleigh A. Burke. The List of Sources (pp. 1–6) lists the files consulted both in gov­ ernment repositories and in private collections for the print volume and the microfiche supplement. Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary. Some general decisions are also made regarding issues that cannot be documented in the volume but will be addressed in a microfiche supplement or in editorial or bibliographical notes. The following general selection criteria are used in preparing vol­ umes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-­editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The compiler-­editors also tend to apply these selec­ tion criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the gener­ ally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors give priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes). Selection Criteria (in general order of priority): 1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identity the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States; 2. Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted;
