146 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII a negative response from the government of Pakistan, we will proceed with a Finding which will be laid before the President. If the Pakistani response is negative, we would meet again and take up these questions again . . . DN: Under the instructions we have prepared for Art Hummel, we are authorizing him to say if it is raised by Zia that we will examine these questions—do we want him to initiate discussion under these circumstances? ZB: What is your judgment? DN: I am inclined to think that Zia would be aware that this other contact is going to be made and that a Finding coming out of these discussions will require further review in Washington. ZB: Should Hummel initiate it if Zia asks? DN: We will leave it on an if-asked basis. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] 49. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1 Washington, April 12, 1979, 2012Z 91597. Subject: Secretary’s Démarche to Dobrynin on Afghanistan. 1. (S—Entire text) 2. During a meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin, April 11, the Secretary made the following démarche concerning Soviet accusations of U.S. support for the insurgency in Afghanistan.2 3. The Secretary made the following points: —The United States is not interfering in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and is in no way responsible for the current unrest in that 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 15 Feb 1979–22 Aug 1979. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to London, Beijing, Jidda, New Delhi, Kabul, Islamabad, and Tehran. Printed from a copy received in the White House Situation Room. 2 The meeting was summarized in telegram 91469 to Moscow, April 12. Regarding Afghanistan, Vance protested recent Soviet propaganda alleging U.S. involvement and asked Dobrynin if such propaganda foreshadowed Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. The Soviet Ambassador denied Soviet intentions to intervene and countered that the Voice of America had broadcast “hostile content” to the Soviet Union. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840176–1006)
