Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1043
213.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, May 21, 1991, 1339Z
5711. Subject: START: Brooks-Nazarkin Coffee, May 17, 1991
1. This is NST/START Memcon-XV-M-099. Secret—Entire Text.
2. Meeting Date: May 17, 1991
–Time: 10:00 a.m.–10:50 a.m.
–Place: Relais de Chambesy Restaurant, Geneva
3. Participants:
U.S.	
	
USSR
Amb. L.F. Brooks	
Amb. Yu. K. Nazarkin
4. After discussing organizational issues briefly, Brooks and 
Nazarkin turned to a brief discussion of throw-­weight as part of the 
new types definition. Brooks said that his discussion with Obukhov2 
had left him confused. It was clear that the Soviet side did not like the 
U.S. suggestion to combine an increase in throw-­weight with a 15 per-
cent increase in first stage volume. It was unclear, however, whether 
the problem was the concept of volume or the value of 15 percent. 
Nazarkin said that Soviet instructions did not cover volume at all and 
that the Soviet side was simply trying to understand the U.S. approach 
and report it to Moscow.
5. Nazarkin said the Soviet side had been surprised by the U.S. 
reaction to its new types proposal. The idea of a throw-­weight change 
plus a 5 percent change in length had been suggested to the Soviet side 
by Assistant Secretary Hadley. The Soviet side therefore had antici-
pated quick U.S. acceptance of this proposal.
Brooks said that he was unaware of such a suggestion having been 
made. If Secretary Hadley had, in fact, made such a suggestion it was 
as part of a brainstorming session and was not intended as a formal or 
informal U.S. proposal. By now, Brooks continued, Nazarkin must real-
ize that U.S. negotiators frequently offered personal suggestions that, 
upon further analysis, proved infeasible. Brooks said that the U.S. side 
was still studying the Soviet approach, although, as he would discuss 
during a more formal session that afternoon, the Soviet proposal in its 
present form was almost certainly too loose to be acceptable.
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Lot 02D360, Edward M. Ifft 
Files, Baker-Nazarkin Memcons 1991. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent Priority for information 
to Moscow, the Mission to NATO, and USNMR SHAPE. Drafted by Brooks; cleared by 
Kangas; approved by Brooks.
2 See Document 212.
