500.A15/196: Telegram
[Document 60]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
WASHINGTON, April 8, 1926—noon.
55. Department’s 54, April 7, 4 p.m. Department is concerned by apparent
tendency to give increased importance to the role of League Committees.
As originally presented the role of these committees was clearly limited to
holding their advice at the disposal of the Preparatory Commission and no
objection was therefore raised by this Government inasmuch as this did not
put the League committees on different ground from any other authority
from which the Commission might seek advice. There has, however, been
an increasing tendency to inject these committees into the work of the
Commission and Drummond’s letter to me speaks of the fact that they are to
be “convened to assist the work of the Preparatory Commission.” Your
despatch 780 March 25 indicates that it is proposed to adjourn the
Preparatory Commission within a short time and leave the discussion of its
agenda in the hands of these League bodies. It will be obvious to you that
any such course would afford to those who are opposed to our cooperating
with the League good ground for claiming that we have been maneuvered
into turning over to League organizations responsible primarily to the
League Council matters which should be discussed only by the authorized
representatives of this and other Governments. As you know the
Department has sought to cooperate as generously as possible with the
League in its humanitarian activities but these efforts might be seriously
compromised if any ground were given for the belief that the League
Committees are given a more active and important role than was indicated
to us at the time the invitation was accepted.
In view of the difficulty of securing technical experts abroad it has been
necessary for this Government to send a large delegation and it will be
unfortunate if through the long adjournments which are foreseen in your
despatch 780, March 25 our representatives are kept in Europe longer than
is necessary for continuous discussion. It is therefore hoped that no effort
