42  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Planning Board Recommendation: Accordingly, the Planning Board 
recommends that the National Security Council agree that:
Majority Proposal
ODM Proposal
The Council on Foreign Economic 
Policy should be requested to study 
all possible means of improving 
U.S.-­Canada economic relations, and 
to transmit to the National Security 
Council any recommendations requir­
ing Presidential consideration.
The Planning Board should 
prepare, for consideration 
by the National Security 
Council, a draft policy paper 
on all aspects of our relations 
with Canada.
14.	
Memorandum of Conversation Between Dulles and 
Gruenther1
Washington, February 19, 1958, 2 p.m.
We talked about Tunisia, Mutual Security, and so forth. Then I dis­
cussed the disarmament situation. I said I felt that it was essential that the 
disarmament work should be an integral part of the State Department 
activity and not operated independently. Disarmament involved 
too many political considerations, the future of NATO, the future of 
Germany, and so forth. Gruenther said he agreed. I further said that I was 
very sceptical about there being any reduction of armament purely as a 
matter of agreement. There might be reduction for domestic reasons or 
because some political issues were settled, but the disarmament problem 
was so complex, the balance so difficult to find, and enforcement so pre­
carious, that I doubted that there could be reduction of armament purely 
as a result of reciprocal and balanced agreement. Nevertheless, I felt it 
was vital to continue to seek limitation of armament. I referred to the 
German attitude prior to World War I and the disastrous consequences 
to them of being regarded throughout the world as militaristic. General 
Gruenther indicated his general agreement with this point of view. I then 
indicated that I was thinking of handling the matter, perhaps through 
Wadsworth, as far as negotiation was concerned, and through the regular 
Departmental officers, but I did feel it necessary to have some qualified 
persons from outside who could serve as kind of an advisory panel to 
keep us moving and moving in sound directions, taking into account all 
1 Source: Possibility of establishing disarmament advisory board. Confidential; 
­Personal and Private. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers. Drafted by Dulles.
