Afghanistan
705
aggressive global policy that seeks ultimately to obtain a stranglehold
on Western oil supplies. ([classification marking not declassified])
Beijing believes that the outcome in Afghanistan will set the tone
in world politics for years to come and that the Soviet action thus poses
a fundamental test for the West. In Beijing’s view, Western acquiescence
in Soviet action in Afghanistan will only embolden Moscow and will
also lead to international acceptance of the Vietnamese conquest of
Kampuchea, where Chinese security interests are more directly at stake.
([classification marking not declassified])
For Beijing, the Soviet invasion is an opportunity to advance three
key foreign policy objectives: to discredit detente politics in the West;
to drive a wedge between the Third World and Moscow; and, most
important, to prod the United States into a tougher anti-Soviet stance.
With these goals in mind, China is pursuing the same policies in South-
west Asia that it has pushed in the region for several years, although
with new emphasis, along the following lines. ([classification marking
not declassified])
Engage the West in the Region. At the heart of Beijing’s strategy is
its effort to get the United States to renew its close ties with Pakistan.
It wants Washington to give Pakistan a strong security guarantee and
enough military aid to encourage Islamabad to resist firmly the Soviet
presence in the region. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
Reassure Pakistan. China has given Pakistan constant reassurance
of its support since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and has sent
separate high-level political and military delegations to Islamabad.
Although China has publicly stated its willingness to aid Pakistan, it
has not offered a firm security guarantee or given Pakistan any new
military assistance. China is known to be concerned about the stability
and the anti-Soviet steadfastness of the Zia-ul-Haq regime. ([classifica-
tion marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Encourage Regional Harmony. Beijing seeks, over the long term, to
create an informal, Western-backed alliance of Southwest Asian coun-
tries that can firmly resist further Soviet encroachment in the region.
As a key element of this policy, China is encouraging Pakistan to
improve ties with India while itself attempting to mend its own
relations with New Delhi. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
Bog the Soviets Down in Afghanistan. China seeks to make Moscow
pay the highest political price possible for its intervention. It thus
opposes any plan to neutralize Afghanistan or any attempts at a com-
promise solution that would leave the Soviets in control. Beijing is
supporting all international measures to isolate the Soviets and is
encouraging other countries to aid the Afghan rebels. It is not clear what
