Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 709 142. Editorial Note On March 27, 1980, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in order to provide an overview of the Carter administration’s foreign policy. Vance noted that for the past 4 months concern had been focused on southwest Asia, Iran, the Persian Gulf, and Afghanistan. Decisions made in any of those areas, he continued, had to be placed within a broader, strategic outline. Responses needed to focus on immediate concerns, while taking into account long-term strategic interests. Vance suggested that his appearance before the Committee could serve the purpose of solidifying “broad agreement on the general course that best suits America’s interests and needs in the coming decade.” Recognizing that a full consensus proved unlikely given the complexity of an independent world, he, nonetheless, stated: “But I do believe that despite differences on decisions that we have made and that we and others will make during the 1980s, our nation can now shape a new foreign policy consensus about our goals in the world and the essential strands of our strategy to pursue them. “This consensus can be built around agreement on two central points. “—First, the United States must maintain a military balance of power. Our defense forces must remain unsurpassed. Our strategic deterrent must be unquestionable. Our conventional forces must be strong enough and flexible enough to meet the full range of military threats we may face. As a global power, we must maintain the global military balance. Our strength is important to our own safety, to a strong foreign policy free from coercion, to the confidence of allies and friends, and to the future of reciprocal arms control and other negotiations. Our strength also buttresses regional balances that could be upset by the direct or indirect use of Soviet power. “—The second central point is this: that our military strength, while an essential condition for an effective foreign policy, is not in itself a sufficient condition. We must nurture and draw upon our other strengths as well—our alliances and other international ties, our economic resources, our ability to deal with diversity, and our ideals. By drawing fully on these strengths, we can help shape world events now in ways that reduce the likelihood of using military force later. A global American foreign policy can succeed only if it has both these dimensions. “Some have argued that a strong response to Soviet military growth and aggression is overreaction. But to disregard the growth of Soviet military programs and budgets or to explain away aggression as a defensive maneuver is to take refuge in illusion.
