Afghanistan 749 NSC Mr. Robert D. Blackwill Brig. General William Odom Mr. Marshall Brement SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS In opening the discussion, Secretary Muskie asked CIA if our lack of success with the Allies in persuading them to respond vigorously to the Afghanistan crisis was an indication that they disagreed with our strategic analysis of the situation. He noted that our original rationale had been to try to persuade the Soviets to withdraw and to deter repetition of the Soviet invasion. The Secretary asked if the Europeans had in effect accepted a permanent Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. CIA said yes, Ambassador Komer thought that was indeed the case, and David Aaron added that there was an important train of thought in Europe that argued that we would in the end have to trade Western acceptance of the Babrak regime for eventual Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. (S) Responding to Secretary Muskie’s observation that these issues should be discussed at the Venice Summit, Dr. Brzezinski stressed that it was important for the leaders of the West to talk together in detail about the strategic challenge, either formally or informally at dinner. Before going to the Summit, the President would have to decide if he wished to pose sharply and directly the strategic issues we confront, or to soft-pedal them. Dr. Brzezinski thought that the President should use the Venice forum to portray the Soviet challenge as he saw it and to make clear that palliatives such as a partial Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan would not work. With this approach the President would stress that if we did not act to meet the Soviet threat in Southwest Asia, a fundamental tipping of history would occur. Giscard, Schmidt and Ohira all had said that they more or less concurred with our strategic assessment, but it was important to get their collective agreement at Venice to our view of the implications of Afghanistan. If we could do that, the individual measures we had proposed would then be easier to achieve. Therefore, the President should make a toughminded, forceful statement at Venice.2 (S) 2 A report on the June 22–23 Venice Economic Summit is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy, Document 247. On June 22, the participants at the Summit issued a statement on Afghanistan that called for “a world in which the rule of law is universally obeyed, national independence is respected and world peace is kept.” The statement continued: “We therefore reaffirm hereby that the Soviet military occupation of Afghanistan is unacceptable now and that we are determined not to accept it in the future. It is incompatible with the will of the Afghan people for national independence, as demonstrated by their courageous resistance, and with the security of the states of the region. It is also incompatible with the principles of the United Nations Charter and with efforts to maintain genuine détente. It undermines the very foundations of peace, both in the region and in the world at large.” The text of the statement is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pp. 1170–1171.
