750  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
by word, having devoted all or the major part of 11 meetings to sub­
stantive discussion.2
With respect to the language of 13 of the paragraphs as printed in 
the new draft (Paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 11, 14, 21, 22, 24, 50, 53, 56, 60, and 64), 
the Planning Board recommends no change. Other paragraphs were 
revised in one respect or another and agreed to at the Planning Board. 
There are 9 wholly new paragraphs. In 15 of the paragraphs there are 
splits, in some cases more than one.
I now propose to go through the paper, not dwelling on the 
unchanged paragraphs, or on the less important agreed revisions, unless 
someone wishes to raise a question about any one of them.
Paragraph 3 (p. 3), which is split, gives an evaluation of the basic 
threat to the U.S. from the Sino-­Soviet Bloc. The majority proposal 
stresses that the “danger to U.S. security from the Communist threat 
lies not only in general war or local aggression but [also]3 in the possi­
bility of a future shift in the East-­West balance of power” which “could 
be caused by a gradual erosion of Western positions via means short 
of force, and over time by a continued growth of over-­all Communist 
strength at a rate significantly greater than that of the West.”4
The JCS Planning Board Advisor preferred the language of the old 
paper, with the slight amendments indicated by the underscoring in the 
left-­hand column.
(Call on: SECRETRY HERTER
ALLEN DULLES
ADMIRAL BURKE)
Paragraph 5 (p. 6) describes the basic task for the U.S. in general 
terms, pointing out the need, among other things, for adequate military 
strength and civilian preparedness. Treasury and Budget in their split 
wish to emphasize “while preserving fundamental American values 
and institutions”. Other Planning Board members felt that this thought 
was repetitious, being covered generally in Paragraph 1 and specifi­
cally in Paragraph 2.
(Call on: SECRETARY SCRIBNER
MR. STANS)
2 Includes June 22 meeting with consultants; excludes 5 earlier meetings with con­
sultants and 2 meetings on the NIE’s. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 All brackets are in the original, except for those identifying footnotes in the original.
4 The majority proposal also points out such factors as the rapidly growing Soviet 
nuclear capabilities, which have made their leaders feel freer to adopt an aggressive pos­
ture in peripheral areas; the Soviet regime’s ability and willingness to identify itself with 
political and social discontent, and to exploit instability; and the ability of Communist 
leadership to act ruthlessly and rapidly and to repudiate agreements without being sub­
ject to moral restraints.
