146
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
contacts with at least two Persian Gulf governments—one [is] Saudi
Arabia. They have not approached major Western governments yet.
No firm pledges of support have come from any governments.
[Omitted here is a list of proposed Ministers, a list of exiles and
the countries within which they reside, information on Bakhtiar’s Lon-
don and Paris offices, and a list of former Iranian military officers
residing in the United States.]
56.
Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)
to President Carter1
Camp David, undated.
The longer the situation in Iran drags on, the more complex it
seems and the more reluctant I am to try to offer advice. I lack a sure
sense of what we should do as we weigh the lives of the hostages
against several abstract principles against our country’s interests after
the present crisis is over. And although the principles involved are
pre-eminent, they are also abstract and easily deferred in their applica-
tion when the lives of 49 human beings are at stake.
Having established that I am not in a good position to offer advice,
I do have some feelings in my gut that I wanted to pass on to you.
First, I agree strongly with your desire to bring this thing to a head. It
seems to me that the passage of time makes the situation more difficult
for everyone involved:
—The American people, who have been supportive to date, will
soon begin to sour on the situation and we will see increased support
for extreme measures from giving the Shah back to wiping Iran off the
face of the earth;
—The passage of time will make it more difficult for you and
Khomeini to find a satisfactory political solution to this problem;
—The passage of time increases the chance that the mobs will
overrun the Embassy and do harm to the hostages and/or increases
the chances that some of the students will take the situation into their
own hands;
—The passage of time will take its toll on SALT II ratification; I
do not believe that SALT II will be ratified unless we have a politically
1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,
Box 34, Iran 11/79. Eyes Only.
