398
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—We took initiative today to say publicly that we have deter-
mined in light of all the circumstances that no trilateral negotiations
should take place today. In our view, which we have conveyed to
Egyptian delegation, there should be no trilateral meetings for next few
days while we deal with this issue.
—If Egyptian delegation were recalled, even if it were made clear
this was for consultations with intention to return to Washington in a
few days, onus for disruption of negotiations would shift in public
mind to the Egyptians. Many would see a parallel with Sadat’s recall of
his delegation from Jerusalem in January. As matters now stand, the
focus is on Israeli decision with respect to the settlements and on our
publicly declared position which makes clear we do not think this is the
time to carry on business as usual.
—With respect to East Jerusalem issue, it is our clear impression
that this was an idea that was floated in Israel and has now been put on
ice. (The Secretary made this point also to the Egyptian delegation.)
Vance
116.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State and the White House1
Tel Aviv, October 30, 1978, 1235Z
15996. Subject: Begin’s Reply to President’s Letter on Settlements.
1. Following is text of copy of letter from Prime Minister Begin to
President Carter dated October 29. Text received by Embassy at 1230
local time October 30.
2. Begin quote: Dear Mr. President, I acknowledge the receipt of
your message2 dated October 26th, 1978, which I read with deep regret.
At Camp David, I informed you, Mr. President, that whilst undertaking
not to establish new settlements in Judea, Samaria and Gaza during the
next three months—the agreed period for our negotiations with
Egypt—we shall add several hundred families to the existing settle-
ments. In fulfillment of this, the Cabinet decided unanimously that the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Middle East, Box 46, 10/21–31/78. Secret; Sensitive; Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a
copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 108.
