Human Rights pointing out that abstention is a method of distancing ourselves from a repressive regime, while not actually voting no on aid for the needy. The abstention option does not exist for bilateral assistance. More often, however, opposition to a needy loan would be for tactical reasons: because it seemed the course most likely to produce improvements in a particular human rights situation. This approach is supported by individuals in other Bureaus. At the moment, for instance, our Ambassadors in Chile and Uruguay are recommending that we oppose all loans to those countries, whether or not they meet the needy standard. Each believes that our hard line policy may be beginning to show results, and thinks we should keep up the pressure. Ambassador White in Paraguay recently urged opposition to all loans there, not because the hard line is beginning to pay off but because he feels that the GOP does not appreciate the distinction between needy and non-needy loans and so is getting confusing “signals” from us which make human rights improvements less likely. S/P believes we should always support IFI loans which would serve basic human needs. If the political situation in a country is such that the benefits of an assistance program would not actually reach the needy, the proposal should not reach the Interagency Group; if it does, that Group should oppose it. But we should have a clear and consistent record of support for programs which we believe would actually meet the basic human needs criteria. S/P believes that to preserve our credibility in the IFIs, we need to be able to demonstrate that the only difference in our attitude to their loans and to bilateral programs has to do with the kinds of loans brought forward. Such nuances as a reduction in some bilateral programs, or a decision not to begin further new ones, are likely to be lost on those who see some bilateral programs continuing while we oppose similar programs in international institutions. (The statement in the attached talking points that “we have signed no new bilateral AID agreements” in Ethiopia may be a useful debating point; but the reason is Ethiopia’s unwillingness to sign agreements with us. We have been trying to continue bilateral aid programs in order to preserve some links with the country, despite our opposition to its basic human needs loans in the IDA.) A more consistent record of support for humanitarian loans in the IFIs might also help encourage other donor countries to factor human rights considerations into IFI operations; several of the European governments already consulted have suggested that the IFIs are too much the cutting edge of our human rights advocacy. S/P further believes that consistent support for humanitarian loans in the IFIs is important to our longer-range human rights efforts. We need to be able to demonstrate that our quarrel is not with any
