Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I cate scarce Federal resources, the process of bringing in these refugees must be orderly, and it must be in accordance with our laws. We’re working vigorously, yesterday and today, with 16 nations and with international organizations, at a conference on refugees in Costa Rica, to develop alternatives that will permit safe and orderly evacuation of the Cubans who are seeking to leave.12 For ourselves, we will give highest priority to family reunification, and we prefer, of course, prescreening in Cuba or in a third country, such as Costa Rica. Let me emphasize again that we treat those seeking asylum and those who are refugees from Cuba, from Haiti, and from other countries, equally, on a case-by-case basis as is required by American law. And finally I’d like to say to you that America’s foreign policy must always reflect the kind of people we are. We are a strong people, we are a caring people. We care about human rights, we care about decent living standards, we care about the independence of nations, and we care about the rights of individual human beings. We have a sober, responsible recognition that American power is especially important in a turbulent world where others depend upon us for their safety and for their freedom. Our interests and our ideals serve each other. Our power must be used in the service of both—interest and ideals. The course I have mapped to you today in this brief outline form is neither simple nor easy, but it’s a sound course, it’s a safe course, which we must pursue. Our foreign policy deserves your understanding and your support, not only for our Nation’s own security but in order that people everywhere can be certain of America’s commitment to use its vast power with a clear, firm, steady purpose—to seek for all humankind what we have: a future of progress, of freedom, and of peace. Thank you very much. 12 Costa Rican President Rodrigo Carazo Odio organized the conference. Attendees included representatives from the United States, Australia, Argentina, Costa Rica, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic, Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, Spain, the United Kingdom, Chile, Uruguay, Brazil, Italy, Peru, Venezuela, Colombia, the Netherlands, the Vatican, UNHCR, OAS, and the Inter-governmental Committee for European
