836 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 332. Memorandum of Conversation1 Moscow, March 29, 1977, 4:30–7:30 p.m. SUBJECT Middle East, Arms Control PARTICIPANTS UNITED STATES USSR Secretary Cyrus R. Vance Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko Ambassador Malcolm Toon Deputy Chairman of the Council Mr. Paul Warnke of Ministers L.V. Smirnov Assistant Secretary Arthur Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Hartman Korniyenko Mr. William Hyland Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin Mr. Leslie Gelb Notetaker—Name Unknown Mr. William D. Krimer, Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter Interpreter [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.] NON-PROLIFERATION Gromyko suggested that the subject of non-proliferation required some discussion. The Secretary said he would be happy to start. As he had indicated the other day, the question of non-proliferation was a matter of major concern for our government, for the Carter Administration.2 As a consequence of the priority we attached to this issue, we had begun a study immediately upon taking office. That study was about to be completed. We would be prepared to discuss such things as international fuel assurance arrangements, international spent fuel storage and strengthening IAEA safeguard arrangements. As a result of the study, we had come to the following conclusions, which would be announced very shortly: First, we would indefinitely defer commercial fuel reproc- 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 8, Vance to Moscow, March 28–30, 1977. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Krimer; and approved in draft by Hyland. The meeting took place at the Kremlin. The memorandum of conversation is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 20. 2 On March 28, Vance told Brezhnev and Gromyko that Carter “felt that we must be bold and vigorous in achieving control over nuclear weapons,” that “in the very near future we would announce certain policy decisions concerning nuclear non-proliferation,” and that the United States “shared Soviet concern about the dangers of proliferation of nuclear weapons, and we believed that the actions which we are about to take would constitute a major step forward toward this end.” The memorandum of conversation is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 17.
