472
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
165.
Annex A From the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, January 14, 1980
PROSPECTS FOR INSURGENCY IN AFGHANISTAN
Whether the disparate Afghan insurgent groups can stand up to
the Soviet military occupation forces depends on the degree of Soviet
commitment.
The Soviets appear to have three options:
(1) To use Soviet forces primarily to secure urban areas and major
roads and to rebuild the Afghan Army for the role of pacification in
the countryside.
(2) To use Soviet forces directly in counter-insurgency operations
in the countryside as a supplement to the Afghan Army wherever
most needed.
(3) To use Soviet forces as the primary element in crushing the
insurgents throughout the country.
We believe that the Soviets already have sufficient forces (80,000
troops) in Afghanistan to fulfill option 1, and in fact now control the
urban areas and key roads. The longer task of rebuilding the Afghan
Army to the point where it can challenge the insurgents in the country-
side will be much more difficult. Even before the Babrak coup, the
Afghan Army was well below strength due to desertions and low
morale. If the Afghan Army cannot regain more of the initiative against
the insurgents soon, the Army may continue to disintegrate and rural
territory continue to fall to the insurgents.
We believe, then, that the Soviets will be drawn into an active
counterinsurgency role as in option 2. The recent establishment of General
Sokolov’s headquarters in Kabul and of a tactical air headquarters at Bagram
airfield would seem to point in this direction. The introduction of more
airpower, especially transport and gunship helicopters and close air
support aircraft, or the availability of the latter from nearby airfields
in the USSR, would presage such intentions.
A key question is whether limited Soviet counterinsurgency opera-
tions under this option would intimidate the insurgents into at least
quiescence. The insurgents have probably not faced the ruthlessness
with which the Soviets will destroy their villages, mosques, and farm-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The
full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The annex
printed here was found in this form.
