Human Rights 137 Rights (adopted in 1966) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (adopted in 1966). Discuss the guarantees which these documents provide. B. Remind contacts of the essentially apolitical nature of the concern for human rights. Offending regimes often try to smear human rights activists at home and abroad as subversives seeking the downfall of the ruling government or ruling political philosophy. C. Observe that the abuse of human rights and the failure to honor pertinent laws and international agreements may create obstacles to the achievement of the foreign policy objectives. Third World leaders may be particularly susceptible to damage to their country’s selfimage which would amount to losing face before the international community. D. Indicate that abuse of human rights will negatively affect the character of relations between the U.S. and foreign governments in all areas. 45. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 19, 1977 SUBJECT Human Rights PRM Attached at Tab A is a human rights PRM2 which has been the subject of substantial interagency—and intra-NSC—discussion. After preliminary meetings, several concerned agencies were asked to submit drafts of a human rights PRM. These were coordinated and a redraft in- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1977. Confidential. Sent for action. Tuchman sent Brzezinski the memorandum under a May 17 covering memorandum, which Inderfurth asked her to prepare on May 13, recommending that Brzezinski forward the memorandum to Carter. Handwritten notations by Inderfurth and Hormats on the covering memorandum read: “This PRM is now ready to go. I suggest, however, that a length limitation—say 25 pages—be placed on the response. RI.” and “I agree with Rick on length. Jessica should ride this one clearly lest it turn into treatise on the issue. RH.” (Ibid.) 2 Printed as Document 46.
