988  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
area, but we ought not to betray the extent of our surveillance of the 
area.
Mr. Dulles then turned to Khrushchev’s recent speech before 
the Supreme Soviet. He said this speech was very important and 
had been the subject of a careful analysis by CIA. He was inclined 
to accept Khrushchev’s statement on manpower strength and on the 
reductions in certain hardware production. He was willing to accept 
tentatively Khrushchev’s figure of 3.6 million men under arms in all 
the Soviet forces, although this figure was less than the figure pre­
viously carried in intelligence estimates. CIA had already observed 
the virtual cessation of bomber production in the USSR and cuts in 
the production of other weapons, e.g. naval vessels. Incidentally, Mr. 
Dulles noted that the first reports of Khrushchev’s speech had lumped 
submarines and surface ships together as obsolete. This turned out to 
be an error in translation. Actually Khrushchev had said only that 
surface ships were obsolete. Mr. Dulles estimated that the reduction 
in Soviet armed forces proposed by Khrushchev of 1.2 million could 
probably be effected within two years, by the fall of 1961 according 
to Malinovsky. Mr. Dulles felt it made a good deal of sense for the 
USSR to reduce its forces in view of the possibility of serious compe­
tition in 1960 through 1962 between the military on the one hand and 
the civilian economy on the other as represented by the Seven Year 
Plan. The USSR needed more manpower for its industrial program. 
Reduction in military manpower would also result in the reduction of 
16–17 billion rubles in the explicit Soviet military budget. Mr. Dulles 
pointed out, however, that the real military budget, as opposed to 
the announced military budget, of the USSR was 160+ billion rubles. 
Mr. Dulles did not believe that the reductions announced in the 
Khrushchev speech would affect previous estimates of Soviet ICBM 
capabilities. Apparently the Soviet forces were about to undergo a 
through reorganization. Khrushchev has become a missile enthusi­
ast and wishes to speed up the rationalization of Soviet forces. He 
may also wish to fix our attention on the missile field, where he 
thinks the Soviets have superiority. He apparently wishes to achieve 
armed forces which will consist of strategic attack and air defense 
forces armed with missiles, ground forces also armed with missiles 
and having great airborne capability, and a navy consisting largely 
of submarines. Mr. Dulles said that Khrushchev may be considering 
a percentage withdrawal of Soviet forces from Eastern Europe. The 
Khrushchev program of reduction is probably not palatable to the 
Soviet military and Khrushchev may have had some difficulty getting 
the military to go along. Evidence of this is the fact that the Chief 
of Staff and other important military figures did not make speeches 
before the Supreme Soviet. The demotion or Kirichenko may also have 
been related to opposition to the Khrushchev military program. Mr.
