370
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
better integration of our economic and military assistance decisions.
Good country strategies, and a better flow of information about indi-
vidual decisions between the Interagency Group on Human Rights and
Foreign Assistance, on the one hand, and the Arms Control Export
Board, on the other, would help. Opinion is divided as to whether there
should be a more institutionalized advisory link between the two. We
think the various ways of establishing such a link should at least be
explored.
The Foreign Assistance Group also should continue to improve its
procedures for putting human rights in context of other American in-
terests—and be seen to do so. Regional Bureau experts have recently
been playing a larger role (in preparation of the Group’s agenda and in
introducing issues at its meetings). That trend should be encouraged,
and representatives of other Departments also urged to speak not just
to a human rights situation or the basic human needs relevance of a
loan, but to their view of our overall interests in and strategy toward a
problem country.
Effectiveness
Except for countries whose human rights violations are so serious
that legislation requires us to treat them in certain ways, we should try
to emphasize what will be effective over what will make us look con-
sistent. That may not prove possible. It certainly would be more
time-consuming, since it would be even less clear that a certain kind of
human rights violation, wherever it occurred, would require a certain
response from us. A more serious problem is that country desk officers
might be unable to resist the temptation to say that only quiet diplo-
macy could ever work in the country with which they have to deal; or,
even if we overcame the temptation, we might be unable to convince
Congress that we had done so. In that case, we might only provoke leg-
islation which further restricted our flexibility. But it is worth trying to
develop country strategies which emphasize effectiveness. It would be
essential to consult with human rights activists and critics alike on the
Hill about country strategies—not just transmit to them our finished
papers—well in advance of our decisions about particular assistance
programs.
Our Role in the IFI’s
We are required by law to use our voice and vote to promote
human rights in the IFI’s, including channeling loans to countries with
good human rights records; consulting with other donors about
standards for meeting basic human needs and promoting human
rights; and devising with them mechanisms for acting together. There
are various ways (or combinations of ways) we could meet the require-
ment. Each has advantages and drawbacks.
