1112  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
266.	 Memorandum From Rathjens to Kistiakowsky1
Washington, October 5, 1960
SUBJECT
Comments on Attached Study
1. The main conclusion of the study is that U.S. capabilities for the 
limited operations studied are adequate. The most serious criticism that 
can be leveled is that this conclusion is not supported by the analysis. 
Five case studies are discussed as indicated below:
a). Berlin: In this instance it is acknowledged that “the adequacy of 
U.S. and Allied capabilities for limited military operations in defense 
of Berlin is dependent upon demonstrated U.S. and Allied resolution 
to risk general war over this issue, and Soviet unwillingness to accept 
such risk over Berlin.” (p. 23, para. A) In other words, defense of Berlin 
is dependent on the credibility of the threat of general war, since our 
limited capabilities are otherwise inadequate!
b). Laos: The introduction of Chinese “volunteer forces” is assumed 
to be beyond the scope of the study (p. 50, para. G), though it is 
acknowledged that this would be the most probable consequence of 
the assumed U.S. attack against N. Viet Nam (p. 52, para. 6).
c). Iran: It is acknowledged that if the Soviets follow one of the three 
courses of action proposed—Course I (open intervention with Soviet 
forces),—the best we could hope for would be to hold the southern part 
of the country (p. 63, para. d(3)). It is further stated that such Soviet action 
is considered beyond the scope of the study (p. 81, para A).
d). Offshore Islands and e). Korea: In these cases, the judgment is 
reached that we should use nuclear weapons, but the consequences of 
enemy use are not explored. It is acknowledged that our logistic base is 
very vulnerable.
In view of the foregoing, I believe the first conclusion of the study 
might more accurately be rewritten along the following lines:
U.S. and Allied capabilities are adequate provided the Bloc does 
not take actions for which they are inadequate.
I think this a sad example of people coming up with a conclusion 
that they think their bosses want to hear, regardless of the facts and any 
analysis.
2. In a number of places (e.g., page 20, para. E 1) there is a suppo­
sition that the Soviets will not expect, will be unpleasantly surprised 
by, and will therefore back down in the face of a moderately tough 
1 Source: Comments on limited war study. Top Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, 
White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for 
Science and Technology.
