Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX and produce a significant increase in bilateral cooperation. Brown did not answer this point, but noted that the group of Yugoslav aircraft engine experts was to arrive soon and that he wanted to press forward for the present with that aspect of the TF–30 question. Brown said he wished to know the GOY decision on the US proposal for a joint US-Yugoslav Defense Working Group. He recalled that they (Brown and Ljubicic) had met twice with a year’s interval. He suggested that more frequent meeting of the staffs could lead to progress, but would not substitute for meeting between the Secretaries. The Defense Working Group would promote cooperation in areas requiring attention to detail. Ljubicic replied, “We fully accept your suggestion to establish this commission.” Experience with other countries had been successful with groups headed at the “assistant state secretary” level, or at the level the US side wished, he explained. He said the group could meet when necessary, but at least once a year, with the first meeting in Belgrade, or in Washington if the US wished. Brown said that the first meeting should be in Belgrade before the end of the year. Ljubicic said, “I quite agree.” Brown raised the subject of disposal of old US-origin military equipment. He explained that the USG has decided that Yugoslavia need not purchase the reversionary rights on MAP equipment. This decision, he continued, meant also that the USG need not ask other countries receiving US MAP if they were interested before allowing Yugoslavia to dispose of the equipment. He emphasized that a written request to the USG was required before the GOY disposed of the equipment. Ljubicic said that the Yugoslavs were grateful to the USG and people for the MAP equipment and that he was satisfied with the “solution” just explained. He said Yugoslavia made one mistake: “the tanks to Ethiopia.” He speculated that if they had asked maybe more could have been given to Ethiopia. Belovski laughingly interjected, “Jointly!” Ljubicic said the equipment was obsolete and plans were to scrap it. Brown noted that his remarks on equipment disposal were not a criticism, only an explanation of procedures. Ljubicic assured him that the Yugoslavs did not want to cause problems with the US Congress or anyone else. Brown asked if Ljubicic had other things to raise. Ljubicic said he would not burden Brown with the long list of equipment requested (Brown agreed the list was very long); however, he (Ljubicic) had a few questions. He asked about rocket fuels and explosives. Brown said he thought the Thiokol and Octogene problems had been resolved. Ljubicic said that Admiral Mamula, the chief of their navy, would come to the US at the “beginning of next year” to clarify navy needs. Brown said he would be very welcome. Assistant Secretary McGiffert reminded Ljubicic of an October deadline for the Sparrow missiles associated with
