Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the President is prepared to insist that Begin sign a peace treaty in the course of his visit. In response to my query, he indicated that he would not be prepared to go to Jerusalem but would welcome the President and Prime Minister Begin to Ismailia in order to sign the agreement. I pointed out to Sadat the psychological importance of inviting Begin to Cairo and, after some exchanges, he conceded that this was psychologically important and said that he would be willing to invite Begin here, immediately after the President’s visit to Jerusalem. 4. Third, with regards to our specific language, Sadat made only indirect comments which seem to indicate that he himself was not raising any objections and was prepared to accept it. He went on to raise additional issues, such as oil, indicating a willingness to be accommodating. My impression is that you will have his support on our new formulations unless tomorrow his colleagues talk him out of it. 5. Fourth, Sadat was extraordinarily delighted by your willingness to consider the issue in a wider security context. He interrupted me several times with exclamations to the effect that this is “marvellous, marvellous” and that it represents his own thinking exactly. In fact, he told me that to him the regional security issue is now the more important one. 6. You will note in the more detailed account which follows that he is anxious to give us some “secret weapons” to take to Jerusalem, though the issue of ambassadors still gives him difficulty. Having noted his uneasiness over that issue, I did not probe any further but merely registered the point that you will discuss it with him in greater detail. The most important “secret weapon” he wishes to offer, but please note that it is only to you and that it is not to be incorporated in any formal agreement, is the willingness to build an oil pipeline from the Sinai to Israel. 7. Insofar as the conversation itself is concerned, I started by covering all of the points that you asked me to make. Sadat listened very attentively, interrupting only to express agreement regarding my characterization of Begin’s motives, regarding the impact on U.S. domestic politics of the Middle Eastern crisis, and particularly regarding the point that the U.S. wishes to see a strong Egypt. At that moment he interjected with a number of comments, expressing enthusiastic approval of your approach, stressing the positive results for the U.S. of a friendship with a militarily and economically strong Egypt. 8. After I handed him our proposed new language, Sadat read extremely carefully and out loud. With respect to Article VI, he simply said “ah-ha, you made it neutral,” and then asked Roy Atherton to come in in order to make certain whether that would or would not be part of the treaty or would be a side letter (and Roy told him that it would be attached to the treaty). Regarding the target date language
