926 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX their present expectation and request more direct Western military engagement. This paper sets forth a number of policy areas for US action. Perhaps the most important at this time is to strengthen the US military supply relationship with Yugoslavia. In recent years it has been limited. The Yugoslavs strongly complain that prices of US equipment are too high, and they are extremely wary of publicity. Nevertheless, there are prospects for sales of some systems the Yugoslavs want, such as air defense radars. Even though the Yugoslavs have not bought much from the US, they remain seriously interested in developing the arms transfer relationship. Post-Tito Scenarios In the initial post-Tito period Yugoslavia is likely to remain united and the Soviets to exercise a certain caution. The scenarios set forth below address the situations we could face over the mid-to-longer term. These scenarios are illustrative. Scenario 1: Cohesion: Yugoslav leadership demonstrates unity and basic consensus, achieves broad popular support, continues nonalignment. The Soviets might attempt to both woo and pressure the Yugoslav leadership, presenting it with an ambiguous, but not openly threatening Soviet stance. If the Soviets were willing to pursue riskier policies, they could seek to weaken the new leadership and to generate ethnic and regional tensions. Scenario 2: Cohesion with Liberalization and/or Westward Shift: Internal cohesion as in Scenario 1, but accompanied by political liberalization or a decided shift westward in Yugoslav foreign policy. The Soviets would intensify pressures on Yugoslavia to eschew such trends. Depending on how pronounced were the trends, the Soviets might even use military pressure. But the greater the cohesiveness in Yugoslavia, the less likely the Soviets would intervene with force. Scenario 3: Disunity: Early post-Tito unity and consensus of federal leadership begins to break down as regional disputes and pressures on leadership mount. If disunity were limited, the Soviets would urge decisive recentralization steps. If the situation deteriorated further, regional constituencies could seek active Soviet backing. There would be an active prospect of Soviet military intervention. Soviet perceptions of potential Western responses would be critical. Scenario 4: Soviet Military Intervention: If the USSR saw disunity in Yugoslavia as very serious, it might decide to intervene militarily. Were Yugoslavia’s armed forces cohesive and strong, the USSR might need to assemble 40–50 divisions to launch a full-scale assault. Alternatively, if Yugoslavia were weakened by internal conflict, the Soviets might decide to use a smaller force, perhaps 20–25 divisions. The USSR would
