Negotiating Channels 515 JCS General David Jones Lt. Gen. John Pustay Justice John Shenefield Treasury Robert Carswell Energy John Sawhill SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 1. Iran Developments. Secretary Vance informed the group that the U.S. public reaction to the reports that the hostages were to be turned over to the Revolutionary Council would be: “We have noted what has been said in Tehran and we are waiting to see what happens.” No one should go beyond that statement. All agreed. (C) 2. Iran Sanctions. The SCC reviewed the status of sanctions on Iran as follows: Military Spares. State and Defense reported that the embargo on sale of military spare parts was holding. [3 lines not declassified] In general, the anxiety on the part of the Iranians to find spares is evidence that the embargo is working. We are staying alert for efforts to circumvent the restrictions. (S) Assets Freeze. Treasury reported that the freeze is holding. The Iranians are considering a counter-attachment of U.S. assets in Swiss banks, and we have retained counsel to attempt to block them. The situation will have to be played day by day. In France, a hearing on our freeze of assets in French banks is scheduled for March 17, but we are seeking a month delay. If and when the hearing is held, it is likely to go against us. [12 lines not declassified] Otherwise, Treasury noted that there are a number of tactical situations around the world which are being watched, and we are holding fast. Iran is putting pressure on Finland to repay $38 million oil payment which was caught in the freeze. The World Bank is asking us to license payment of an Iranian loan which is coming due. In the UK, seven Iranian counter suits have been consolidated but will probably not be heard before summer or fall. There are 160 suits pending in the U.S., but consolidation proceedings insure that they will not be held for at least a month or longer. (TS)2 2 In the left margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Keep strictest possible sanctions intact.” Brzezinski passed on these instructions in a March 7 memorandum to Vance, Miller, Brown, Civiletti, Duncan, Cutler, and Jones. (Carter Library, Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler’s Files, Box 13)
