324 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 6. After welcoming remarks and introductions, Under Secretary Bartholomew noted that this was the first time working groups had met before ministers, and said it ought to be considered an experiment. He suggested that the sides make their initial presentations in the core group, but save details for the sub-­groups on START and chemical weapons. He proposed to begin with the nuclear and space talks. Then he offered the floor to Amb. Grinevskiy. 7. Grinevskiy agreed to begin with general presentations as Bartholomew had proposed, but noted that the more could be accomplished in structured groups, the better. He suggested adding a subgroup on nuclear testing and expressed mock concern that, since conventional arms had not been mentioned, he himself might be left unemployed. He asked why the U.S. side had excluded that issue. Bartholomew said he was sure Grinevskiy was fully employed in another forum; here it was not a question of substance, but simply a question of how best to do the work at hand. He proposed to begin with NST. Nuclear & Space Talks 8. Nazarkin opened by recalling the list of subjects he and Amb. Burt had agreed upon in Geneva as appropriate for work at the ministerial: ALCMs, SLCMs, Mobile ICBMs, unit of account, and verification and stability measures (which he referred to in Russian as “trial measures”). Nazarkin also wanted to inform the U.S. side that the Soviet side thought the ministers would want to exchange opinions on ABM Treaty compliance. The sides had reached an impasse and were talking past each other, he said; it would be useful to see whether this problem could be overcome. The Soviet side had studied Vice President Quayle’s statement on SDI with interest, and would be interested in U.S. clarification of how that would influence the U.S. position at the negotiations. START 9. (Note: the START section is not in strict chronological order; it has been reorganized by subject within each subject area, conversations are reported in the order in which they occurred.) 10. Nazarkin presented an introductory statement on START issues (reported piecemeal below). Bartholomew thanked Nazarkin for an interesting statement. After brief comments on selected issues (see below), Bartholomew said the U.S. side proposed to continue discussions this week, laying the groundwork for resolution of a group of issues; the U.S. side looked forward with interest to hearing Nazarkin’s ideas. Concluding that the sides had their work cut out for them in this area, Bartholomew asked Amb. Burt to offer further details. Burt said he was encouraged by Nazarkin’s comments, and amplified some of the points made by Bartholomew.
