National Security Policy  353
C.	 Sea Forces
	
Fleet Missiles
	
Nuclear Powered Fleet
	
Eagle Missile
	
Bullpup v. White Lance
IV. General Military Support
A.	 General Discussion
B.	 Research and Development
C.	 Communications
	
High altitude nuclear weapons effects
	
Global communications systems
D.	 Navy Radio Telescope
E.	 Pacific Missile Range
F.	 Aircraft, nuclear propelled
G.	 Dyna-Soar
H.	 ARPA Space Program
I.	 BW–CW
I. STRATEGIC STRIKING FORCE
A. General Discussion
The mission of the strategic striking force determines, of course, 
related questions such as the size of the force, composition of the force, 
and the number of nuclear weapons it requires. In turn, the quantity of 
nuclear weapons assigned to the striking force will influence the num­
ber available for defense of the home base and for ground and sea forces 
and will affect substantially the budget of both the DOD and the AEC.
Is the size of the strategic striking force, therefore, to be determined 
principally in terms of its expected effectiveness against bases of the 
enemy striking force, or by its effectiveness for retaliatory purposes, or 
both? If intended targets consist of population centers and enemy war 
mobilization potential, would a smaller force be possible? Alternatively, 
if intended targets consist of enemy striking force bases alone, or such 
bases together with population centers, will a larger force be necessary?
With regard to the composition of the striking force, what is an 
appropriate balance between bombers and missiles? Is it desirable to 
have a mixed force of missiles, as, for example, a combination in the 
future of Titan, Polaris and Minuteman? Would such combinations 
reduce the vulnerability of the striking force and complicate the ene­
my’s problems of countering it?
Decisions to proceed with research and development of new deliv­
ery systems should clearly be distinguished from decisions to develop 
operational capabilities. The parallel development of competing
