634
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—On the average, about 40% of US Government orders or deliv-
eries are weapons systems. The balance is vehicles, transport aircraft,
construction, training and miscellaneous services.
STEPS NOW BEING TAKEN
1. The Pipeline. Over $32 billion in defense goods and services, or-
dered by foreign governments (mainly in the Middle East), are under
contract and scheduled for delivery over the next eight years. We are
putting together a list and timetable of what is to be delivered to whom.
We will assess the immediate impact and use this information in evalu-
ating future requests for sales.
2. Pending Sales. We are now reviewing 17 proposed Foreign Mili-
tary Sales (FMS) cases worth $2.3 billion which we inherited from the
last Administration. We are screening these very carefully and will
send to you separately a list of those items which we believe should be
considered by you prior to being sent forward for Congressional re-
view. At that time, we will also propose procedures for obtaining your
views on future cases. Among the most pressing issues are a number of
large proposed sales to the Persian Gulf area. Those requiring notifica-
tion to the Congress cannot be processed until we have satisfied the
SFRC’s resolution requiring an Executive Branch statement of Persian
Gulf policy.3
3. Fiscal 1978 Security Assistance Programs. Together with OMB and
DOD we have reviewed the past Administration’s proposed request to
Congress for FY 1978 funds for grant aid, FMS financing and military
training. These are for the most part reasonable and defensible, al-
though we would have formulated it somewhat differently. Given the
short time available, we have been able to make only limited changes,
and these have centered principally on our human rights concerns. To
show that we intend to follow a different policy on this issue, we have
proposed to OMB that the grant aid program in Ethiopia be eliminated,
that the FMS financing program in Uruguay be eliminated and that the
FMS financial program in Argentina be cut.
4. Congress. Members of my staff and I have begun an active cam-
paign to build confidence with members and key staff on the Hill. We
will institute a new procedure with respect to Congressional notifica-
tions of proposed arms transfers—namely, including a policy justifica-
tion with each new FMS case. Current practice on these notifications is
to report formally only the name of the buyer, the content and price of
3 On September 24, 1976, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee passed a resolu-
tion “opposing further arms sales to Persian Gulf states pending completion of an overall
National Security Council study.” (“Arms Sales to Saudis Set Back,” Washington Post,
September 25, 1976, p. A1)
