336 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX counselled that the movement should remain within the “strict confines of legality.” Disillusionment with increasing factionalism may have been a main factor in Hajek’s decision to resign as spokesman— although the view that the position should rotate annually was obviously a factor. Those spokesmen who later came to represent the movement have not been able to use their influence to resolve differences—in part, because of their lesser prominence at home and abroad. While acknowledging divisions, some Chartists dismiss them as of little consequence, underscoring instead the common goal of the struggle for human rights. Organizers of the Charter clearly recognized that concentrating the movement in the capital city of Prague would be a disadvantage, but they had little choice. They sought to avoid police attention by limiting their contacts outside Prague; some who played a prominent role in the establishment of Charter 77 had been under police surveillance and any travel outside the city would have been duly scrutinized. Moreover, such travel would have given the impression that a “conspiracy” was underway or that attempts were being made to found an “organization,” for which Ministry of Interior approval is necessary and would never have been granted. Prospects Prospects that the movement will accomplish its goals remain as bleak as ever, since: —The regime has all the necessary levers of power and coercion at its disposal, and will not hesitate to use them if threatened. It also sees no reason to consider any “dialogue” with the Chartists, since this could open a Pandora’s box. Prague takes its cue from Moscow, where the attitude toward human rights dissidents is also one of hostility and repression. As a result, Prague can feel confident it has Soviet support for its policies against dissent.2 —The failures that have plagued the Charter movement from the outset (above all, the lack of popular support) have not been reversed, with little prospect for improvement in the foreseeable future. The movement is likely to remain concentrated in Prague, with the intelligentsia its hard core and driving force. Despite these bleak prospects, the movement deserves respect, admiration, and sympathy for its ability to survive thus far and for its willingness to confront the regime in the face of overwhelming odds. 2 Prague would hardly have conducted the October 1977 trials of the four dissidents without Moscow’s approval—coming as they did at a most sensitive time during the CSCE review conference. Similarly, it is unlikely that Prague would try those Chartists now under arrest without informing Moscow beforehand and gaining its understanding and approval. [Footnote is in the original.]
