890 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II nations to “cash in” their pledges would be of critical assistance to the relief effort. Also, plans for a new pledging conference5 to continue the effort into 1981 must be finalized quickly, and any attempt by the United Nations to call such a conference should be supported by the United States. The Commission cautions the international community that the relief effort itself can have a destabilizing effect on Kampuchea. As the feeding system along the Thailand border becomes more efficient, it tends to draw people within Kampuchea toward the border and may even encourage them to cross the border as refugees. Certainly the preference is to reach the hungry within Kampuchea and not add to the refugee problem. With regard to current efforts in Thailand and Kampuchea to help refugees and other victims, it appears that the arrangements for delivery of relief as assistance are adequate, but the implementation of actual distribution of food has been ineffective in some cases.6 The concept of reliance on international agencies7 to operate the bulk of the programs and to facilitate and coordinate the efforts of non- Government agencies seems the best approach.8 Logistical arrangements, while periodically exhibiting great difficulties, particularly in Kampuchea, seem adequate. The food supply pipeline is in good order for the short run, and substantial quantities of food are being delivered into Kampuchea or to nearby points along the border from which they can be moved readily, once the distribution bottlenecks within Kampuchea have been resolved. To date, food distribution within Kampuchea has not been effective, and the World Food Programme has slowed down shipments for that reason. Infrastructure requirements, including transportation and handling facilities, must be improved and augmented. Coordination of the international relief effort is difficult almost by definition because of the large number of organizations involved and the movement of refugees. The arrangements for international coordination seem appropriate, however, and are working well under the circumstances. Arrangements for internal coordination within the U.S. Government and among private agencies, however, are only partially successful and the clear designation of a single individual as the primary 5 The first UN pledging conference for Kampuchean relief took place in New York on November 5, 1979, garnering $210 million worth of cash and commodities. For Vance’s statement on the U.S. effort, see Department of State Bulletin, December 1979, pp. 10–11. 6 An unknown hand highlighted this sentence. 7 An unknown hand highlighted the phrase “reliance on international agencies.” 8 An unknown hand highlighted the phrase “seems the best approach.”
