370
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Secretary Blumenthal then reviewed paragraphs 4 and 5 of the text
of the March 13 agreement with Germany,4 to indicate that Germany—
on paragraph 4—may move. This was a German paragraph. It implies
that after the first-quarter figures are in, there may be more action.
Paragraph 5 was on energy, in which the U.S. was committed to look
further at its efforts.
The President said that we found this meeting worthwhile. It has
clarified some possibilities. The Prime Minister now understands U.S.
limits and inclinations. He seconded what Mike Blumenthal had said
about announcements by Germany before the Bonn Summit. Though
maybe Schmidt will wait until Bonn to act, in order to create an aura of
success. As we will do, these steps would be identified as part of the
overall approach. He guesses that Schmidt would like the heads of
state to leave with a sense that Germany was helping, and had made
some sacrifice. Schmidt would not want to be seen as an obstacle to
progress. On political pressure, we should not underestimate the
German ordeal in the 1920s.5 We understand.
All this has been very helpful. With the Prime Minister at Copen-
hagen, and as we also present ideas to the press, this should not be put
forward as an American and British plan. He would like to say to
Schmidt that he would like him to understand the U.S. view of the
problems and the way we are addressing them. All of us need to work
together, and ease Schmidt forward. He then asked Dr. Brzezinski to
draft a message to Schmidt, emphasizing our conviction that efforts
should be multinational, but that each nation would need to do some-
thing. The draft should say what we can do, with cooperation and
consultation.
The Prime Minister said that he will write to Fukuda.
The President said he would, too; Fukuda thinks he is left out,
sometimes.
(The President then adjourned the lunch at 1:00 for a private Oval
Office meeting with Prime Minister Callaghan, which continued to
about 1:25.)
4 See footnote 4, Document 114.
5 Apparently a reference to the German hyperinflation during the early years of the
Weimar Republic.
