420
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
non-Communist countries. These smaller wars would beget larger ones
until we would be in direct confrontation with one of the superpowers.
Reality looks far different. The Communist countries are eco-
nomically weak and—after sharing common ground against us—
are now bitterly divided. The sharpening of the Sino-Soviet split, the
Vietnamese-Cambodian border skirmishing, and the recent deteriora-
tion of Vietnamese-Chinese relations clearly reveal serious and chronic
problems among these countries. The roots of these three rivalries lie
deep in the historical and geopolitical realities of Asia. We do not ex-
pect them to abate in the foreseeable future. This presents a sharp con-
trast with the other nations of the region.
The forces of regional economic integration are growing. Japan is
increasing its trade with the rest of Asia. ASEAN is successfully en-
gaged in increased economic cooperation through a web of consulta-
tions encompassing practically every phase of economic activity. Our
two-way trade with ASEAN in 1977 was over $10 billion. When that is
added to our approximately $15 billion in trade with Hong Kong,
Korea, and Taiwan, the total is almost as large as our trade with Japan.
These countries—whose combined population totals 300 million (more
than South America) have achieved between 6% and 11% annual
growth in GNP over the last 6 years. It is now the only group of coun-
tries in the world within which real GNP’s are doubling every 7–12
years.
As these countries prosper and mature, they will be increasingly
looking to U.S. markets for more sophisticated products. To cite an ex-
ample of particular interest to the Western States, Singapore’s decision
to purchase thirteen 747’s and six 727’s from Boeing is the first step in a
transaction which will ultimately be worth $900 million.
From the standpoint of security, the strategic balance that exists
today among the four most powerful countries in the region—China,
Japan, the Soviet Union, and the United States—is clearly in our na-
tion’s interests. Although important differences remain with Peking, it
is fair to say that the United States, China, and Japan share an interest in
maintaining that stability—a significant and hopeful change from the
pattern of the past half century in which U.S. Far Eastern policy con-
stantly required us to choose, in effect, between China and Japan. This
situation, true only since Henry Kissinger’s 1971 trip to Peking,2 has
created dramatic new opportunities throughout Asia: It is one of our
main tasks not to lose these opportunities—which are diplomatic,
strategic, political, and economic—through inattention, inaction, or
misunderstanding.
2 Kissinger made his first, secret trip to Beijing in July 1971. See Foreign Relations,
1969–1976, vol. XVII, China, 1969–1972, Documents 139–144.
