598  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
had indicated it would be unrealistic enter into another agreement 
before previous agreement fully implemented.
41. Wang said it would appear that it is chance of agreement that 
has made U.S. side hastily revert to same self-contradictory position 
which U.S. side had taken couple of months ago when U.S. side insisted 
on final implementation agreed announcement before entering into 
discussion of second item.
42. Wang said this situation could not but pose once more ques­
tion of whether U.S. side has sincere desire for progress when it insists 
on the condition of final implementation before there will be another 
agreement. Did I mean that there could be an agreement only after 
all Chinese in U.S. desiring to return had done so? If that were what 
I meant it would not be a matter of few months but a matter of years for 
the return of Chinese in U.S. who number tens of thousands.
43. Wang said U.S. side must see that if it attempts by this method 
to drag out or break up the talks it will get nothing good out of it.
44. Wang said he wished to point out that if U.S. side was sincere 
there is no justification for entangling talks with question of item one. 
Agreement should be reached on new draft of PRC side. Then talks 
could proceed to negotiation on problems at issue between both sides.
45. I replied that either Wang had misunderstood me, in which 
case I was sorry I had not made myself clear, or he had chosen distort 
what I had said concerning relationship of agreed announcement of 
September 10 and possible future agreements. Wang had quoted me as 
saying it would be unrealistic to enter into another agreement before 
first was fully implemented. I did not recall having said that and felt 
sure I hadn’t. What I had said, was that I felt it would be unrealistic 
enter into another agreement unless full confidence was established 
that first was being carried out. I had many times referred to impor­
tance of confidence and full understanding between us, without which 
it would be unrealistic enter into other agreements. I had understood at 
last meeting he agreed with that.
46. I said I had for these reasons discussed agreed announcement 
in such detail. Far from desiring to retard progress I was hoping by this 
to expedite progress. In that spirit I had frankly discussed matter. If 
I did not desire make progress, I certainly would not take time and effort 
discuss this first matter as seriously as I had. I would be doing disserv­
ice to both of us if I attempted conceal or gloss over my government’s 
feeling concerning operation of first announcement.
47. I said we should be completely frank. At time Wang and I had 
discussed agreed announcement, it was clear between us that largest 
group of Americans in his country under discussion was those in 
prison. I had made it clear at that time I had no intent interfere with 
method his government chose handle problem.
