522 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement act as a catalyst to start the snowball rolling. [text not declassified] When we recently sent some arms to the Haitians, there was a furious reaction here. If there is anything that will drive Trujillo to madness and make him act against his better judgment, it will be a Haitian scare. This is probably dream-­talk, but I am throwing many things into the pot in the hope that something may be helpful. Then there is the question of, “After Trujillo, what?”. Right after the Sixth MFM there was little doubt in my mind but that we could expect a moderate U.S.-­oriented government here if we could at that time have taken the sanctions that would have been effective against Trujillo. Mr. X believed, and I agreed, that the resulting confusion in the Trujillo family and in the national economy would have been such as soon to enable the opposition to stage a successful coup. At that time our friends were riding high in the opposition and we would have been as well off as we could ever expect in our relations with the new government. Since that time our position among the dissidents generally has deteriorated, along with that of the pro-U.S. contingent. If a revolution took place today, it would be touch and go as to whether our friends would have high places in the government. I believe our position is retrievable to a large extent. We could win back considerable lost ground by stiff recommendations from the OAS Sanctions Committee, followed by immediate and effective action on our part, for example. I realize that this is a tall order and probably impossible, but I am trying to state what I think it would take to put us where we would like to be. What I am leading up to is to say that the answer to the question, “After Trujillo, what?” depends on us to some extent. If we are unable to convince the dissidents that we are helping them materially to put the skids under Trujillo, then it is quite likely that the extreme nationalists, the extreme leftists and other anti-U.S. elements will dominate the future here. If we can effectively help the opposition, if we jump to their assistance right after the overthrow, if we have some measure of success in keeping the communist elements among the exiles out of here for a period after the fall of Trujillo, then I believe we shall have a good future. One further point which I should probably not even make. From a purely practical standpoint, it will be best for us, for the OAS and for the Dominican Republic if the Dominicans put an end to Trujillo before he leaves this island. If he has his millions and is a free agent he will devote his life from exile to preventing stable government in the D.R., to overturning democratic governments and establishing dictatorships in the Caribbean, and to assassinating his enemies. If I were a Dominican, which thank heaven I am not, I would favor destroying Trujillo as being the first necessary step in the salvation of my country and I would regard this, in fact, as my Christian duty. If you recall Dracula, you will remember it was
