itself with a moderate number of planes, and keeping an air force trained to the highest
efficiency.
While I am a thorough believer in national defense and entirely committed to the policy
of adequate preparation, I am just as thoroughly opposed to instigating or participating
in a policy of competitive armaments. Nor does preparation mean a policy of
militarizing. Our people and industries are solicitous for the cause of our country, and
have great respect for the Army and Navy and for the uniform worn by the men who
stand ready at all times for our protection to encounter the dangers and perils necessary
to military service, but all of these activities are to be taken not in behalf of aggression
but in behalf of peace. They are the instruments by which we undertake to do our part
to promote good will and support stability among all peoples.
VETERANS
If any one desires to estimate the esteem in which the veterans of America are held by
their fellow citizens, it is but necessary to remember that the current budget calls for an
expenditure of about $650,000,000 in their behalf. This is nearly the amount of the total
cost of the National Government, exclusive of the post office, before we entered the
last war.
At the two previous sessions of Congress legislation affecting veterans’ relief was
enacted and the law liberalized. This legislation brought into being a number of new
provisions tending more nearly to meet the needs of our veterans, as well as afford the
necessary authority to perfect the administration of these laws.
Experience with the new legislation so far has clearly demonstrated its constructive
nature. It has increased the benefits received by many and has made eligible for
benefits many others. Direct disbursements to the veteran or his dependents exceeding
$21,000,000 have resulted, which otherwise would not have been made. The degree of
utilization of our hospitals has increased through making facilities available to the
incapacitated veteran regardless of service origin of the disability. This new legislation
also has brought about a marked improvement of service to the veteran.
The organizations of ex-service men have proposed additional legislative changes
which you will consider, but until the new law and the modifications made at the last
session of Congress are given a more thorough test further changes in the basic law
should be few and made only after careful though sympathetic consideration.
The principal work now before the Veterans’ Bureau is the perfection of its
organization and further improvements in service. Some minor legislative changes are
deemed necessary to enable the bureau to retain that high grade of professional talent
essential in handling the problems of the bureau. Such changes as tend toward the
improvement of service and the carrying forward to completion of the hospital
