512 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI destruction of rail mobile SS–24s easier than the SS–25s. (Discussion of SS–18 warheads.) On the B–2, the Air Force, I think, made a mistake focusing on finding mobile missiles. If we try to find theirs, they will try to find ours, then we are back where we all were. I would focus on finding other moveable targets—­like the Red Army. The President: So sorry, but I am going to have to break this off. 82. Memorandum From Senator Warner to President Bush1 Washington, February 23, 1990 SUBJECT Comments on Proposals to Ban Mobile MIRVed ICBMs A major reason for building the MX missile arose out of SALT I counting rules, which limited missile launchers but placed no direct limit on the number of warheads. The United States and the Soviet Union were thus encouraged to build large missiles with as many warheads as possible to maximize their capabilities under a SALT I Treaty. This was later codified in SALT II in the form of limits on nuclear delivery vehicles, although an attempt was made to limit MIRVed warheads on individual missiles. In START, we are moving away from counting only nuclear delivery vehicles by including limitations on the number of overall warheads and indirect limits on missile throwweight. These circumstances, combined with significant increases in missile accuracy over the years, contribute to MIRVed ICBMs becoming less militarily useful. For these reasons, I am in basic agreement with Senator Nunn on the proposals put forward yesterday and today in our private meetings with you.2 However, I stress the need that any such proposal be coupled with an accelerated and serious Small ICBM (SICBM) program that provides for research, development, and production of the missile along with an advanced mobile launcher development program. In assessing the proposals, certain Congressional considerations must be addressed. 1 Source: Department of State, Economic and Agricultural Affairs, Lot 96D484, Robert B. Zoellick, Under Secretary for Economic and Agricultural Affairs, Gates Group NODIS. No classification marking. Printed from an uninitialed copy. 2 See Documents 79 and 81.
