January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1127
peat no intention of publicizing this letter and was providing us a copy
in confidence. In response to my question as to whether he would tell
Ben Elissar a copy had been given to us, Mubarak said he would do so
if asked. The letter deals with the negotiations, in which the U.S. is a full
partner, so there was no reason why we should not have a copy.
3. Begin text. Dear Prime Minister Begin.
—In our last meeting in Aswan,2 we pledged to do everything pos-
sible to ensure the success of the efforts we have been exerting along
the road to a comprehensive and lasting peace. I need not reiterate,
here, the factors which make it imperative for all of us to reach that goal
without delay. Strategic considerations, both regional and global,
render the continuation of the present situation most detrimental to the
cause of peace and stability. This makes it all the more important to
make real progress every day in the negotiations on the establishment
of the self-governing authority for the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
That is also why we agreed to step in, when the need arises, and give
the necessary directives to our delegations to the negotiations.
—It is with this in mind that I am writing to you today. I have been
following very closely the course of the negotiations with hope and
faith. I firmly believe that both our peoples are firmly committed to the
cause of peace. It is my clear conviction, also, that they are aware of the
necessity for reinforcing the historic step we took on the road to peace.
That is precisely why we have been exercizing patience and restraint
even in the face of several discouraging and alarming signs. We had
hoped that, in the course of the negotiations, a way would be found to
give the process the shot in the arm it badly needs. However, I must tell
you, in all candor, that I am deeply concerned over the present state of
affairs. Enough time has passed without making any tangible progress
on major substantive issues3 of special significance. Several months
were spent merely on defining the positions of the parties and identi-
fying the areas of agreement and disagreement. On the other hand, we
noticed that certain attempts have been made to depart from the Camp
David formula and treat it lightly. All this has been taking place despite
our positive policy of taking every conceivable action to bolster the
bridges of confidence between our peoples and eliminate any remain-
ing barriers. We have been faithful not only to the letter of the peace ac-
cords, but also to the spirit of Camp David and my mission to Jeru-
salem. With all the good will nations can command, we accepted the
early implementation of the provisions on normalization.
2 See Document 327 for a summary of the meetings in Aswan.
3 Carter underlined “I am deeply concerned over the present state of affairs.
Enough time has passed without making any tangible progress on major substantive
issues.”
