Peru 1047 PE–13. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of West Coast Affairs (Silberstein)1  Washington, June 24, 1958. SUBJECT Peru’s Financial Problems PARTICIPANTS Sr. Pedro Beltran, Editor and Publisher of La Prensa, Lima W – Mr. Dillon OSA – Mr. Silberstein Sr. Beltran referred to conversations he had been having with Mr. Waugh and his staff at the Export-Import Bank,2 and also with Mr. Rubottom,3 concerning Peru’s financial problems. He said he was very encouraged by the reception he had had. He thanked Mr. Dillon for giving him the opportunity to acquaint him directly concerning these problems. Peru is now facing a critical balance of payments situation, similar to that of Colombia and some of the other Latin American countries. Colombia’s crisis came upon it rather precipitously, while Peru’s developed more gradually because of the substantial exchange reserves built up in 1956. However, as world prices of Peru’s raw materials exports declined, these reserves had been consumed during the last half of 1957, because of the mistaken policy of trying to hold the rate firm at 19 soles to the dollar. By February of this year the acuteness of Peru’s balance of payments problem had become evident. It is estimated that foreign exchange income this year only from lead, zinc, copper, cotton and sugar will be $85 million less than last year. Sr. Beltran expressed appreciation of the constructive advice he had received at the Export-Import Bank. The Bank officials had carefully explained to him all the data which Peru would have to develop and present to document a request for a balance of payments loan. When he returned to Peru he would explain this to the Government. The trouble with balance of payments loans, however, is that they are understood only by bankers and businessmen, and have no meaning for or impact on the people in general. Peru has two serious social 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 823.10/6–2458. Official Use Only. 2 In telegram 697 to Lima, June 19, Waugh summarized Beltrán’s discussion with the Export-Import Bank of Washington regarding stabilization credits. (103.XMB/6–1958) 3 A memorandum of conversation between Beltrán and Rubottom, June 19, is in file 723.5–MSP/6–1958.
