1955  505
principal ideas his draft and US position. There were many more exam­
ples he could cite.
14. Wang said his side turned down all requests for interviews with 
press and even refused pose for pictures. He was dissatisfied with what 
appeared in press. This applied even to story in London Daily Worker. 
He could not accept responsibility for story many points of which not 
satisfactory to him.
15. Wang said even Dulles in press conference I had quoted from 
had mentioned that in talks we were engaged in discussions renuncia­
tion of force. He considered this disclosure of what was going on in talks.
16. Wang said there had been distorted press reports concerning 
proceedings here and that his side could bear no responsibility for 
these. His side was therefore considering clarifying its position.
17. I said that I was glad he had mentioned press reports following 
October 27 meeting. I did not question his statements concerning his 
relations with press. He may be unaware of situation. I would mention 
it only in privacy of this room, but NCNA correspondent who stands 
outside this room has for long period of time had remarkably accurate 
information what goes on inside. He has not been discreet in discussing 
this information with other correspondents. I was not ten minutes back 
in my office after October 27 meeting when Western correspondents 
indicated NCNA correspondent had said Wang had presented import­
ant statement renewing proposal for higher level meeting.
18. I said I and members of my staff refused discuss report with 
press. Nevertheless, places me in difficult position. I was completely 
satisfied that this and other reports have often come from same source.
19. I said I had not seen November 8 New York Times report. If 
it contained details of his proposal, it was doubtlessly obtained from 
Daily Worker article. As for Daily Worker article, it clearly did not orig­
inate with us.
20. I said rather than continue discussion this subject, could we 
not agree do our best prevent press speculation. I did not intend make 
statement or reply to Daily Worker article. However, if Wang made 
statement as intimated in letter I of course reserved my right make 
reply.
21. I said I hoped we would not be reduced debating in public. 
Progress so far due in large part to fact we able discuss frankly without 
public debate.
22. I said I did not recall that Wang had proposed open talks. I 
did propose private talks but did not recall any counter-proposal from 
Wang. Did Wang reaffirm his agreement to private talks?
23. Wang replied that he could not accept my statement concerning 
NCNA correspondent. He often received telephone calls from Western
