Comprehensive Test Ban
339
evasion of test ban constraints is immediately introduced. Without ade-
quate restrictions, ostensible PNEs could be exploited to gain practi-
cally any nuclear weapon-related benefits that can be achieved by a de-
clared nuclear weapon test of equivalent yield.
Further, there is concern that an accommodation for PNEs could
increase belief in the value of PNEs, thereby stimulating interest in in-
digenous PNE programs. This would diminish one of the principal
non-proliferation benefits of a CTB which prohibited PNEs—namely, a
closing of this avenue to potential weapons development (as in the case
of India). A contrary but probably weaker effect would be that some
states, which felt that they had a real economic need for PNEs, would
continue to have an alternative to indigenous PNEs and thereby might
accede to such a CTB.
Even with a PNE allowance, a CTB would act as an important po-
litical restraint on a decision to develop nuclear weapons overtly, and
would deter overt political use of a weapons capability. Thus, while it
is clear that a CTB banning PNEs would be highly preferable, one
which allowed PNEs (if necessary to accommodate Soviet interests)
would still probably contribute to our non-proliferation objectives and
might have enhanced value in terms of its impact on the US-Soviet
relationship.
C. PNE Accommodation Options
If the Soviets insist on a PNE accommodation, the fundamental
issue is whether a verification arrangement can be devised that would
adequately protect US security interests. To reduce the weapon-related
benefits attendant on accommodating PNEs under a test ban, restric-
tions would have to be devised that guard against: substitution of a
weapon or weapon development explosive for the ostensible PNE ex-
plosive; detonation of a collateral weapon or weapon development ex-
plosive near the PNE, simultaneously or nearly simultaneously, with it;
or acquisition of weapon effects data. A number of specific PNE verifi-
cation procedures have been considered in an attempt to satisfy these
general objectives; however, none would provide adequate unilateral
assurance that the country testing the PNE would not obtain weapons-
related benefits. Consequently, our attention has focused on highly in-
trusive cooperative verification arrangements which would seek to en-
sure that the US would share at least equally in any weapons-related
data generated in PNE activities.
These procedures are extensions of the PNET provisions and as
common elements include: (a) certification of the nature and peaceful
purpose of each PNE project; (b) review of the proposed project by the
verifying party on the basis of data supplied by host party; (c) observa-
tion of the preparation, emplacement, execution, and post-shot activ-
