56  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
while it is vital not to allow the USSR to attain military superiority, it 
will not be possible to prevent a further expansion of Soviet influence 
simply by strengthening the free world militarily.
6. Under the cover of this condition of mutual deterrence, the 
USSR apparently intends to wage against the US a vigorous contest 
for world leadership. This contest, already under way, is taking place 
against a background of accelerated social and economic revolutions 
in many parts of the world. Both sides possess many assets capable of 
exploitation, and the contest seems likely to go on for many years. In 
the following paragraphs we discuss the changes which have occurred 
and the basic forces and attitudes with which the US must contend.
II. CHANGES IN THE WORLD SITUATION
A. The Strategic Situation
7. The leaders of all the nations in the West have long been aware 
of the fact that the USSR had some capability to strike the US with 
nuclear weapons. They have also realized that the time would come 
when the USSR, through its growing nuclear weapons stockpile and 
as a consequence of its development of long-­range aircraft and ballistic 
missiles, would develop the capability—­barring some revolutionary 
development in defensive arms—­to inflict critical damage upon the 
US. Heretofore Western statesmen and Western peoples have thought 
of this largely in terms of some vague future date, and many of them 
hoped that somehow something would intervene which would pre­
vent this prospect from materializing or from becoming unmanageable 
if it did. Now, as a consequence of recent Soviet developments in the 
missile field, the general public has had dramatically brought home to 
it a realization that the USSR will be able, within the next year or two, to 
bring the US under direct nuclear attack with ballistic missiles.
8. Since the end of World War II, US military capabilities, and 
particularly the capability to deliver nuclear weapons on the USSR, 
together with US assurances and US demonstrations of its intention 
to protect victims of aggression, have created some sense of security 
among peoples who feared Communist internal or external aggression. 
What made US actions and assurances persuasive to these peoples was 
a conviction of US superiority over the USSR in nuclear weapons and 
delivery capabilities and a belief that the vital centers of North America 
(including its retaliatory capability) were relatively safe from severely 
damaging Soviet attack.
9. To many observers Soviet progress in ballistic missiles appears 
not merely as a gradual improvement in military capabilities but as the 
portent of a new military situation. They foresee a situation in which the 
US—­although it will retain the power to deliver nuclear weapons on 
the USSR if the latter engages in political or military aggression—­will
