1955  543
carried out along coast, including construction of airfields, railroads, 
and ships. Lengthy negotiations at Geneva had produced no concrete 
results except release of Americans, but advantage of informing world 
opinion as to quote truth about Taiwan unquote.
Article in TA KUNG PAO November 24 alleged that US is protract­
ing ambassadorial talks in order to quote perpetuate domination unquote 
over Taiwan. US quote intensification of war preparations unquote in 
Taiwan area said to violate international principles against use of force. 
Article noted visits of topranking US military leaders to Taiwan since 
October, cited reports US increasing supply of Sabrejets, and quoted 
Gen. Twining to effect that US Far East air force and Nat. air force being 
welded into force quote capable of advance unquote. NCNA commented 
briefly on visit of Admiral Stump to Taiwan. Other comment largely of 
Psychological Warfare nature, concerning food shortages on offshore 
islands, and quote factionalism unquote among Nationalist leaders.
Peiping comment on ambassadorial talks November 19 and 
November 24 reiterated previous charge that US obstructing progress 
of talks and detaining Chinese nationals desiring return to mainland. 
People’s Daily November 19 alleged that lists Chinese nationals pre­
sented by US at Geneva were incomplete and charged that less than one 
fifth of Chinese who had requested return to China had been permitted 
to leave. Demanded that US take immediate steps to facilitate return, 
and stated that question of quote lawbreaking unquote Americans still 
held in China and that of quote guiltless unquote Chinese nationals in 
US entirely different matters. TA KUNG PAO November 24 urged that 
US quote get down to serious negotiation and reach necessary agree­
ment on practical matters at issue unquote.
ChiCom commentary on Ministers Conference continued to echo 
Soviet line. Relaxation of tensions will continue, despite US efforts 
revive Cold War, but struggle for peace will be long and hard. Peiping 
hailed Bulganin trip as quote important milestone in strengthening 
peaceful cooperation between USSR and Asian countries unquote.
NCNA denounced Bagdad pact as quote concrete step by the US 
to aggravate tension in the Middle East unquote and hailed refusal 
of Egypt and Arab states to join as quote serious blow to US policy 
unquote.
Peiping during week continued to give considerable attention to 
question of trade restrictions, alleging that US embargo and quote trade 
monopolies unquote had seriously impaired expansion of trade among 
Asian countries. ChiCom overtures to Japan for normalization of trade 
relations continued. At same time, Peiping continued to berate Japa­
nese government for its treatment of Chinese nationals seeking return 
to mainland.
Dulles
