Romania office to expedite applications. Nimetz urged Bogdan to be prepared to negotiate with the Jewish groups. 3. Bogdan said that he had come to the U.S. on a fact-finding mission and did not have instructions on how to resolve the problem which had arisen. He expressed puzzlement with motivation of American Jewish groups and their timing in raising emigration issue. Noting that he had spoken with Rabbi Rosen and with Romanian emigration authorities, Bogdan said he could see no Jewish emigration problem. He had been assured by Romanian officials that only in the case of German emigration are there any problems or attempts to spread out applications. Bogdan said that he had also spoken with the Israeli Ambassador and did not believe that the Government of Israel was prompting Jewish organizations to raise the emigration issue. As for using the JDC to distribute applications, Bogdan said personally he believes such an idea is unacceptable. No foreign or international organization could play such a role in Romania. 4. Nimetz offered two explanations for actions of Jewish groups: First, a heightened concern with general question of Jackson-Vanik in view of possibility of MFN for the Soviet Union; and second, the reports from Jews who have left Romania of intimidation at pre-screening process. He again urged Bogdan not to be overly concerned with the motivation of the Jewish groups and instead to focus on practical aspects of solving the problem. 5. Bogdan said he would try to find “a reasonable solution” but that he is troubled by the escalation of demands and what might be next. He mentioned possibilities of fact-finding trip by U.S. Jewish groups or presentation of lists through JDC or other bodies. Bogdan commented that, whatever happens to MFN, it will not have negative effect on the Jews in Romania. 6. In closing, Nimetz stressed the urgency of the situation and asked Bogdan to be in touch after Bogdan’s meetings later in the day with representatives of American Jewish organizations. 7. House Trade Subcommittee staff member David Rohr, who participated as “observer” in subsequent meeting at Romanian Embassy on July 2 between Romanians and representatives of American Jewish organizations, gave Department the following account of the meeting. (The Jewish organizations were represented by Al Moses of American Jewish Committee, Mark Talisman of Council of Jewish Federations and Welfare Fund, and George Specter of B’nai B’rith International. Moses acted as spokesman in place of B’nai B’rith International President Jack Spitzer, who is now in Geneva.) 8. Rohr said Moses made following three-part proposal to the GOR to remedy their concerns re Jewish emigration:
