121.5754/8
[Document 187]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, November 4, 1925.
[Received November 30.]
No. 597
SIR: I have the honor to report that on October 18th I received the Department’s
telegram No. 88 of October 8th87 directing me to seek an early reply from the Swiss
Government to the request that our Customs Representatives in Switzerland be granted
diplomatic status and recognized as Customs Attachés. I immediately sought an
interview with Monsieur Motta, Federal Councillor, Chief of the Political Department
but, in view of the number of his previous engagements Monsieur Motta could not
receive me until the morning of October 22nd.
I explained the situation to Monsieur Motta and said that my Government would
greatly appreciate an early reply to the request submitted by Mr. Boal88 on May 29th
(See my despatch No. 465, July 18, 1925).87 Monsieur Motta said that I would receive
a note on the subject in the course of a few days, as soon as its text was formally
approved by the Federal Council. He added, however, that he could tell me informally
the nature of the reply, which was to be an expression of regret at the inability of the
Federal Government to accord diplomatic status to the Customs Representatives.
Monsieur Motta went on to say that he had felt grave doubts from the beginning as to
the possibility of acceding to our request, but as Mr. Boal had set forth our point of
view so earnestly and convincingly, he felt the whole question deserved a careful
examination before a decision was reached. The Federal Council had expressed its
reluctance to refuse a request from us if any proper way could be found to meet our
wishes and he had gone into the question thoroughly with the help of the Department of
Public Economy. Monsieur Motta said that he had allowed the study of the question to
pursue a leisurely course for two reasons, first, in order that the matter might be given
careful consideration, and second, in the belief that most other Governments would
probably give unfavorable answers and that if a Swiss refusal became inevitable it
would make a less painful impression if it came after refusals had been received from
more important governments.
He then stated that the decision of the Federal Council was based chiefly on two
grounds; first that these agents are not engaged on work which entitles them to
