590  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
127.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs 
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 30, 1979
SUBJECT
CNA–78 (U)
A. (TS) The Comprehensive Net Assessment, 1978, is a much 
needed review of the elements of our competition with the Soviet 
Union.2 However, I believe that in many ways it paints too optimis-
tic a picture of our current position. In particular, your assessment of 
world attitudes, although correct as of today, does not consider ade-
quately the relation among the dislike, the respect, and the fear with 
which the USSR is regarded. Is it better to be feared or loved (or rather, 
not disliked)? “The Prince” gave one answer. Another comparison that 
is inadequately addressed, I think, is the respective vulnerability of 
the US and the USSR to economic and political forces over which we 
may have little control. In a number of areas we, perhaps more than the 
Soviet Union, face serious risks that could significantly alter the cur-
rent balance. I would like to note some of these for your consideration. 
Further, in keeping with the format of your assessment, I would like 
to comment on the military balance, where I would again take some 
exception to the picture you present; in some cases it seems too optimis-
tic, in others perhaps too pessimistic.
(S) The most important changes in the non-­military aspects, of our 
world position vis-­a-­vis the USSR, have been (not necessarily in order 
of importance):
1. The President’s stress on human rights, which has been instru-
mental in improving our image throughout the world.
2. Our increasing energy vulnerability, coupled with the recent 
upheavals in Iran and Soviet penetration of Afghanistan and the Red 
Sea area.
3. The achievement of an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty, reaffirming 
the US role as the only major power who can talk effectively to most if 
not all of the significant Middle East players.
4. The widening PRC door to the West, including the Sino-Japa-
nese treaty, and a major (though tactical and perhaps temporary) PRC 
attempt to play “the American card.”
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski 
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 60, Alpha Channel: Miscellaneous: 5/79. Top Secret; 
Eyes Only. Sent via Alpha Channel. A copy was sent to Vance.
2 See Document 95.
