Non-Proliferation
811
Palliser said that everyone was agreed on the importance of non-
proliferation efforts. Discussion at the summit should not leave the im-
pression that there was disagreement on this fundamental point. He
agreed that the subject should be discussed under the energy item. He
felt that the principles which Ambassador Owen had outlined were at a
pretty high level of generality. The question was whether summit
agreement to initiate a study would be viewed by press and the public
simply as a way of postponing discussion.
Ambassador Owen noted that a great deal would depend on the out-
come of bilateral consultations which the United States was under-
taking with each of the summit participants. If there was agreement,
the summit could reflect it. If there were not, one would have a dif-
ferent situation. In this case, perhaps, the summit should confine itself
to endorsing the principles he had outlined—either two or all three of
them. These principles might be rather general but that was, after all, in
the best tradition of summitry.
Hibbert noted that it was important that non-participating states
not feel that those at the summit were ganging up on them. Owen re-
plied that his first principle was included for that purpose. Reflecting
on the problem of non-proliferation in general, Owen recalled that Eu-
rope had confronted a somewhat similar difficulty thirty years ago
and had resolved it by creating the European Coal and Steel Commu-
nity. Perhaps on non-proliferation a similar international approach is
needed to overcome national suspicion and rivalries.
Owen noted that bilateral consultations on the proposal for a fuel
cycle evaluation program would have progressed by the next summit
preparatory meeting. He felt there was agreement that proliferation
should be discussed at the summit under energy, and that at least the
first two of his three principles were generally acceptable. Whether the
third principle could be agreed upon and a study initiated at the
summit was still open for discussion. This was generally agreed to be a
fair summation of where matters stood.
Van Well reiterated that there should also be discussion of prolifer-
ation among the four. This would offer a better form to review certain
political ramifications of the issue. Owen inquired what questions the
four would address. Van Well envisaged discussion in the four focusing
on the political constraints which each of the participants felt in this
area. Hartman agreed that a frank discussion of this sort among the four
leaders would be very useful. No one felt that such a discussion would
require detailed preparation. Owen noted that President Carter might
well treat the political aspects of non-proliferation among the seven.
Van Vell said that this was perfectly acceptable but that other leaders
might prefer to reply in the four.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
