National Security Policy  791
182.	 Telegram Cahto 159 From Herter in Geneva1
Geneva, July 21, 1959
Cahto 159. For Acting Secretary From the Secretary.
Reference Tocah 162. I endorse the line you proposed in reftel. 
However there should be further monkeying with the buzz saw at the 
next NSC meeting or should you in your discretion feel warranted you 
could convey to NSC following message from me:
QUOTE. Whether proposed changes are considered new policy or 
clarification of old policy does not strike me as an important distinction. 
The Council decision being proposed is important, as is evidenced by 
the unusual amount of top governmental consideration which has been 
given to it.
My predecessor proposed a change or clarification of our military 
strategy more than a year ago. He agreed to a continuation of the old 
language in NSC 5810 on condition that it be immediately subjected 
to interdepartmental review. It should be recalled that during the 1958 
and 1959/NSC discussions the majority of the Joint Chiefs believed that 
a policy change/clarification was a first importance.
The Department of State submitted to NSC sometime ago a paper 
on Foreign Policy Requirements to be considered in connection with the 
development of military strategy. This paper was prepared originally in 
response to a request by the Department of Defense for foreign policy 
guidance. My responsibility as Secretary of State will be discharged if 
the military paragraphs of the basic paper meet these foreign policy 
requirements. The details of force levels and budget division among 
the military services is not my business. However, I assume that the 
“clarification” phrase “and the requirement for maintaining balanced 
forces” would permit the US to have a military capacity to engage to 
some significant extent in limited hostilities without the necessity for 
automatic resort to nuclear weapons.
I understand that there has been some suggestion that opinion in 
the Department of State is divided on the necessity for and the meaning 
of the proposed change/clarification in policy. I can assure you that the 
Department of State is unanimous on the above position and speaks 
with one voice. UNQUOTE.
Herter
1 Source: Transmits message to NSC on revisions in NSC 5906. Top Secret. 3 pp. 
NARA, RG 59, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 67 D 548, Military and Naval Policy.
