National Security Policy  779
(Call on: SECRETARY HERTER
SECRETARY McELROY)
Paragraph 13 (page 12) sets forth our policy on chemical and bio­
logical weapons. The majority would leave the language of the existing 
paper unchanged, but Budget and Treasury propose that the President 
decide on the stockpiling of such weapons, as well as their use.
It is my understanding that the Director of the Bureau of the Budget 
feels that we are either spending too much or too little on these weap­
ons, and his effort is to clarify our posture with respect to the employ­
ment of such weapons.
(Call on: Mr. STANS)
Paragraphs 15 and 16 (pages 12 to 14) were not considered by the 
Planning Board. There is no issue in the paper before you on paragraph 
15. However the Chiefs of Staff of Army and [illegible in the original]. As 
to paragraph 16 the issue is posed by the State submission which appears 
in the Annex on page 61.
There are two issues posed by this paragraph. First, shall we con­
sider that the term “limited aggression” (I would hope that we can sub­
stitute limited aggression for local aggression) refers only to conflicts in 
the less developed areas; or is it conceivable that a limited war could be 
fought in developed areas such as NATO Europe, non-­NATO Europe, or 
Japan? What about Communist China? Could our problem be met by 
directing our planning against the contingency of limited aggression 
using the term to refer to conflicts occurring outside of the NATO area?
(Call on: SECRETARY HERTER
SECRETARY McELROY)
The second issue in this paragraph is this: With respect to local or 
limited aggression, (a) would U.S. objectives be served by prompt and 
resolute application of force necessary to defeat such local aggression; or 
(b) might U.S. interests be served in certain cases by restricting the appli­
cation of force to that degree necessary to achieve objectives of limiting 
the area and scope of hostilities and restoring the status quo ante?
It is agreed that with respect to local or limited aggression the use 
of any U.S. force will be applied in a manner and on a scale best calcu­
lated to avoid hostilities from broadening into general war.
(Call on: SECRETARY HERTER
SECRETARY McELROY)
Paragraph 17 (page 14) deals with the “cold war” contribution 
which the capabilities of U.S. military forces can make. USIA proposes 
deleting the clause which uses the term “cold war”. (It may be noted 
that paragraph 9 sanctions the use of the term “cold war” and is already 
tentatively agreed to by the Council.)
(Call on: MR. GEORGE ALLEN)
