1956 943 with regard to merits of our dispute. I was only asking him accord to me same respect for our views as I accorded to his. If there were agree­ ment on his part with me on genuinely renouncing force as first essen­ tial preliminary to seeking means of peacefully settling our disputes, there could be no valid objection to this draft. If there were not such agreement, difficulties between us were indeed deep and disturbing. 19. Wang said he had given me his views with regard to my draft of April 19, both at last meeting and this morning. In his statements he had specifically pointed out reasons why they objected to and could not accept my draft. Their efforts at trying find agreement on issuance renunciation of force declaration must be carried out on basis of fair and reasonable proposal. Their drafts of October 27 and December 1 were just such drafts and fulfilled principle of reasonableness and fairness. If US had genuine desire settle and resolve grave disputes between our two countries, there could be no reason for not accepting these drafts of their side. He regretted find that so far we not able arrive agreement on basis their drafts. 20. Wang said he obliged note that new opinion submitted by me did not change my former position and did not advance our meeting a step further. This morning I had again made statements to effect that I respected their views and rights in Taiwan area and would not prej­ udice those views and rights. However my draft of April 19 in its text precisely prejudiced their lawful views in that respect. He noted in my statement this morning I had made repeated references to what I said had been use of force and threat of use of force by his side. Such ref­ erences in fact were made in attempt cover up use of force by US in Taiwan area and attempt by US use threat of force against PRC. His side had constantly made clear that FonMins conference was the most effective means for settling grave disputes between PRC and US in ­Taiwan area, and so if it were desired make specific reference Taiwan area in agreement, same announcement must make provision for hold­ ing ­FonMins conference. 21. Wang said I had said my draft of April 19 had met their views and had removed reasons for their objections, but actually this draft, like all others, retained those features toward which they voiced their objections. As such, how could I say it had met and removed their objections? As he had said in his statement this morning, his side trying to find announcement capable of being accepted by both sides. My side had repeatedly proposed drafts which their side long ago made clear it objected to and could not accept. This would not help resolve problems between us. 22. I said there were two aspects to his objections. One aspect was whether anything that was said prejudiced his position with respect to our disputes. The other aspect was whether or not our declaration was
