26
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Attachment
Study Prepared by the Staff of the National Security Council
THE POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES
WITH RESPECT TO IRAN
The Problem
1. To assess the position of the United States with respect to Iran,
with particular reference to possible future developments in Iran af-
fecting United States security interests.
Analysis
Basic United States Position
2. Because of its resources, strategic location, vulnerability to
armed attack and exposure to political subversion, Iran must be re-
garded as a continuing objective in the Soviet program of expansion. If
Iran should come under Soviet domination, the independence of all
other countries of the Middle East would be threatened. Specifically the
USSR could (1) control or limit the availability of a Middle Eastern oil
reservoir upon which the economy of Western Europe depends; (2) ac-
quire advance bases for subversive activities or actual attack against a
vast contiguous area including Turkey, Iraq, the Arabian Peninsula
(hence the Suez Canal), Afghanistan, and Pakistan; (3) obtain a base
hundreds of miles nearer to potential US–UK lines of defense in the
Middle East than any held at present; (4) control continental air routes
crossing Iran, threaten those traversing adjacent areas, and menace
shipping in the Persian Gulf; and (5) undermine the will of most
Middle Eastern countries to resist Soviet aggression. In addition to
these developments affecting the Middle East, the loss of another free
country to communist domination at this time would damage the
global position of the United States and other members of the Western
community by weakening the determination of threatened nations ev-
erywhere to resist communism.
3. Loss of Iranian oil production and of the refinery at Abadan
would seriously affect Western economic and military interests, partic-
ularly as regards the level of industrial activity in Western Europe. The
effect of this loss on the volume of petroleum products available for
Western Europe could be overcome in a reasonable length of time by
developing reserves and building refineries elsewhere, but the finan-
cial effects, in the loss of the British investment and in the increased
dollar requirements of Western Europe, could be overcome only
slowly, if at all. The loss of Abadan would also deprive the West of the
principal source of aviation gasoline and fuel oil in the Eastern Hemi-
sphere, with consequent effect upon air and naval activity in the region.
