National Security Policy 887 214. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, November 17, 1959 OTHERS PRESENT Dr. Glennan, General Goodpaster Dr. Glennan said the ABMA transfer is going very well. He is receiving excellent cooperation from the Army and expects to have detailed papers ready before Congress reconvenes. He foresees certain problems when the Congress does reconvene. Although the big booster project is now being cleared up, there is still confusion regarding dual­ ity of management of the space program. He then read to the President excerpts from a memorandum on space organization (copy attached). The President said he regards the space organization as having a major role in proving out what can be done in the field of space boost­ ers. The military forces can then take over developments which they regard as having promising military applications. The President suggested that Dr. Glennan next take up with the Department of Defense the proposals he had outlined. He said he was not aware of the great confusion to which Dr. Glennan had referred. Dr. Glennan said this is a concept the newspapers are trying to cre­ ate and the Congress is trying to exploit. The President said it is quite acceptable to him to try to clarify the situation. This effort should not, however, be put on the basis that the Soviets hit the moon or took pic­ tures of it. In his mind the real question is what should we—the United States—do. It seems that everything centers on the development of the big booster. He thought we should take one or two particular projects that we want to carry out and concentrate on those. Dr. Glennan said that the greatest problem is how to get into a real perspective regarding space that makes sense. He thought a Presidential public statement is essential. The President said that such a statement could be very brief. He would simply state what the law meant to those who proposed it. This could be put into proper language and placed before the American people. As to the budget and the program for space, he said he felt that should be thought out very carefully. He does not like the idea of grow­ ing and growing with no foreseeable limit. Instead we should try to find a level that seems about right. Dr. Glennan said that to develop payloads 1 Source: Transfer of ABMA to NASC; defense budget; reorganization of space activ­ ities. Confidential. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on December 1.
