National Security Policy  309
numbered forces”, might be “Authorizing Commanders”. The origi­
nal “Authorization” stated that its implementation “will be extended 
where necessary and appropriate to the level, but not below that, of 
the commanders of numbered field armies, fleets, and air forces.” This 
does not appear to be a change in the sense of the original, [text not 
declassified].
Paragraph 6–­a, third sentence, continues in effect the earlier 
“Authorization” described in 1 above rather than superseding it as 
contemplated in the “Authorization” described in 2 above.
Paragraph 6–­d contains new factors to be considered by an 
“Authorization Commander”.
[text not declassified]
Section “B”, paragraph 2. Does the term “within effective enemy 
striking range of the United States, its Territories and possessions” have 
any real meaning in view of the long-­range ballistic missiles?
Section “B”, paragraph 3–a, adds specific examples of attacks. 
Subparagraph 3–­a–(2) cites as an example of an attack a submarine 
attempting submerged penetration of a major U.S. port or harbor. The 
term “attack” is elsewhere defined as “a major hostile assault of such 
magnitude and against such areas or forces as to constitute an imme­
diate and vital military threat to the security of the United States or to 
major U.S. forces”. Presumably one submarine penetration of a major 
U.S. port is considered sufficient evidence of hostile intent to fit the 
definition of “attack”.
Section “B”, paragraph 3–­a, provides that an unidentified submarine 
or aircraft engaged in an attack may be assumed to be a Sino-Soviet 
Bloc attacking force. Isn’t it conceivable that hostilities on the Middle 
East might under certain circumstances involve an attack on U.S. forces 
by submarine or aircraft of Middle Eastern countries?
Section “B”, paragraph 4–c–(1), authorizes expenditure of nuclear 
weapons “against all elements of the attacking forces, including those 
within Sino-Soviet Bloc territory.” While this fits the definition of 
defense against an attack, it also may become equivalent to retaliation 
in the case of long-­range weapons.
[text not declassified]
James S. Lay, Jr.
Executive Secretary
