588  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
some elements fearful that too obvious maneuverings to control out-
come might spark serious disturbances with overall deleterious affect 
on political stability of country. Uncertainty as to how best to deal with 
this dilemma is in itself causing uneasiness.
Unrelated but combining to spread uneasiness and even fear 
through sizeable segment local population have been recent circular 
letters threatening death to certain leading families here, series daylight 
abductions and rapings of rather prominent ladies and generally high 
incidence of lawlessness, all of which of course play into hands extrem-
ist elements.
Re (2) and (3) above, President Lemus deteriorating position 
and reasons therefore were reviewed in Embdes 368, March 14.4 
Disaffection has continued and widened even since then and it now 
no longer a secret that 14 families have withdrawn their support. 
President himself tacitly acknowledged this and probably even wid-
ened breach during press conference early April when he called for 
change in mental outlook on part moneyed classes and, with veiled 
threat of resorting to legislation, urged them to humanize their 
wealth for good of country.
At crux of cleavage is wealthy element’s belief that President is 
largely to blame for current situation because of his do nothing atti-
tude and policy, especially with respect to Communist-­led subversive 
activities. They believe that if President had taken strong action against 
extremist elements and had prohibited them from returning from exile, 
organizing and openly agitating, country would not have been whipped 
into unhappy state of uneasiness and tension that exists today, which 
they naturally, and probably rightly view as threat to their privileged 
position. Whatever the causes and they are manifold, President today 
is an isolated man with his back to wall. (4) above, Communists, using 
other dissident elements, are not only largely responsible for creating 
current situation, but they are exploiting it to full and, thus far, with 
impunity.
There is a widely held belief here, however, that while local ground 
sufficiently fertile to provide sustenance for Communists to grow in, 
they could not and would not have been able to advance as they have 
without the Cuban situation. Opinion strongly voiced and heard in 
every quarter is that U.S. must bear share of responsibility for what is 
happening here. Fully conscious that Cuban money and other types 
of support flowing in, question asked how it could be considered 
possible for country like El Salvador to deal more courageously and 
firmly with insidious Cuban machinations than U.S. itself has thus far 
4 Not printed; 716.11/3–1460.
