3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
888
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
to make the Treaty better understood and to make people understand
the consequences of a no SALT world. We would make an effort to ob-
tain ratification early next year or before; it was a long shot but worth
the effort.
On the question of equality or equivalence, the US is committed to
it. We can’t have Arms Control on any other basis. This is common
sense—though not to all. Some believe in superiority but this is
impossible.
Turning to Afghanistan, the Secretary said that we see no basis for
saying that self-determination is at work in Afghanistan. The gov-
ernment which the Soviets say invited them in did not survive their ar-
rival. Babrak was installed by Soviet forces. Gromyko interjected that
Afghanistan did not have a tradition of elections and Muskie re-
sponded that they didn’t have tradition of governments installed by
outside invaders either.
Muskie said we agree on the need for political settlement. But the
question was how to arrive at this point and gather support in Afghani-
stan. A political settlement without the support of the Afghan people
would simply lead to new Soviet intervention. There might be a basis
for further US-Soviet dialogue on this question, but the Secretary
wanted to eliminate all misunderstanding. Withdrawal was essential to
the normal, good US-Soviet relations we want to have.
Concerning the Indian Ocean, Muskie said he understood how US
deployments might be misunderstood by the Soviets but when a nation
has vital interests far from its shores, it logically uses its Navy to defend
these interests. The Soviets assert a right to be involved in Cuba close to
the US. The US is prepared to discuss Naval limitations in the Indian
Ocean when the Afghan situation is resolved.
TNF
Muskie went on to propose talks in Geneva to begin at an agreed
date in October on TNF. The US proposed that its delegation would be
at the level of ACDA Deputy Director Keeny and that the initial round
would last about one month. We are prepared to deal positively and
constructively with the issue. We did not think the description of the
talks should be a problem. Questions of scope could be addressed in
the negotiations themselves. We wanted to describe the discussions as
preliminary since we did not want to give the impression of moving to
SALT III before SALT II was ratified. This would only encourage those
Senators who wanted to avoid a vote on SALT II.
Gromyko began by objecting to what was published in the US con-
cerning Soviet military budgets. He went on to raise a question which
he said was relevant to SALT II or SALT III, claiming that the US has
taken steps to undermine SALT II by developing a new type of strategic
