3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
115
23.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Moscow, March 30, 1977, 5:40–6:45 p.m.
SUBJECT
SALT
PARTICIPANTS
US PARTICIPANTS
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Mr. Paul Warnke
Mr. Philip C. Habib
Mr. William G. Hyland
Mr. William D. Krimer, (Interpreter)
USSR PARTICIPANTS
General Secretary L.I. Brezhnev
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Ambassador Dobrynin
Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov
Deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko
Mr. O.M. Sokolov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, (Interpreter)
General Secretary Brezhnev opened the meeting and said to Secre-
tary Vance that it was now time again to talk about business. Foreign
Minister Gromyko had kept him fully informed of the current talks on
SALT, as well as a number of other issues. Secretary Vance had given
the Soviet side quite a long list of things to be discussed.
Turning to SALT, Brezhnev rhetorically asked what he could tell
the Secretary on this subject. To his regret it was necessary to recognize
that the discussion of this most important issue had so far not been very
satisfactory.
The main reason for that was the unconstructive, one sided and, he
would even say, non-objective nature of the position taken by the
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 8, Vance to Moscow, 3/28–30, 1977. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Krimer; reviewed in
draft by Hyland; approved by Twaddell on April 16. The meeting took place at the
Kremlin. Vance described this meeting in his memoirs: “I expected that after a day of
study and discussions in the Politburo, the Soviets would come back with objections to
specific aspects of our proposal and to our numbers and possible with counterproposals.
This could provide a basis for serious negotiations. Consequently, when I next met with
Brezhnev on the evening of March 30, I was angered at the vehemence and finality with
which he rejected our SALT proposals. There was not even a hint of a counterproposal.
He called our position ‘unconstructive and one-sided,’ and ‘harmful to Soviet security.’ It
was evident there was no point in attempting to pursue serious negotiations on this trip.”
(Hard Choices, p. 54)
