March–August 1953
639
247.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, July 22, 1953.
SOVIET UNION OFFERS TO SETTLE IRANIAN
FINANCIAL CLAIMS
[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
Iran has tried unsuccessfully several times to obtain this gold
owed by the USSR under the terms of a 1942 financial agreement, as
well as to get the dollars which are in payment for Iranian goods and
services provided during World War II. Soviet refusal to discuss this
issue has been a major cause of friction between the two countries.
Late last month the Soviet Union proposed that some of the out-
standing border disputes between Iran and the USSR should be settled.
Iran, [less than 1 line not declassified] insisted that all disputes be settled,
particularly the question of the gold.
The Soviet Union’s apparent concession to Iran’s urgent request
for return of the gold, the conclusion of the 10 June barter trade agree-
ment,2 and the appointment of a top-level Soviet diplomat, Lavrentiev3
as ambassador to Iran, all suggest that the Soviet Union may be inaugu-
rating a new policy toward Iran. These moves may be designed to show
Prime Minister Mossadeq that an alternative exists to economic and po-
litical ties with the West.
If Mossadeq succeeds in obtaining the gold, he will be able to ex-
ploit it as a considerable victory in his struggle to make Iran strong and
independent. The prime minister is badly in need of something to gen-
erate public support and interest. He induced his followers to with-
draw from the Majlis, thus making it ineffective, because he feared the
opposition. Recent progovernment demonstrations including that of 21
July, have been smaller and less enthusiastic than earlier ones. New
support in the form of a diplomatic victory over the USSR coming at
this time could enable him to secure popular approval for dismissing
the Majlis and holding new elections.
While the delivery of the gold would be a tremendous psycholog-
ical boost, actually the $21,000,000 dollars under discussion would
cover at best three or four months of current expenses for Iran’s oil-less
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 80R01443R, Box 1, Folder 27,
NSC Briefing 23 July 53. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified].
2 A handwritten phrase inserted at this point reads: “involving 100 million on both
sides”.
3 In the right margin at this point, is a handwritten note that reads: “Yugoslavia
Russian”.
