no note has been addressed by this Government to the British Government on behalf of the Irish Free State or to the Legation of the Irish Free State in Washington. Abyssinia did not attend the Geneva Conference. We have addressed no note to Abyssinia. It would seem that, in order to carry out the terms of the Senate resolution of January 27, 1926, an exchange of notes should be attempted with both the Irish Free State and Abyssinia. The phraseology of the resolution is “The signature of the United States to the said Protocol shall not be affixed until the powers signatory to such Protocol shall have indicated through an exchange of notes their acceptance of the foregoing reservations, etc.” As the signature of the United States will take place some time in the future, if ever, it seems to me that “the powers signatory” would be those powers which are signatories at the time of signature or adherence by the United States. An interesting consideration is that Chile apparently has never ratified the signature of its government to the Protocol of Signature of the Statute of the Permanent Court. The Senate resolution contemplates acceptance of the senate reservations by “signatories”. The position may well be taken by Chile that, not actually being a party to the Permanent Court Protocol, it cannot properly accept or decline to accept our reservations. While some of the above considerations are academic, the situation which they outline appears to me to be somewhat hopeless quite aside from the replies which will presumably be given by the powers that recently conferred at Geneva. I should be glad to have an opportunity to talk this matter over with you shortly and especially to ascertain your views as to whether we should not, for the sake of making the record complete, address notes to the governments of Abyssinia and the Irish Free State. A despatch from Tuck35 states that: 1) The South African delegate had to leave Geneva before he could sign the draft Protocol of Execution.
