786 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Foreign Minister Shevardnadze: I am prepared to work with the Secretary of State on this. On the first, the agreement already has the basic agreed elements—­some issues do remain—­but there is time for the experts to elaborate them. The second part—­the outline for the future—­is of great importance. We will try to agree but if we fail maybe we can confine ourselves to a brief statement that the sides want to have future negotiations for stability immediately following the current treaty. That should be done even if we fail to resolve anything more. Non-circumvention could also be transferred to the follow-­on. (S) Secretary Baker: There are a number of issues that we think are technical but our view is that non-­circumvention, Backfire and heavies are major issues and must be dealt with if we are to say we are ready to sign a statement that the major elements are agreed. In order to resolve these issues this afternoon, we will need direction from the Presidents. (S) President Gorbachev: I share the statement that major work has been done and that we have travelled a major portion of the road as the experts have testified. First, I want to emphasize that we have a firm intention to continue to act so that the treaty can be done this year. I put the question to Karpov about what should be done. There are issues which are very important if we are to elaborate the treaty fully and with complete clarity. We must ensure that the issues are clear which prevent or enable us to sign a major elements statement. We must separate these to keep from complicating things. The work is not over but it is time to record what has been accomplished. We should ask Minister Shevardnadze and Secretary Baker to work on the basis of this approach and try to wrap it. But I must say that we are embarrassed by the fact that all of a sudden when we thought what cooperation between the U.S. and the UK meant—­the modernization of Trident II—­and when no other problems or issues have been raised for all this time—­now we are made mindful of a change. This brings up the broad interpretation of the ABM treaty and this is dangerous. The logic will be upset. We made a big step forward at Reykjavik when we said we would not raise the issue of French and British nuclear forces. That was a big concession. In doing so, we recorded an understanding that as soon as the particular approach of deep cuts, we said that others would have to get involved. Mrs. Thatcher has said that as soon as the U.S. and USSR sign 50 percent reductions, the British can get involved. Mitterrand too has said something and China. We are in reach of an agreement and others in the nuclear club should be ready to join us. (S) This idea that is now coming up would just let NATO continue to build up. This is illogical and we reiterate our understanding that this means only rearmament concerning the Trident II—­only that. Ambassador Bartholomew is always passionately agitating on this—­but
