314 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III could do would have as positive an impact on that rate as an announcement from their side that they are increasing their target for economic growth above the present inadequate level. Summary We are proceeding with exploring expanded swaps and sales of special drawing rights, as well as planning gold sales. We do not plan to issue foreign-denominated securities at this time. Any significant action on oil will be dictated principally by the pace of progress on the energy legislation. We do not contemplate any of the more drastic steps at this time— these further steps would, of course, involve major Presidential decisions. 99. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1 Washington, January 26, 1978 SUBJECT U.S.-Japanese Economic Relations While the joint communique with the Japanese on the abovecaptioned matter2 is a dramatic breakthrough in setting some new directions and spelling out a new philosophical thrust for Japanese trade policies, it is only a first step. The extent of economic impact of the policies and measures that the Japanese agreed upon will be entirely dependent on our ability to constantly review their progress, both in terms of their efforts and their achievements.3 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 40, Japan: 1–5/78. No classification marking. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Bob—Whom do you suggest? J.” 2 See footnote 3, Document 97. 3 During a January 26 Trade Policy Committee meeting, Strauss asserted “that Japan had made a very far-reaching statement on what was to be done in order to bring about an adjustment in her trade relationship with the rest of the world. At the same time, the statement resulted in very little in the form of concrete actions that would have an immediate impact. The value of the exercise will depend on the extent to which the political commitments in the communique are implemented by the Japanese government. The U.S. government will need to monitor Japanese policies on a continuing basis and to hold regular consultations with Japanese officials.” (Summary minutes of the Trade Policy
