202
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Mosadeq is gambling that Iran’s strategic and political importance
will force America to give him money to meet his budgetary deficit and
will lead to pressure on the British to lift their blockade of Iran’s oil
sales.34 Other politicians find this approach to American support
equally enticing.
“The Unseen Hand” Even more extraordinary than this vanity is a
peculiar national faith in the omnipotence of an “Unseen Hand”. The
profound effect on Persian psychology of Islam’s belief in an inexorable
fate and the mass frustration of a people who have been dominated for
centuries by foreign forces beyond their control give rise together to an
amazing national irresponsibility. It is difficult to emphasize suffi-
ciently the great importance of this Persian resignation to the influence
of the Unseen Hand. There is no limit to their fantasy in this respect.
Many Persians honestly believe the British engineered the nationaliza-
tion of their oil industry in Iran. Many Persians, therefore, blame their
present situation on the British. Prime Minister Mosadeq catered to Ira-
nian suspicions of the British hand in all things when he said to the
Majlis that Mr. George McGhee’s transfer to Turkey resulted from the
pressure of antagonistic British on the U.S. Government.35 Only under-
standing of this psychological infirmity can make explicable a wide-
spread Persian rumor that the British are behind Mosadeq and that the
Tudeh Party is primarily British-dominated.
Iranian irresponsibility, which blames every ill upon the Unseen
Hand, allows Mosadeq a freedom of action which few political leaders
of the world could have. No matter what he does, he can blame it on the
British and his people will believe him. This seems so incredible that
western readers, unfamiliar with the Persians, will have to take the
statement on faith. As deputy Jemal Emami told Ambassador Hen-
derson in December, 1951, “There sometimes is no barrier between a
Persian and his fantasy”.36
34 It is pertinent to point out here that Mosadeq has good reasons for taking the cal-
culated risk of threatened suicide. If Iran falls into communist hands, a great rent will be
torn in our “containment” ring around the USSR. Strategically, loss of Iran will be calam-
itous for the free world. In 1918 the Bolshevik writer K. Troyanovski assigned an impor-
tant role to Iran in his “The East and the Revolution”. “The Persian revolution is the key to
the revolution of all of the Orient, just as Egypt and the Suez Canal are the key to the
British domination of the Orient. Persia is the Suez Canal of the revolution. If we shift the
political center of gravity of the revolutionary movement to Persia, the Suez Canal loses
its strategic value and importance. For the success of the oriental revolution, Persia is the
first nation that must be conquered by the Soviets. This precious key to the uprising of the
Orient must be in the hands of Bolshevism cost what it may . . . Persia must be ours;
Persia must belong to the revolution.” [Footnote is in the original.]
35 To the left of this sentence in the original is a handwritten note that reads: “But
was he right?”
36 Memorandum of Conversation, December 3, 1951. [Footnote is in the original.]
