December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 641 When we say there is no other priority, and we know of these other pacts, then this means that they in fact have priority. This is a rule of international law. Let me quote from the Law of Treaties by McNeil.10 “If Country C is aware of an earlier inconsistent treaty between A and B, he contracts a treaty with them at his own risk”. If we do not say that the Israeli-Egyptian treaty must prevail, then we are acknowledging the validity of those other obligations. (The Prime Minister quotes from Lauterpacht11 to the effect that the treaty is null and void if it conflicts with a prior treaty). This means that at any time Egypt could join a war against Israel. If we have a war on our northeastern front, we will be able to defeat our enemies, but we will do so by counterattacking. We cannot defend ourselves from Tel Aviv. We will take the war to the other side. If we counterattack in self-defense, and if we approach Damascus, Egypt may call this Israeli aggression. Egypt will be able to carry its commitments to Syria. I am not boasting when I say that we may get within ten kilometers of Damascus. Israel will never initiate a war, but if Israel is attacked, we will counterattack. Egypt could then join the war, and the peace treaty would be null and void. These proposals are totally unacceptable to Israel. We had a letter12 from Mr. Hansell which has now been nullified by this minute. It should be nullified. That also gave Egypt the means to attack Israel. There shall be no interpretive notes to Article 6, neither for paragraph 2 nor for paragraph 5. A Cabinet decision was taken before I left. We will not sign any so-called peace treaty unless Article 6 stands as it is. There can be no interpretation. This is the heart of the peace treaty. We cannot be derelict in our duty. Israel has been attacked five times, and each time Israel has been branded the aggressor. Israel wants to be sure that the treaty will not be nullified suddenly because a comprehensive peace has not been achieved. Now let me turn to the question of the letter on the West Bank and Gaza. The draft13 of the letter that our delegation received at Camp David contains deviations from and contradictions with the Camp David agreement. We want to fulfill the Camp David accords faithfully and completely. I signed those agreements for Israel, but I cannot agree to deviations. Here is the list of deviations. First, there is a proposal to distinguish between Judea and Samaria on the one hand, and Gaza on the other. Where is this written in the Camp David agreements? There is no difference there. 10 Likely an erroneous reference to The Law of Treaties by British legal scholar Arnold McNair. 11 Sir Hersch Lauterpacht, jurist and scholar of international law. 12 See footnote 3, Document 169. 13 See footnote 5, Document 182.
