conceivable, namely, that these soldiers would make no trouble or if they did they
would be restrained by the victorious forces of Lu or Sun.
4. Foreign intervention in the way proposed would be a benefit to the present Peking
Government and the Anfu Party and disadvantageous to Chi whom it would shut off
from the arsenal. It is not improbable that it would be favored by the Japanese. Among
the British and some other foreign merchants in Shanghai there has been always strong
element in favor of military intervention in China and they may be utilizing the present
situation to get foreign governments committed to that program.
5. The following telegram, dated January 17, 3 p.m. from Cunningham received this
morning:
“The senior consul is addressing a protest to Marshals Chi and Sun against
the recent hostilities on the border of the French concession which were a
grave menace to foreign lives and property, and a demand that no Chinese
troops remain within rifle shot of foreign-inhabited area in the future and that
any such troops within such radius at present be removed at once. This is the
result of meeting this morning of consuls general for Italy, United States,
Japan, the Netherlands, Great Britain, and France.
That an international military force should be sent immediately to Shanghai
to ensure compliance with this demand, which is essential for security of
foreign settlements, was the unanimous opinion of the meeting.”
Foregoing will probably be considered by diplomatic body at a meeting which had
already been brought up [called for?] January 19th.
6. I have telegraphed Consul General Cunningham as follows:
“January 17, 10 p.m.
1. Your January 17, 3 p.m. brings forward a very serious and
important proposal and raises a number of points upon which I
require information before reaching any conclusion: First, what do
you mean by ‘international military force’? Do you mean a force
composed army units or an increased naval landing force? Second,
is your last paragraph a recommendation of yours or is it advance
information of a recommendation which the senior consul intends
to address to the [consular body?]? Third, if by ‘international
military force’ you [mean] army forces, why do you consider that
naval landing forces supported by their ships are not adequate to
cope with any situation as has been the case in the past, notably
that of some days ago and of last September–October? Fourth,
