36
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
from their point may be understandable, want to change the demo-
graphic picture in the West Bank. Despite Dayan’s talk about only indi-
viduals being allowed to purchase land, I suspect that the Israelis will
continue to try to create facts on the ground that will affect what
happens in five years. Given this situation, the illegality of large scale
Israeli settlement activity in the West Bank should be reaffirmed if
Sadat is to sell some unpalatable territorial concessions to confreres.
8. Since the Camp David meeting may bring us to the crunch, I
have one other general observation to make with which Sam may or
may not agree. Despite his sense of U.S. pressure, Mr. Begin strikes me
as being in an advantageous position. If Sadat does not agree to his ter-
ritorial demands, the Egyptian President can be depicted as being at
fault; if Sadat agrees to those territorial demands, that’s all the better; if
Sadat subsequently goes under because of such agreement, well—
that’s just too bad because Mr. Begin knew all along the unreliability of
the Arabs and, anyway, it removes the one Arab leader who success-
fully challenged Israel’s longtime sole claim on the affections of the
American people; and if it fails because of Begin’s own unwillingness
to go the extra mile, this can be explained away at home and any oppo-
sition criticism will be manageable for as adroit a political leader as Mr.
Begin. Sadat has no such advantage. He must come out with something
saleable or he is in trouble, his already faltering peace initiative will be
irrevocably damaged, and the validity of his reliance on the United
States will be perceived by his own people and the Arabs as having
been misplaced.
9. The above are general thoughts based on reftels. It is difficult to
be specific in the absence of some more precise indication of what our
objectives will be at Camp David. As requested elsewhere, I am pre-
paring a series of messages9 on the political/economic dynamics of
Egypt which I hope to submit next week and which will spell out in
greater length the constraints under which even the normally venture-
some Sadat will have to work.
Eilts
9 On August 21–22, Eilts sent three telegrams to the Department on the political and
economic dynamics of Egypt as they affected the peace process. Telegram 19438 from
Cairo, August 21, discussed the basic political, economic, and social institutions in Egypt.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850067–2107) Telegram 19415
from Cairo, August 21, discussed Sadat’s personal compulsions and constraints as he ap-
proached the Camp David talks. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P850067–2098) Telegram 19474 from Cairo, August 22, provided an analysis of Sadat
himself. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850067–2125) A sepa-
rate paper, sent in telegram 19377 from Cairo, August 21, overviewed the current state
of the Egyptian economy. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780341–0199)
