patience and self-restraint which they have consistently exercised at this time when such heavy damage has been inflicted upon their countrymen. 5. It will, however, be well understood that the attainment of legitimate national aspirations must be sought through means equally just and honourable. Japan, during a period of twenty years, had devoted all her energy and attention to the completion of judicial reforms before she proceeded to the abolition of extraterritoriality within her own borders. When the results of her labour were made evident, the Powers gladly abandoned the immunity which they had previously enjoyed by treaty. The same immunity is still enjoyed by foreigners in China. It is, however, by no means due to any intention on the part of the Powers to stigmatize the Chinese people. It is based on the actual necessity inherent in and consequent upon the present inefficiency in the administration of justice. No attempt is likely to succeed which is designed to remove any effect without removing its cause. On the other hand, if the Chinese Government should decide to introduce immediately necessary reforms in the administration of justice, and thereby to prepare the way for the termination of extraterritoriality, they may reckon upon the wholehearted co-operation of the Japanese Government in common with the other countries. 6. It further seems extremely unfortunate that the present agitations of the Chinese for the revision of treaty relations should be closely associated with activities looking to the destruction of industrial organization. So long as strikes in factories are no more than a means to secure better conditions of employment, they shall give no occasion for official interference. But when they represent organization to undermine the whole structure of industry, they will prove a cause of serious danger as much to China herself as to other countries. 7. The Japanese Government are of the opinion— (a) that the questions directly connected with the Shanghai incident shall first of all be brought to a final adjustment as quickly as possible; (b) that thereupon, the questions concerning the jurisdiction of the Mixed Court, the organization of the Municipal Council and other kindred matters in Shanghai shall next be taken up and settled in the light of local requirements; (c) that finally the questions of extraterritoriality and of customs tariff shall be disposed of, in conformity with the terms and spirit
