Non-Proliferation 999 sufficient to deal with the truly dangerous problem posed by the nuclear threshold states. Some present or potential threshold countries (e.g., Iraq) are NPT parties and would think twice before withdrawing from the Treaty. Moreover, progress on a CTB or other arms control measures might strengthen the international consensus on non-proliferation that could help restrain non-party states as well. Nonetheless, certain threshold countries are already well on the way toward fuel cycle autonomy or are obtaining technical options to develop nuclear explosives. These states will make their decision on whether to produce a nuclear device on the basis of their perception of immediate security interests and vulnerabilities, with internal politics also coming into play. If one or more of these countries decides to obtain a nuclear explosive capability, there would be an increased chance for regional conflict and serious consequences for the continued Treaty adherence of neighboring NPT parties. In any case, it appears likely that we may be faced with cruel dilemmas involving our national security, if such threshold states as Pakistan or South Africa continue their progress in developing nuclear devices. Implications for Arms Control and Peaceful Cooperation After the NPT Review Conference, we plan to adopt the following stance on major arms control issues in the near-term: —The concession on a CTB Working Group which you approved was worth making under the circumstances, but was only valid in terms of achieving a consensus final document at the NPTRC. We believe the non-aligned will seek to “pocket” our contingent concession, and that Australia, Canada, and other allies may join them in increasing the pressure for a Committee on Disarmament Working Group. We will resist accepting their position since multilateral involvement in CTB talks would seriously complicate tripartite negotiations, especially the important verification issue. —We should not agree to a CD Working Group on nuclear disarmament, since nuclear arms control can be approached effectively only through step-by-step negotiations by the partners directly concerned. —We will continue to reject proposals for cut-off of production of Special Nuclear Materials (SNM),3 which some of our Allies may sup- 3 Telegram 268280 to London, October 7, noted that “We share HMG’s view that efforts should be made to discourage arms control proposals that are presently unrealistic and unworkable—such as cut off.” The Carter administration believed that “consideration of cut-off would be premature and inadvisable in light of the current international situation and the importance of not detracting from priority issues on the arms control agenda, such as SALT, and CTB. As appropriate, we would also stress the various difficulties associated with a possible cut-off (definitions, modalities, and verification) and the need to ensure that our security interests would be properly protected.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800479–0470)
