1978  373
85.	
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Report on My SAC/NORAD Trip
On August 20–21 I took advantage of your absence to familiarize 
myself with NEACP, to be briefed on the C3I2 problem at SAC HQ, to 
fly a low-­level attack mission in a B–52, to inspect a Minuteman silo, 
to review warning and assessment procedures at NORAD, to inspect 
tactical fighter training at Nevada, and to visit a site on which I will 
report orally.
Some key impressions (and you might wish to provide some guid-
ance by marginal notes):
1. The military enormously appreciate the direct interest you have 
shown in C3I issues. This was mentioned everywhere. In this connec-
tion, I believe that we ought to run an IVORY ITEM on an LNO. We 
have not done this and that issue could become more critical in the 
years ahead.
2. I was struck by the extent of U.S. C3 vulnerability. More work 
on this is needed, and I will be pressing Harold Brown and my own 
staff to develop this matter further. I believe that our C3I vulnerability 
is serious. [4 lines not declassified] This issue could become a more seri-
ous problem for crisis stability than the question of [less than 1 line not 
declassified].
3. I believe that our strategic forces are well organized and designed 
for a single large retaliatory attack, but less so for any lesser variant, or 
for a war lasting weeks. We should not base all of our planning on the 
assumption that a nuclear war must either escalate or terminate quickly.
4. Our strategic doctrines are based on the concepts of the sixties, 
when we had strategic superiority and at least conventional parity. 
We need a fundamental doctrinal review. I am setting up an office in 
the NSC on Strategic Planning (under Fritz Ermarth, who is currently 
­serving as the Director of the Strategic Systems Program at Rand) to 
work on this issue as well as on a comprehensive and integrated strat-
egy for SALT 3 and the grey areas.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 52, SAC and NORAD 8/20–21/78 Brzezinski Trip: 7–9/78. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent 
for information. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.
2 Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence. [Footnote is in the 
original.]
