Afghanistan
903
might put pressure on Deng to make such a move could include a
return to detente politics in the West or a developing trend toward
“official” ties between Washington and Taipei. ([classification marking
not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]
345.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
Islamabad, January 10, 1981, 1329Z
321. Subject: Afghanistan: Soviets Appear To Renege on Their “Ini-
tiative.” Ref: State 5253.2
1. (S) Entire text.
2. Summary: In carrying out instructions today on Soviet initiative
on Afghanistan, I was informed by President Zia and Acting Foreign
Minister Shahnawaz that Soviet Ambassador has suddenly pulled the
rug out from under them by informing GOP that regional conference on
Afghanistan would not be possible if linked to UN General Assembly
resolution, that participation of Iran was not acceptable, and that UN
SYG’s Special Representative could participate only as an observer.3
Soviets attributed these sudden changes to Babrak Karmal. Shahnawaz
has already told Soviet Ambassador that GOP is ‘deeply disappointed’
and he will shortly deliver formal reply from President Zia. Zia and
Shahnawaz said that initiative had been stopped dead in its tracks. Zia
said that Pakistan will continue its firm opposition to Soviet occupation
of Afghanistan in absence of some acceptable proposal for compro-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D810014–0355.
Secret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to Peshawar, The Hague,
New Delhi, Beijing, Kabul, Jidda, Moscow, London, USUN, Paris, USNATO, and Bonn.
2 Telegram 5253 was not found. In early January, with Soviet support, Pakistan and
Afghanistan had tentatively agreed to begin talks. (Michael T. Kaufman, “Afghanistan
and Pakistan Report Progress Toward Beginning Talks,” New York Times, January 7,
1981, p. A4) On January 7, it was reported that the Soviet Union no longer insisted that
Pakistan recognize the Karmal government as a condition for the talks. (“Dispute on
Afghanistan,” Washington Post, January 7, 1981, p. A20)
3 See footnote 4, Document 337. An item in the President’s Daily Brief, January 14,
noted that Pakistan informed the Soviets that these preconditions for the talks were
unacceptable. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 7, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1981, PDBs)
