1012 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 11. There continues to be a serious deadlock on downloading, with no solution in sight. When Obukhov was here, he stressed to me, and later to Rick, that Moscow feels very strongly about this—­he sees it as the single most important remaining issue. He stresses two points—­the SS–N–18 has a new front end (a stricter condition than the U.S. is willing to accept for its own downloaded missiles), and the 1987 summit statement itself contained a sentence which foresaw that the declared numbers could be changed. On the one hand, they handled the issue in a sleazy way. On the other hand, perhaps we should be viewing the situation in a more factual and less emotional way. The real issue is how can we be sure the SS–N–18 has now and in the future no more than 3 RVs, not what it had in the past. Our confidence on this point could be strengthened by further verification requirements tailored to this system. We might also be able to get the downloading quota tilted in our favor somewhat as compensation. This seems to me preferable to expanding the downloading provisions to accommodate the SS–N– 18, which opens the door to phony reductions on both sides and more breakout worries. 12. The Soviets are now claiming that mobile ICBMs need not return to base (or be otherwise accounted for) at the end of an operational dispersal. This is rather troubling and it continues the trend to open the loophole for operational dispersals ever wider. People here tend to wave these problems aside by assuming operational dispersals will never happen, but those given to worst-­case analyses could make this look very bad, given that there are no limits on the number or duration of such events. People here are beginning to say, “the treaty is suspended during operational dispersals.” This is not a helpful way to view the situation and perhaps we should take another look at this. 13. A related loophole opened by JCS is “contingency operations” for heavy bombers. The Soviets are pushing hard for notification in advance of such events rather than only telling their inspectors after they have arrived and asked to inspect a base. This seems reasonable to me, since declaring a base uninspectable only after a request has been made to inspect it seems like an unnecessarily suspicious way to proceed. 14. With the passage of time, the September 1 MOU data now being exchanged is looking more and more out of date. Since we are agreed data must be updated every six months after EIF, are we approaching the point at which we need to tell the military on both sides that they will have to update the data? 15. It is perhaps not too early to begin to plan for the JCIC. We are giving it difficult and important tasks beginning right after signature. This must not be viewed as just another commission holding desultory six-­week sessions in Geneva and manned by people not deemed
