1955  167
India to serve, and that we should not make it contingent as suggested 
in Johnson’s 607.
I realize that we may thus be giving up a certain bargaining posi­
tion, but I believe that disadvantage is more than offset by avoiding 
the appearance of agreeing with the Chicoms to do something which 
we would not otherwise do. Also, the impact on world opinion will be 
very much stronger.
John Foster Dulles
134.	 Telegram 616 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 25, 1955, 2 p.m.
616. From Johnson.
Two hour five minute meeting this morning. No progress.
Wang presented re-draft of “agreed announcement” very close our 
August 23 text except for substitution “and declares that it has adopted 
and will further adopt measures so that they can in fact return as soon 
as possible” for latter portion US section our August 23 draft and 
substitution “and declares that it has adopted and will further adopt 
appropriate measures so that they can exercise as soon as possible their 
right to return” for latter portion PRC section our August 23 draft.
(Full text showing other apparently minor changes by separate tel.)
I said his amendment para one US section not necessary as we had 
already taken all necessary measures but focused attention on substi­
tution “as soon as possible” for “promptly” in para one PRC section.
In fact virtually all of meeting centered around my continued 
effort obtain definite statement on definite period of time during which 
remaining Americans would be released and Wang repeating this 
“could never be done”, “impossible” and repeating virtually verbatim 
his previous line this regard.
During course much give and take I took line contained para two 
Deptel 622 and after he had in reply clearly related release of flyers to 
decision hold these meetings, release Americans whose cases review 
completed to our agreement to “agreed announcement” and again 
gave “state of relations” as one factor in timing release remainder, 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2555. Confidential; Niact.
