392
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
130.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, May 3, 1978, 12:30–1:50 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Secretary of the Treasury Mike Blumenthal
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Robert Strauss, Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
Mike Mansfield, U.S. Ambassador to Japan
Ambassador Henry Owen, President’s Special Representative for Summit
Preparations
William Gleysteen, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific
Affairs
Mike Oksenberg, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Mutsuyoshi Nishimura (Interpreter)
Japan
Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda
Sunao Sonoda, Foreign Minister
Nubihiko Ushiba, Minister for External Economic Affairs
Fumihiko Togo, Japanese Ambassador to the U.S.
Yoshiro Mori, Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary
Masuo Takashima, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs
Toshijiro Nakajima, Director-General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Hisashi Owada, Assistant to the Prime Minister (Notetaker)
Ryuichiro Yamazaki (Interpreter)
President Carter: Mike, why don’t you get the discussion started
with the analysis of the economic situation.
Secretary Blumenthal: Fine, Mr. President. We have gone through
a difficult economic period. In our view in recent weeks the situation
has begun to improve. We are engaged in communication with your
colleagues on a number of mutual problems and are working up to the
Bonn Summit in July.
I have been fully aware of the difficulties caused Japan by the rapid
movement in exchange rates. We have tried to adopt both fundamental
and short-run measures to ameliorate the situation. The basic insta-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 36, Memcons: President: 5/78. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White
House Dining Room. Fukuda made an official visit to Washington May 1–3. Memoranda
of conversation of two meetings between Carter and Fukuda, as well as U.S. and Japa-
nese officials, during the morning of May 3 are ibid.
