The Norwegian delegate gave his assent in principle to proposal Number one
of the Chinese program but requested more definite information.
The Spanish delegate said that he would give support to all resolutions
favorable to China adopted at this conference.
The Swedish delegate withheld definite commitments in the absence of
instructions from his Government.
The British delegate took a similar attitude, saying, however, that the British
delegation was prepared to discuss the proposals to establish tariff autonomy
in the widest spirit but wished time to consider them.
Following the presentation of these views, Dr. Wang read the following
memorandum on the abolition of likin:
‘1. Measures leading to the abolition of likin and the dates.
Inasmuch [as] the Special Conference [on] Chinese Customs, being
inspired by the spirit of the Washington Conference [in] its respect
for China’s sovereignty, is aiming at tariff autonomy, there should
be a determination to abolish likin which prejudices the economic
growth of the Chinese people, so that their productive energy may
thereby be developed.
On the other hand, likin and commut[ation] tax or duty partaking of
the nature of likin hitherto collected by the provinces constitute the
main source of revenue for the province[s]. Therefore, it appears
impossible to abolish such taxes all at once. It is necessary to
divide into different period[s] within which to execute the plan of
likin abolition, for the authorities concerned of the Central
Government have to examine carefully all the details relating to
likin such as the various original denominations, rules governing
their collecting, location of the barriers, forms of certificates and
passes, and the receipts, et cetera. After such examination, different
steps have to be taken.
It is now proposed that, in conformity with the annexed table
relating to the procedure for likin abolition, the different provinces
should, beginning from December, 1925, and within a period of six
months, prepare reports, and, at the same time, commissioners
should be sent to the provinces for investigation. The results of the
investigations should, within another period of six months, be
conjointly examined by the Ministry of Finance and the
