1108 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 1. Assistant Secretary Vest took advantage of November 20 visit (on unrelated subject) by Ambassador Von Staden to present latter with following aide me´moire expressing U.S. concerns over nonproliferation aspects of subject transaction: Begin text: The Department of State wishes to bring to the attention of the Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany an issue involving Argentina which is of grave concern to the United States. The United States is deeply concerned over the prospect of nuclear weapons proliferation in the Western Hemisphere and has indicated to Argentina its expectation that that country will complete ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco and accept an international safeguards obligation covering all of its nuclear activities and precluding any nuclear explosive use. In addition, both Brazil and Argentina have been urged to defer their plans for the development of nuclear reprocessing facilities. The United States believes that the Argentine reprocessing program is spurred primarily by a desire to maintain its lead over Brazil and that this competition could lead to a reprocessing race in Latin America which would threaten hemispheric stability. In discussions with Argentina over the last year, the United States has taken the firm position that it would be prepared to supply heavy water production technology, which Argentina is seeking, only if Argentina deferred its reprocessing plans in addition to the steps indicated above. The United States is concerned, however, that Argentina will attempt to obtain this sensitive technology from other suppliers without deferring reprocessing. Representatives of the United States have called the attention of officials of the Government of the Federal Republic and other potential suppliers of heavy water production technology to this matter and to the belief that this technology should not be supplied to Argentina unless it agreed to defer its reprocessing plans. The Embassy of the United States in Bonn has been informed that the Government of the Federal Republic shares these concerns and intends to take a similar position, if the Federal Republic is approached concerning the supply of heavy water production technology. The Department of State appreciates this attitude and wishes to ensure that senior members of the Government of the Federal Republic are aware of the strong interest of the United States in this issue. The Department of State believes that it is important that the Governments of the United States and the Federal Republic consult closely on this issue and, in particular, before any binding commitments are entered into for the supply of this technology to Argentina.
