866
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
324.
Message From the Swiss Chargé to Iran (Kaiser) to the
Department of State1
Tehran, July 25, 1980
PURGES IN THE FOREIGN MINISTRY: A SITUATIONAL SKETCH
An official in the Foreign Ministry told me that they had a great
purge there yesterday. This operation, which must be seen in connec-
tion with Khomeini’s latest appeal for the Islamization of every aspect
of daily life, was directed against persons as well as objects.
Even though there have been other purges before, this operation
is said to have resulted in 200 more persons being retired, transferred,
or dismissed. The weeding out of mostly experienced personnel affects
all ranks. The Director General for Europe and North America, Ettesam
(over 20 years experience) was also dismissed. As Ettesam, who is
married to a Swiss citizen, remarked to the chief of our Chancery
Division, the orderly conduct of business is at present being made
impossible. For instance, he said that he was unable to act on representa-
tions and démarches from foreign embassies because the internal chan-
nels of the Ministry are completely blocked, but also because—and this
is doubtlessly the result of the constant attacks by the fundamentalists
on the Foreign Ministry as a stronghold of the spirit of the ancien
régime—it is apparent from the contacts with the rest of the administra-
tion that the latter is now hardly willing to accept the wishes or recom-
mendations of the “corrupt” Foreign Ministry.
The purges also affect the personnel of the Secretariat (Minister/
Chief of Protocol, etc.) who had had great understanding for the special
urgency of many of the concerns of this Embassy and had always been
helpful in arranging appointments. Our cooperation with the Foreign
Ministry will therefore hardly be improved. The furor was directed
also against left-over objects of the taghouti (idolatrous) period. For
instance, the Persian rug in the Minister’s office disappeared, which
had long been a thorn in the side of the fundamentalist fanatics. At
the same time, the heavy plush curtains, the flags of the country, etc.,
had to go. The office of the Chief of Protocol, too, was swept bare,
which so far had still retained certain representational trappings in
view of his special functions.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 33, Iran Update 7/80. No classification marking. The document was found
attached to a July 26 briefing memorandum from Saunders to Muskie and Christopher
entitled “Iran Update—July 26 1980.”
