Negotiating Channels 421 tion and that it will be referred to their Attorney General in accordance with Panamanian law. As I wrote this, I was just thinking out loud. It would probably be better to use the Panamanian “card” earlier and also to build in additional steps and gestures to safeguard this process. But, it is my opinion that some scenario like this will have to be worked out before our people are freed. I believe that U.S. public opinion would support our taking such a chance although it would look bad if we failed. 2. If such a scenario is developed, what is the best way to present it—through Waldheim, the PLO, direct contact or other means? Since there are several parties involved—the Panamanians, the United Nations, etc., it seems that we would have to make a decision as to how to present this. 3. Thirdly, and of critical importance, when would we present this? A basic decision would have to be made as to whether or not it would be best to pursue this during the run-off or after the election of a new President. Assuming that Ghotbzadeh does not make the run-off—and you can see from the attached “Memcon”4 that he no longer thinks that he will—a critical question would be whether or not the contacts that we have had with him could be transferred to the new leadership. We should do what we can to encourage Ghotbzadeh to transfer these contacts to the new leadership. This could also be a way that he could keep himself involved and possibly ingratiate himself with the new leadership. Another thought is that if Ghotbzadeh is a lame duck, possibly he and/or Khomeini would be willing for him to take the heat for resolving the hostage situation. I am just thinking out loud, but it seems after your State of the Union Address, you should spend some time with Zbig, Cy and his excellent team talking these things through. I strongly believe that we do need a new approach that is inherently risky for both our country and for you politically. Also, you should review the attached “memcon”.5 Our trip was taken seriously. I hope that we are not undercutting Waldheim’s credi- 4 Not attached. Reference is to a January 22 memorandum of conversation in which Ghotbzadeh told Cottam that he “had no chance to win in the elections” and that “he was sick and tired of being Foreign Minister and he wanted out as soon as possible. He would remain, however, until the hostage crisis was ended.” Cottam noted that it was his impression that Ghotbzadeh “was counting exclusively on the French channel to Jordan.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Memoranda of Conversation) 5 Not attached, but the meeting was reported in telegram 1314 from London, January 20. See Document 157.
