the United States would not be disposed to raise any objection to the ratification of the proposed agreement with Germany.” [Paraphrase.] The following is for your information: In view of the provision that Lithuania’s obligations shall be entitled to security of and shall be charge upon any payments or property received from Germany or from its allies by way of reparation or cession equally with all other notes which represent similar advances to Lithuania since the Armistice by other Allied and Associated Powers, the Treasury thinks that the suggested ratification of the trade agreement with Germany seems to release the security definitely provided for these obligations. In view, moreover, of the theory advanced informally by Mr. Narushkevich that payments were to be made the United States only from reparations received by Lithuania, a theory which has not, as far as the Department is aware, been discarded by Lithuania, although it is wholly inacceptable to the Government of the United States, it is obvious that should the Lithuanian Government adopt this view as its position the ratification of the proposed agreement with Germany would preclude the possibility of recovery by the United States upon obligation in question. The release of this security, furthermore, by the United States seems all the more inappropriate if any payments have been made to the British Government on obligations similar to those held by this Government unless it is understood definitely that Lithuania’s indebtedness to the United States be refunded at once. Department observes from your despatch no. 1540, December 7, 1923,4 that you expected to inform Mr. Narushkevich of the views of this Government in the matter but the Department does not have a record that you have yet done so. The Department presumes, however, that you did, and that the Lithuanian Government is fully aware of the views of this Government in the matter as stated in the Department’s instruction no. 78, November 7, 1923,5 and concurs in them. If you have not taken up this matter, consult Department before taking action in regard to it. [End paraphrase.] GREW 4 Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, p. 277. 5 Ibid. , p. 276.
