Afghanistan have not heard from liaison by 26 April, we will take the initiative again and request a meeting. (S) b. Unilateral Contact with Dissidents. You should be aware that Islamabad Station is in unilateral contact with a fairly prominent Afghan dissident leader, who, on 24 April requested $1,000,000 from us to purchase ammunition from unidentified sources in Pakistan. We advised him that we had no policy authority to grant his request.4 (S) c. Radio Broadcasting. We continue to explore radio broadcast possibilities, although host country political sensitivities and lead time for acquiring broadcast equipment cast doubts on this option. We believe, however, that radio services such as [1½ lines not declassified] can be utilized indirectly by providing unique news stories to journalists and publications from which [less than 1 line not declassified] often obtains its program material. This effort is underway. (S) d. Psychological Operations. We are readying a senior covert action officer to visit Islamabad and Kabul, to assess and, where appropriate, to initiate psychological operations against the Soviet presence in Afghanistan. The activities which this officer will discuss in the field include: distribution of anti-Soviet propaganda leaflets; production and distribution of cassette tapes; development of spokesmen to project the dissident message effectively; means of getting that message to the foreign press; and black operations (see f. below). (S) e. Worldwide Propaganda. We have already tasked the worldwide covert action infrastructure on Afghanistan and are directing appropriate briefings and propaganda material to our assets. As of 25 April we have obtained media placements in 25 countries and have provided liaison and agent of influence assets with tailored briefings in 51 countries. Some examples of this effort include: —Senior [less than 1 line not declassified] officials were briefed on 12 and 16 April. —The President of [less than 1 line not declassified] was briefed by his intelligence service. —The highest levels of the [less than 1 line not declassified] government have expressed intense interest in material we provided on the Afghan situation.5 —A briefing was prepared for the President and Prime Minister of [less than 1 line not declassified]. —The Prime Minister and Cabinet of [less than 1 line not declassified] were briefed by their intelligence service. 4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin and an arrow pointing to the last sentence of paragraph b. 5 In the left margin next to the first three bullet points, Henze wrote: “Indian and Islamic World?”
