66 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 27. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, July 22, 1978, 0350Z 5882. Subj: Soviet Ambassador’s Views on Present Situation in Afghanistan. 1. During my initial courtesy call on Soviet Ambassador Alexander M. Puzanov July 16, he provided the following answers and observations to my questions: A) Soviet-Afghan relations: Puzanov stated that there had never been any serious bilateral problems between Kabul and Moscow during the sixty years since diplomatic relations were established during the time of King Amanullah and V. I. Lenin. He observed that the Soviets had enjoyed friendly, productive relations with the royal and Daoudist regimes which had preceded the current Taraki government, and expected to continue this positive relationship with the new regime. B) Soviet military advisors: Puzanov explained that the recent increase in the number of Soviet military advisors here has been necessary in order to train the Afghans to use armored, air force, and communications equipment being supplied by the USSR. He claimed that the rate of increase of advisors is not so high as that which followed Daoud’s 1973 overthrow of the monarchy.2 C) Soviet economic assistance: Puzanov explained that the fortyodd Soviet-Afghan economic assistance agreements signed since the April 27 revolution were already in the pipeline. Although most are related to the basic assistance commitment made to former President Mohammad Daoud during his 1975 State visit to the USSR, some date back to the pre-1973 monarchical era. Puzanov stated that negotiations for these proposed projects had become stalled during the Daoudist period for “a number of reasons.” D) Projected bridge over the Amu Darya (Oxus): Puzanov predicted that the projected Hariatan Bridge should be ready to convey vehicular traffic over the river frontier between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union in “four and one-half years.” E) The People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA): Puzanov did not think that Politburo-Secretariat-Central Committee organiza- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780301–0595. Confidential. Sent for information to Ankara, Moscow, New Delhi, USLO Peking, Tehran, CINCPAC for POLAD, and CINCEUR for POLAD. 2 On the question of the Soviet role during the 1973 revolution, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–8, Documents on South Asia, 1973–1976, Document 8.
