National Security Policy  63
31. The second proposition has been weakened more recently by 
the developments mentioned in paragraph 9 above, relating to new 
weapons and the growth of the Soviet deterrent. Among our allies there 
is a declining confidence in the deterrent effect of US military power. 
This doubt has produced two contradictory results; one is a desire to 
knit the alliances more closely together and the other a desire to achieve 
greater independence from US policy. In support of the view that alli­
ances with the US should be tightened are a variety of important consid­
erations: the inescapable fact that the US and its allies have a common 
interest in preventing Soviet aggression, the mutual importance of each 
other’s territories in maintaining and further developing deterrent and 
defensive military power, doubt that any one nation or even a regional 
grouping independently could create an adequate deterrent or defen­
sive capability, and the gains to be achieved through sharing costs and 
responsibilities.
32. On the other hand, some influential political groups in allied 
countries see dangers in developing a closer association with the 
US. Some of them in particular are concerned over their inability to 
influence US policy, and they fear that their national interests will 
increasingly come under US control, that they will be unable to take 
independent action to support their own interests, and that they will 
be unable to disassociate themselves from the US when the US takes 
action in its own interests.
33. Finally, in its recent diplomatic offensive the USSR has encour­
aged an element of doubt respecting the third proposition which origi­
nally underlay the alliances: that there was no acceptable alternative to 
the creation of a counter-­bloc. Through a variety of formal and infor­
mal proposals—­such as the Soviet disarmament schemes, the ideas of 
a European security pact and of nuclear-­free zones—­and through other 
suggestions contained in the various Bulganin letters, the USSR has 
appeared to be offering an alternative worth consideration. The Soviet 
leaders apparently hope that some of these suggestions will produce 
political rifts within allied countries and reduce allied ties with the US, 
especially in Europe.
34. Some of these Soviet suggestions have struck a responsive 
chord, even in moderate Western European opinion. At the moment, 
public interest in talks with the USSR is still at a high point. This 
European responsiveness is partly the result of anticipated changes 
in the military situation and of lessened confidence in US power and 
US leadership, but primarily the result of a growing conviction that 
Western Europe’s only hope of survival is to explore fully and patiently 
every possible opportunity for living at peace with the USSR. At the 
moment the strongest forces favoring negotiations with the USSR are 
political parties, predominantly socialist, who do not now exercise
