Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 sion of this country’s security. If we and our allies seek a world of “peace without victory” while others, pretending to accept that spirit of detente, actually seek “victory without war,” the world will not be safe, and the military factor will become crucial. Recent Soviet behavior is not reassuring on this point. You, as Commander-in-Chief, will make clear to the American public and our allies that military power is a fundamental component of national security. Furthermore, a strong and rich nation cannot escape the political responsibility of military power. Well-reasoned examples of this Administration’s decisions on future military programs will show that you carefully have considered the trends in national security affairs and are providing the flexibility needed to cope with the wide range of contingencies which the U.S. could face during this decade. Your personal involvement in maintaining military readiness will be highlighted. The speech would set forth the following principles: —We do not seek military superiority but we will not allow others to attain it. —It is not our policy to intervene militarily in the domestic affairs of other countries or to exacerbate regional and local conflicts, and we cannot view with equanimity interventions by other powers in such conflicts. —We shall seek arms agreements when they are possible and prudent, but we shall sustain and improve our military capabilities where necessary. —We shall be forthcoming in encouraging further economic and technological cooperation with those who act to restrain destabilizing military competition. It would be easy for a number of states, not only Saudi Arabia and Iran, but also Yugoslavia and our NATO allies to reach a mistaken conclusion about where we are going because we have emphasized cooperation for the past year. This speech should redress the balance and set the backdrop for other statements you may find important to make on national security as events unfold in Africa, the Middle East, and a post-Tito Yugoslavia. In sum, the image to be conveyed is not belligerence or alarm, but rather competence and confidence in the pursuit of the national strategy which you set last summer.3
