70 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Attachment Paper Prepared by the Inspector General, Central Intelligence Agency (Waller)3 Washington, November 15, 1979 INTRODUCTION In May 1979, I sketched out a scenario (hereto attached)4 in which the Iranian left would coalesce ultimately attracting more moderate liberal lay elements in opposition to Khomeini. This was based on the assumption that Khomeini could not construct or keep a functioning government, thus economic decline, unemployment and exasperation by literate Iranians would create a situation in which Khomeini would eventually be ousted. I also predicted a feudal breakup of the country in which urban-oriented leftists would control the capital and some other large northern cities such as Isfahan, Meshed and Kerman, while provincial ethnic or tribal groups would take advantage of the army’s virtual impotence to assume de facto autonomy in their respective regions. The Kurds would resist central authority in Kurdistan, the Azerbaijani Turks would control that province, the Arabs of oil-rich Khuzistan would resist strong central control, the Qashqais and their close neighboring tribes would enjoy autonomy in the south, and Baluchi separatism would begin stirring again in southeast Iran. I also suggested that “before the left seizes urban-labor power, various conservative middle-class landowners, pro-Shah and military elements in Iran or abroad will seek secret Western backing and support.” I concluded that the feudal picture painted by this scenario “will provide the U.S. with neither a reliable source of oil nor political influence in Iran,” and that “the situation will beg progressively for U.S. covert interference as the only viable alternative to chaos and a hostile government antagonistic to U.S. policy aims and infecting other oilbearing Persian Gulf areas vital to our economy.” And, you will recall, I predicted that “as U.S. influence declines, there will be pressure from 3 Secret. 4 Attached; scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. X, Iran: Revolution, January 1977–November 1979.
