Chapter 4, February–April 1990 605 The Secretary replied that he had nothing more to suggest. Perhaps he and Shevardnadze could consult privately on how to proceed. But he did not have a good solution. The U.S. side really had trouble with some of the Soviet proposals that flew in the face of the agreed elements of common ground. He would like to read one: there would be a “continuing right to 115 former heavy bombers outside the START limits for non-­nuclear roles.” That seemed clear, but now the U.S. side was told that all heavy bombers had to be counted in the 1600 limit. This flew in the face of what the sides had agreed in Moscow. Perhaps the Ministers should adjourn and think. But the Secretary was not optimistic; he did not know how to attack this problem. Shevardnadze stated that, if the sides did not find a solution on the main ALCM issue (range), he did not expect breakthroughs on other questions. His delegation could testify to the fact that they had examined all the options but had no fallbacks on ALCM range. It was the problem of problems. The Secretary asked whether ALCM range was related to all the other issues that flew in the face of the Moscow elements of common ground. Shevardnadze responded that it related to the entire package. The Secretary asked if that meant both the ALCM package and the SLCM deal. Shevardnadze answered no; SLCMs were a different matter. The Secretary said that Shevardnadze was talking just ALCMs. Shevardnadze confirmed that he was. The Secretary proposed to discuss this further with Shevardnadze over dinner. He did not know what to do. He had told Shevardnadze in Namibia that he had no authority on ALCM range. That was the truth. He would not pretend that he did. He would be glad to talk with Shevardnadze privately; maybe they could figure some way out of the impasse. Shevardnadze commented that he did not think that would help. This was a matter of principle. He could not budge, not even one meter. The Secretary replied that he believed Shevardnadze. They needed a private conversation. He was not at liberty to proceed further. Shevardnadze suggested that the experts might take up the question again. The Secretary responded that that would not work. Ambassador Bartholomew had told him it would not work, so the Ministers could not resort to that old ploy. The Secretary and Shevardnadze had to talk; they should discuss this over dinner. Shevardnadze said they should let the Presidents talk. The Secretary recalled that that had been his solution in Namibia. He was prepared to do that, but he strongly suspected that—­because the sides now had all these other issues on the table—­there would be no agreement. Shevardnadze said that that outcome was not to be ruled out.
