Chapter 4, February–April 1990 627 to take into account your concerns and our differences. Our requirement that there be some upper limit established is very logical. Baker: There is one. We state it. It’s in our declaration. We say it. We say formally to the Soviet Union every year the number we will have, and we will not exceed it. Shevardnadze: Would you identify the ceiling that would not be exceeded? The numbers of SLCMs would never exceed say 600 or some other figure. That’s what we want to see. If we don’t agree on the number that would not be exceeded, then you have an open channel to the arms race. And that’s what the Supreme Soviet will say to us. We’ve already heard that from the Supreme Soviet. Baker: Now you’ve got a basic question here. Do we want to reduce strategic systems by 50 percent or not. If we put SLCMs into a START Treaty, then we’re not going to have a START Treaty. And what you are asking is, in effect, to put it into the START Treaty. That’s the same argument we have had for many years. Basically, we’re in a situation where either we’re going to take advantage of everything that’s been agreed to now and reduce numbers in this way or we won’t be able to do it. Shevardnadze: You always said that you don’t regard SLCMs as strategic arms. We use to say that it had to be part of an agreement. Gorbachev said this. So when we say we are ready to have just a politically-­binding declaration, you know that had the effect of a bomb exploding within the Soviet Union. We’ve done some good work on this. We should continue on it. Baker: Why don’t we go up stairs then. This is the time to break.3 3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Bush met with Shevardnadze and the Soviet delegation in the Oval Office at 10:04 before escorting them to the Rose Garden at 10:04 and the Cabinet Room at 10:10. At 11:47, Bush returned to the Oval Office for a private meeting with Shevardnadze and Baker that lasted until 12:20 p.m. Memoranda of these conversations are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts.
