National Security Policy  671
questions. We have organized our presentation around these two 
questions.
The first question is: what array of targets does the continen­
tal United States present to the Soviet attacker, and how much force 
would the attacker need to destroy or neutralize these targets? This is 
a natural question to ask in examining the defense of the striking force. 
An answer to the question would show the extent to which defensive 
measures might be useful in increasing the enemy’s force requirements 
against us. Indeed, one would like to find, or to bring about by defen­
sive measures, that the attack the enemy would need to destroy our 
striking force is much larger than any attack he could possibly mount. 
In such a case, one could be fairly sure, without further study, that an 
enemy aware of the circumstances would not attempt an attack except 
under extreme provocation.
Should it appear, in looking at force requirements, that the enemy 
might possibly have a force large enough for a completely destructive 
attack against our strategic bases, then one must probe more deeply 
into the situation. This possibility raises the second question: what 
retaliatory force can we muster even if our bases are attacked with the 
enemy’s best capabilities? A later part of our discussion is devoted to 
this second question.
For the purpose of our discussion, it has been necessary to pre­
pare charts illustrating both some facts and some estimates we have 
made. It is in the nature of such graphic presentations that they tend 
to make all data look like fact—­even mere estimates—­by emphasizing 
exact numerical values. We ask you to bear with us in this, because we 
do not wish to present our charts as exactly descriptive of the strategic 
position of the United States. Rather, we wish to use them as a basis for 
discussing some uncertainties in that strategic position. Perhaps our 
main message is that, because of changing technical factors, the strate­
gic position of the United States is now subject to a range of uncertainty 
and that this uncertainty can lead to a condition of instability interna­
tionally. We hope we can also show that there are some relatively sim­
ple things that this country can do to reduce uncertainty and increase 
stability.
We can turn now to the first of our two questions—­how much force 
would the Soviets need to destroy as completely as possible the ability 
of the continental United States to mount retaliation? The first chart 
sets a scale by picturing something of the range covered by recent and 
current intelligence estimates. Specifically, the numbers on the vertical 
scale represent operational intercontinental ballistic missiles—­missiles 
produced, deployed, and supported by trained troops with the neces­
sary logistics. The dots show specific capabilities discussed in recent 
intelligence estimates. The August, 1958, national estimate, for example,
