August 8–September 17, 1978
201
“After the signing of this framework and during the negotiations,
no new Israeli settlements will be established in this area. The issue of
future Israeli settlements will be decided and agreed among the negoti-
ating parties.”
It was clear and obvious that the “negotiations” applied to the
West Bank and Gaza.
Early the next day I informed President Sadat of the agreement.3
On Sunday afternoon4 Mr. Barak brought to me from Prime Min-
ister Begin a proposed text which differed substantially from that on
which we had agreed. I informed him that it was unsatisfactory, and
read to him the text on which we had agreed, which was still lying on
my desk. He did not disagree with the agreed text.
Jimmy Carter
3 In his personal diary, Carter wrote of this meeting: “Sunday morning I went to
discuss the final draft of the Sinai agreement with Sadat. He does not want to meet in El
Arish as long as it is under Israeli control. He was pleased with the submission of the set-
tlement question to the Knesset prior to negotiations. He said that he would make these
concessions, as he calls them, only if the Palestinians can participate in negotiations on
the Israeli-Jordanian treaty, and he would like to delete the entire paragraph on Jeru-
salem!” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 241) Also see Carter, Keeping Faith, pp. 397–398. Fol-
lowing this meeting, Carter wrote, he redrafted all language in the Framework docu-
ments “to incorporate what I thought would be acceptable to the two delegations, and
then walked down to Holly [Cabin], where Vance and our team were meeting with
Dayan and the other Israelis. I called Dayan out, went over my suggested compromise
language, and asked him to help me during these final hours and with the Knesset when
the time came for a vote. Dayan said that he was absolutely certain the parliament would
never vote for a withdrawal of settlers prior to negotiation of an Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 398) Following this, a further dispute emerged in which
Begin objected to the U.S. draft letter to Sadat, outlining the U.S. position on Jerusalem. In
a “very unpleasant session,” Carter met with Dayan, Weizman, Barak, Mondale, Vance,
and Brzezinski, and offered to revise the letter, striking out quotations from U.S. repre-
sentatives made at the UN on the subject of Jerusalem. (Carter, Keeping Faith, pp. 398–399)
4 See Document 51.
