Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
755
Accordingly, in this memorandum I plan to address myself as
briefly and concisely as I can to four broad themes that deal with for-
eign affairs:
I. The distinctive character of the Carter foreign policy;
II. Public criticism of Reagan’s approach;
III. Crises that we might confront;
IV. Initiatives that we might take.
I. The distinctive character of the Carter foreign policy:
I think the most distinctive hallmark of your foreign policy is that
you have blended together two elements that traditionally have been
seen in America as being in conflict: concern for moral principle and
recognition of the importance of American power.3 In recent years,
McGovern and later Kennedy have stood for the former, while Nixon
and Kissinger have stood for the latter.
In contrast, you have managed to combine the two in order to
shape a foreign policy that has been both moral and realistic. It can be
best summarized by the following themes:
(1) Restoring America’s military and economic strength for the
long-term.4
(2) Recognition of global complexity.5
(3) Progress toward a genuine partnership both with Western Eu-
rope and the Far East.6
(4) On the basis of renewed strength, Allied cooperation, and dip-
lomatic firmness we can also seek accommodation with the Soviet
Union.7
(5) Importance of the Third World.8
(6) Human rights is a dominant idea of our times.9
Finally, we neither run the world nor can run away from it.10 We
cannot be guided by nostalgia for the fifties (U.S. preponderance) or by
3 The President underlined “concern for moral principle” and “importance of
American power” and placed a bracket in the right-hand margin next to that portion of
the sentence.
4 The President underlined this point.
5 The President underlined “of global complexity.”
6 The President underlined the portion of this point beginning with “genuine.”
7 The
President
underlined
the
portion
of
this
point
beginning
with
“accommodation.”
8 The President underlined “the Third World.”
9 The President underlined “human rights.” He placed a bracket in the right-hand
margin next to this and the previous five points.
10 The President underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with “we.” He
extended the right-hand margin bracket to include this sentence.
