3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
770
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
2. Summary and action requested. There is disturbing evidence
pointing to the release of lethal biological agent as the cause of nu-
merous deaths in Sverdlovsk, USSR, in April–May 1979. The intelli-
gence community’s present conclusions and report have been sent to
you septel.3 Ambassador Watson is instructed to raise this matter with
Deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko as soon as possible. Ambassador
Flowerree should inform Ambassador Issraelyan4 of the demarche
promptly after it is made in Moscow. End summary.
3. We are deeply concerned about the incident in Sverdlovsk in
April 1979 and its implications. We wish to make a serious effort to
discuss this issue bilaterally in accordance with Article V of the Biolog-
ical Weapons (BW) Convention.5 Speed is essential in view of the end of
the BW Convention Review Conference on March 21, and our desire to
give the Soviets as much time as possible to give us a considered re-
sponse. It is in both our interests to have at least a preliminary response
before the end of the Review Conference, since we will have to state at
the conference that we have raised a compliance issue.
4. Ambassador Watson should personally make the following
points as soon as possible to Korniyenko or, should he be unavailable,
to another official on the First Deputy Minister or Deputy Minister
level. Points should be provided in the form of a non-paper as well.
A.—The United States and the Soviet Union have a continuing in-
terest in sustaining our mutual efforts to control the arms race.
B.—I have been instructed to raise a matter which potentially has
extremely serious implications for the future of arms control negotia-
tions between our countries and more specific bearing on the Biological
Weapons Convention.
C.—Although no public announcement was made by Soviet au-
thorities, for some time we have been aware of reports of an extraordi-
nary outbreak of disease which was apparently pulmonary anthrax,
which caused numerous deaths in Sverdlovsk in April 1979, and which
resulted in the establishment of a quarantine.
D.—We have now received further information which indicates
that this extraordinary outbreak appears to have been caused by the re-
lease of a quantity of anthrax agent exceeding that justified for prophy-
3 Telegram 68653 to Moscow and Geneva, March 15, is in National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0592.
4 Victor Issraelyan, Soviet Ambassador to the Conference on Disarmament.
5 The Biological Weapons Convention, which was signed in April 1972 and entered
into force in March 1975, prohibits the development and stockpiling of biological
weapons that are intended for harmful use. Article V states that parties will work to-
gether in solving any problems pertaining to biological weapons that arise as a result of
the convention.
