which authority must state that the consignment is required for
delivery to that Government for its own use.”
To replace or to supplement the provisions of paragraphs two and three it is suggested
that the visa of the consul of the importing country upon the export declaration (or
license as the case may be) should be sufficient indication that the shipment referred to
in paragraph 1 is authorized by the Government of that State.
ARTICLE THREE, PARAGRAPHS FOUR, FIVE AND SIX
(4) “The form in which this license shall be given shall, so far as
practicable, be that given as an appendix to the present Convention.
“Each licence must contain a description sufficient for the
identification of the arms, munitions and implements of war to
which it relates and the names of the exporter and the acquiring
Government, ports of embarkation, and disembarkation, means of
transport, intended route and destination.
(5) “A separate licence shall be required for each separate
consignment which crosses the frontier of the exporting country,
whether by land, water or air, and shall accompany each separate
consignment.
(6) “A return of the licences granted shall be sent quarterly to the
Central International Office referred to in Article 8 of the present
Convention by the issuing Governments; importing Government,
when High Contracting Parties, shall also forward quarterly to the
Central International Office a return of the same licences enclosing
particulars of the heading under which the imported goods will
appear in their imports statistics.”
In the event that export declarations replace licenses, it would be necessary to make
corresponding changes in the above paragraphs.
If licenses are retained it would be important to clarify exactly what is meant by the
reference to the “return of the licenses” to the Central International Office. Does this
mean a report of the total export of various categories of arms based on information
obtained from the licenses or is it the intention that copies of the licenses themselves
should be forwarded to the Central Office? In this connection your attention is called to
the provision in Article 8 which would appear to indicate that the return of the licenses
covers an indication of the quantities and the destination of the arms exported under
licenses.
