338 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement business with the Secretary first in Ottawa, then in New York; and with Herman Phleger also in New York part of the time. The “renunciation of force” statement started with an excellent Phleger framework which was fleshed out by the Secretary. This morning we are telegraphing you some minor revisions in the first and last para­ graphs. The intent of these changes, as you will immediately see, is to get away from any remote implication of a non-­aggression pact or indeed any sort of bilateral agreement with the Chinese Communists. Anything which smacks of a pact or executive agreement with the Chinese Commu­ nists is of course out of the question. We are thinking in terms of separate unilateral public declarations and not pledges or assurances to each other. We feel reasonably confident that you are on a good wicket now and that there will be plenty to talk about. It is hard to see how Wang can reject this item out of hand. My guess is that he may try to maneu­ ver in the direction of something resembling the famous “Five Princi­ ples”; or try to make a false distinction between “international” and “internal” resort to force in the Taiwan area. We have had a difficult time with Defense on the confused prob­ lem of the unaccounted for military personnel. So far as have not been able to get what we consider a consistent statement of principle or posi­ tion out of them. In one document they will make sweeping claims and assert that the claims can be supported; in another they will indicate they do not have much basis for any very positive allegations. They blow first hot and then cold. We still do not understand what criteria they have applied in determining what names should go on the list. They seem to have conclusive evidence that some of the people on the list are dead. In some cases the bodies presumably have been recovered. In other cases, the personnel apparently were never in the custody of the Communist side, having been lost over the high seas. On the other hand, it seems that some of the names which were on the original list of 970 should not have been dropped. A case came to our attention this week where an officer was last seen alive in a prison camp by fellow American officers. His name was dropped from the list merely because he was in bad shape from injuries and gangrene and the Americans thought be could not have lasted much longer. This was a lay opinion, not a medical opinion. Defense did not stop with a presumptive find­ ing of death, in this case, but made a definitive finding of death. It is incomprehensible to us and gives us misgivings about the whole sub­ ject. But the casualty determinations are not within our province and there is not much we can appropriately do about it. It is a dilemma. We are trying to arrange a meeting today with Deputy Defense Secretary Robertson, General Erskine and Bill Godel to get Defense clearance of a draft presentation for you to make to Wang on this subject. It represents a considerable departure from the text contained in our 790, which was basically a Defense document, modified slightly but unsatisfactorily by
