Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX resents a fair balance of interests.7 While the Israelis still wish to delete the references to the Camp David framework from the treaty preamble, we have told them that the present language is an irreducible minimum and that we will not support changes. I personally reemphasized this point to Prime Minister Begin. I strongly urge that, for your part, you not seek further changes in texts of the treaty and its annexes that have been worked out by our delegations. To do so would, in my view, lead the Israelis to re-open other issues of importance to you on which we have with great difficulty obtained their agreement. Secretary Vance’s meetings Saturday and Sunday focused on the two remaining major unresolved issues other than oil. They are, first, the question of what will be said in a side document about the manner and timing of the steps envisaged in the Camp David Framework for the West Bank and Gaza, and, secondly, the question of the phasing of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim line. As you know, the Israelis have resisted any specific timetable for next steps in the West Bank and Gaza, taking the position that there should be no linkage between these negotiations and the subsequent process in the West Bank and Gaza. They have been particularly opposed to mentioning a specific target date for the holding of elections. We have supported your position and we have finally persuaded Dayan to accept as a target date that elections should be held not later than the end of 1979. I propose that these assurances be embodied in a letter8 which I would write to you and Prime Minister Begin, if this procedure is acceptable to you. I am asking Hermann to go over with you9 the precise text of this letter. I believe a letter will be the quickest way to get agreement on the best possible language. It will be written to record the agreement of both sides in a way that will be no less binding than an exchange of notes. In addition, it gives me a chance to demonstrate the United States commitment to continued progress on the West Bank and Gaza. On the issue of phasing of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim line, Dayan and Weizman will support in the Cabinet debate the language which we have sent to you. Weizman and Dayan cannot guarantee acceptance by the Cabinet but consider it of the utmost importance that they succeed in winning Cabinet approval. Finally, we have asked the Israelis for a letter which they would address to us detailing certain unilateral steps they would take in the 7 See Document 131. 8 See Document 137. 9 Ibid.
