International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
225
factor has been the growing level of oil imports and, perhaps more im-
portantly, fear that Congress will not pass a meaningful energy pro-
gram to deal with the problem over the longer run.
2. Any single disturbance, or spreading international opinion that
we cannot or will not act to deal with the trade and energy situation,
could set off chain reactions difficult to contain. Real upheaval is a possi-
bility and could cost much politically as well as economically around
the world.
Conclusion:
1. We cannot sit back and hope for the best.
2. We must be seen to be “doing something” about this problem.
3. Therefore, we must develop a program to:
a. Reduce energy import costs for 1978 through 1981 (until your
longer term energy program begins to have an effect).
b. Strengthen our export position (without resorting to protec-
tionist or other internationally irresponsible measures).
C. Possible Action
The following are possible components of a U.S. response:
1. Energy Related Measures
a. Slow down purchases for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. Purchases
in 1978 could be reversed or slowed by Congressional action, saving up
to $3.2 billion in that year. Postponement of 1979 and 1980 purchases
could save $1.5 and $2 billion respectively.
b. Reverse the decision to slow production at Elk Hills.4 This would
save $0.6 billion beginning in 1978, rising to about $1½ billion begin-
ning in mid-1980 if the Sohio pipeline is completed.
c. Encourage the owners of the Trans-Alaskan Pipeline5 to decide now
to increase throughput capacity to the 1.6 million barrels per day capacity
of the Prudhoe Bay main field beginning mid-1980—saving $2 billion
per year. In light of a “glut” of oil on the West Coast, it might be advis-
able to give permission to have, for a temporary period, a trilateral “oil
swap” (with Japan) for any Alaskan oil produced in excess of 1.2 mil-
lion barrels a day.
d. Encourage Sohio and the State of California to resolve impedi-
ments which block the Sohio Pipeline project to Midland, Texas—allowing
utilization of increased Elk Hills production, beginning mid-1980, and
avoiding the need for a trilateral swap.
4 See footnote 3, Document 53.
5 The Trans-Alaska Pipeline, which carries oil from the Prudhoe Bay in northern
Alaska to the port of Valdez in the southern part of the state, became operative in June
1977.
