902
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
United Nations and the governments contributing troops to UNIFIL, as
well as with Saudi Arabia and Syria. We will also be consulting with
the Congress about the best course of action to take. Meanwhile, it will
be important for us to persuade other quarters which contribute to the
provocations and the cycles of violence to exercise restraint, and to
cease terrorism.
Mr. President, all of these steps will take time and hard work; but I
am committed to doing what I can to hasten the day when Lebanon will
no longer be threatened by strife and conflict, and when you will be
able to devote your energies solely to rebuilding your country and ad-
vancing the lives of your people.
I want to keep in touch with you, Mr. President, on these issues of
great concern to us both. My heart will be with you as you shoulder
your heavy responsibilities.
With warm personal regards,
Sincerely, Jimmy Carter. End text.
3. For Ambassador Dean: Since you have to carry the message per-
sonally to President Sarkis, we believe you should either try to deliver
it Thursday, July 26, or telephone Sarkis as far in advance as possible of
your planned meeting-dinner with him on Friday, July 27, to say that
you have a response from President Carter, explain that, under the cir-
cumstances, it would be better for us if we did not have to deal with an
“open letter.”5 Say to Sarkis that we very much understand and appre-
ciate the domestic political problems he is facing, and the need to be
seen as doing something about the problems Lebanon faces. In this con-
nection, you might note that the U.S. made a strong statement con-
demning Israeli air raids and has taken a firm stand—publicly and pri-
vately—against the recent series of Israeli ground incursions into
UNIFIL’s areas of operation. Ambassador Tueini has also registered a
strong message of protest over Israeli actions in the Security Council.
4. FYI. While we do not yet have report, we understand from se-
cure voice telephone call with Tel Aviv that there may have been a
useful exchange Wednesday, between Viets and Weizman on Lebanese
5 Dean met with Sarkis on the morning of July 27 and attempted to persuade him
not to send a second letter to Carter. Sarkis replied that “too much publicity had already
been given to the planned letter not to send it,” but assured Dean that the text would not
be made public. Dean reported: “Sarkis agreed that whatever he had to say had already
been set forth in his July 4 letter. He reiterated that he was merely responding to local po-
litical pressure.” Dean concluded that this second letter would likely receive a “courteous
acknowledgement” and would “close the present exchange.” (Telegram 4189 from
Beirut, July 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850029–2474)
Telegram 4216 from Beirut, July 30, conveyed the text of Sarkis’s second letter. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850029–2477) The Department conveyed
Carter’s short reply, acknowledging Sarkis’s concerns, in telegram 207377 to Beirut, Au-
gust 9; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840172–1595.
