1472  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
opposition and that this could be done without placing us in a seri­
ously untenable position, since part of the onus for denying the UN a 
role would rest on the USSR for boycotting the 25-­nation Disarmament 
Commission.
On balance, we believe it still is preferable not to support the 
81-­nation DC proposal. Since USUN has not made a systematic can­
vass of the strength of this proposal, it would be desirable for you to 
suggest to Ambassador Lodge that they provide us with a tabulation 
of the expected vote on this proposal. You might wish to add that if the 
systematic count confirms his view that there is widespread support for 
the 81-­nation DC proposal, Ambassador Lodge would have discretion 
to support it.
2) Resolutions on testing
As Ambassador Lodge has indicated, the 17-­power resolution 
(TAB B) with the US as one of the co-­sponsors has somewhere between 
45–50 votes in favor of it. Ambassador Lodge has not made any recom­
mendations in his letter for further modifications of specific language. 
In response to Ambassador Lodge’s previous recommendations, he 
has already been authorized to make certain changes in the 17-­power 
resolution, if necessary. The 17-­power resolution with such changes is 
attached (TAB C).
The Indian draft resolution to which Ambassador Lodge refers in 
his letter has since been superseded by an Indian-­Yugoslav resolution 
(TAB D). We believe this formulation is not acceptable since it still tends 
to treat the subject of nuclear testing in isolation. However, we have 
authorized Ambassador Lodge to discuss certain modifications with 
the Indians and Yugoslavs which would make the resolution acceptable 
to us (TAB E).
In these circumstances, we believe you should indicate to Ambas­
sador Lodge the following: (a) We would be able to support the 
Indian-­Yugoslav resolution provided they accept the changes we 
have suggested; otherwise we believe (b) he should stand firm on the 
­17-­power draft resolution with such modifications in it as Ambassador 
Lodge has already been authorized to accept; and (c) if the modified 
17-­power resolution does not have the necessary support or it seems 
desirable for other reasons, we could accept the procedural resolution 
suggested by the British as the concluding action of the Committee in 
lieu of any substantive resolution (TAB F).
