590 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement here should be prepared discuss and do everything possible eliminate any differences of opinion with respect to this first agreement between us and thereby establish sound basis which would give us best hope of making further progress in dealing with other vitally important mat­ ters confronting us. B. You will recall that following issuance of our announcement of September 10 I pointed out favorable atmosphere which its prompt and full implementation could create for progress in discussion of sec­ ond part our agenda. I pointed out advantage of promptly putting into effect appropriate measures for implementation of our announcement, which would dispose of problem we were called upon to deal with under agenda item one, before attempting resolve complicated and dif­ ficult problems under second item our agenda. C. Although I did not feel that your government had in fact ini­ tiated all appropriate measures called for under announcement, on strength of your assurances in this regard I undertook discussion with you of questions under item two. I had hopes that entanglement of our two agenda items in our talks could thus be avoided. I am deeply disappointed and disturbed that my hopes have not thus far been realized. In fact in some ways results appear to have been neg­ ative when compared with situation prior to issuance of our agreed announcement. D. When we arrived here to begin our discussions on August 1, there were to our knowledge 52 Americans whose departure from your country was being prevented in one way or another and whose names I gave to you. On August 1 you informed me that of that number 11 were being permitted return to U.S. On September 6 you informed me of 12 additional persons of that group who would be permitted depart. On September 10 you informed me of another 10 who would be per­ mitted to return. Thus, in approximately 6 weeks between August 1 and September 10 action was taken permit 33 out of 52 persons depart. In approximately 14 weeks since September 10, of that group only 5 additional persons have been given permission depart. Thus, how­ ever results are regarded, that is by absolute numbers or by proportion, results in this regard since September 10 have been extremely dis­ appointing and out of keeping with my government’s understanding and expectation of what was reasonably to be expected under agreed announcement. E. At our last meeting I also spoke of restrictions imposed by your authorities on freedom of Americans communicate with UK Charge, as provided for in agreed announcement, and other restrictions on ability of UK Charge carry out his functions. F. I have also spoken several times in particular of cases of Dr. and Mrs. Bradshaw. You have often spoken of lenient and humanitarian
