August 8–September 17, 1978
187
is the problem for Sadat. El-Araby again referred to UN Resolution 267
of October 1967,7 which the United States has approved.
El-Reedy asked if the Palestinians in East Jerusalem will or will not
be included in the self-governing regime. The American paper seems to
suggest that it will not be (page 8). Saunders opined that we should
think of Jerusalem separately. El-Araby suggested that the reference be
to the West Bank and Gaza, instead of to areas now under Israeli mili-
tary government jurisdiction. Saunders suggested that our phraseology
protects Sadat. It leaves the Jerusalem question separate. El-Araby re-
sponded that the West Bank/Gaza has specific geographic meaning.
The Secretary suggested that the Egyptians provide us with their pro-
posed language.
El-Baz then referred to the absence of any reference in our paper to
settlements. The Secretary pointed out that this omission had already
been explained to Sadat and Kamel. Before our paper is finalized, lan-
guage on the settlements will be included. On the matter of the ille-
gality of the settlements, President Carter will repeat our position in a
speech to the Congress.
The Secretary then said he would like to raise a question or two.
On page 4, the fourth line from the bottom, he asked if the Egyp-
tians would like to have the phrase “based on the principle of reci-
procity” included. The Egyptians said this was agreeable to them and
observed that President Carter had already agreed to the inclusion of
such a phrase.
El-Araby asked what is meant by “special security forces” on page
4 of our paper. Saunders said the reference is to the collection of police
forces that might be involved.
The Secretary alluded to the phrase on page 6 of the American
draft “assist in the restoration of Egyptian sovereignty.” He suggested
an addition, “based on phased withdrawal, Israeli forces, etc.” He said
we have some language to this effect. The Egyptians suggested that
“phased” be removed, withdrawal should not be qualified. A state-
ment could be included suggesting withdrawal in accordance with
some timetable.
El-Araby suggested that on page 6 a statement be included to the
effect that “security arrangements will be reciprocal,” or some other
similar phase based on the principle of reciprocity.
El-Reedy returned to the issue of the basic structure of the paper.
Some of the fundamental principles for Egypt, such as the inadmissi-
bility language, is in the Preamble. The Secretary observed that this is
7 For the text of UN Security Council Resolution 267, adopted July 3, 1969, see Quest
for Peace, pp. 23–24.
