902 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV had on the average 5% less purchasing power than the FY 77 budget (even FY 78 had only about 1% real growth). This is basically because we have consistently underestimated inflation, especially with respect to major defense procurement—­which has run well above the general inflation index. Hence the issue is whether the US is prepared to make a significant modernization effort or to keep falling behind. DoD does not propose matching Soviet procurements (which we couldn’t afford even at 7–8% real annual defense budget growth). What we do propose is exploiting our superior technology in selected key areas such as ASW, antitank weaponry, and other PGMs, Stealth vehicles, and cruise missiles of various kinds. We can also exploit our greater efficiency in defense investment (for example, we see no need to design and build four new ICBMs when one will do the job).32 We must press our Allies hard along similar lines. By enlightened rationalization/standardization/interoperability policies, and accepting more of a two-­way street, we can make Allied defense investment more efficient too.33 But an indispensable corollary to exploiting our own technology more vigorously is to accelerate our efforts to prevent it from leaking its details to the USSR (which makes enormous efforts to secure those details).34 DoD sees this too as a key element in any viable security strategy for the 80s. Issue #7—Since quality uniformed manpower will be so tight in the 80s, what relief must we seek? A return to the draft is an obvious answer, but raises so many thorny problems that other measures should be taken first. Clearly, we must pay what is necessary to remain competitive in the labor marketplace, and above all do whatever is necessary to retain trained manpower in key skills. It is the worst false economy to have to spend so much to keep training new people to achieve skills that those leaving already have (for example, it costs over $600,000 to train an advanced fighter pilot; paying him even $20,000 more a year to hold him five more years would be far cheaper than having to train another one). Beyond this, DoD simply cannot afford to use scarce uniformed manpower to do peacetime blue collar jobs which could be done just as well—­and more cheaply—­by civilians. Substituting civilians for military people was successful in the past; we replaced about 90,000 military 32 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this paragraph, another one in the right margin, and next to it wrote “wrong.” 33 Brzezinski underlined “two-­way” in this paragraph and wrote in the right margin next to it: “No.” 34 Brzezinski drew a short vertical line in the left margin next to this paragraph.
