504 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I or supposed culprits. We must find a positive, creative role, of being the catalyst of change, of promoting the process of wider participation where there are conflicts so that all the parties are involved. In the struggle to make all people free, we ourselves must become free. Freedom is not some distant state of affairs when there will be no more problems and history will have arrived at some utopia, some paradise, some order of perfect justice. Freedom is solidarity with those who are less free than we are. Freedom is taking the risk of working for social justice for all people. The United Nations was brought forth as a result of the struggle for freedom against tyranny. There are many forms of tyranny, and none of us are exempt from the temptation to conspire with tyranny against freedom by remaining indifferent to the struggle of others to be free. But our very humanity rests in our capacity to identify with the other and to join in the struggle to make all persons free. The United Nations is now challenged to take the next steps that can move us forward in the struggle of humankind for peace, justice, and freedom. If we accept this challenge, I believe we will all be free someday. 104. Address by President Carter to the Nation1 Washington, December 15, 1978 Diplomatic Relations Between the United States and the People’s Republic of China Good evening, I would like to read a joint communique which is being simultaneously issued in Peking at this very moment by the leaders of the People’s Republic of China: 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 2264–2266. All brackets are in the original. The President spoke at 9 p.m. from the Oval Office at the White House. His address was broadcast live on radio and television. In his diary entry for that day, the President commented: “The big day for the China announcement. We were favorably impressed with Teng and the rapidity with which he moved and agreed to accept our one-year treaty with Taiwan, our statement that the Taiwan issue should be settled peacefully would not be contradicted by China, and that we would sell defensive weapons to Taiwan after the treaty expires.” (White House Diary, p. 265) For the official U.S. statement issued on December 15, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 2266.
