Chapter 2, January–June 1989  95
were developed to complement in equal measure an SDI program 
structured to support a deployment decision in the early to mid-1990s 
and initial deployments in the mid- to late-1990s.
(S) DST Objectives Not Equal—Another view is that for purposes 
of evaluating whether to retain these objectives, a useful analytical 
distinction can be drawn between those objectives that are likely to be 
enduring and those that respond to changing circumstances. Enduring 
objectives include “a”—­except, according to this view, preserving 
broad interpretation testing rights during the nonwithdrawal period 
(see discussion below)—­and “b” above and maintaining ABM Treaty 
constraints on Soviet ballistic missile defenses until the United States is 
ready to commit itself to deployment. They have guided our position 
since negotiations began, enjoy a wide political consensus, are indepen-
dent of specific Soviet demands, and remain valid for any SDI program 
with the goal of developing, if feasible, effective defenses which would 
permit deterrence to be based increasingly on defenses, with the ulti-
mate goal of a defense-­dominant deterrent.
(S) According to this view, other objectives, including “c” above and 
Soviet acquiescence to the right to test under the broad interpretation, 
evolved and currently are explicitly linked to specific Soviet demands 
(i.e., the nonwithdrawal period and observance of the ABM Treaty). 
They evolved in response to changing conditions—­programmatic 
requirements of the SDI program, Soviet demands, and domestic polit-
ical considerations. The issue, then, is whether these objectives remain 
valid in all circumstances.
President’s SDI Decision
(S) [The President provided guidance for the Department of Defense 
regarding the SDI program. The new program is similar to the current 
SDI program, but includes greater emphasis on a modification of the 
space-­based interceptor concept (e.g., Brilliant Pebbles). With a funding 
profile of $4.6 billion in FY 90 and $33 billion over the FYDP, this program 
structure would maintain the possibility of deploying a layered defense 
in the late 1990s, following a deployment decision in the mid-1990s. In 
effect, the President has elected to pursue an SDI program that is essen-
tially the same as that pursued by the previous administration.]19
Preserve Right to Pursue SDI Within ABM Treaty
(S) Assuming Soviet compliance, it is in the strategic and political 
interest of the United States to maintain ABM Treaty constraints until it 
19 This description of the President’s decision is based on unofficial sources. It will 
be revised, as appropriate, when an official source becomes available. [Footnote is in the 
original.]
