Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI —Political necessity. Neither Congress nor the press will let you get away with saying “we will sell less” as was suggested yesterday. Conventional arms control was a major focus of your campaign. —International necessity. The U.S., as the world’s leading supplier, will have to make clear its intent to exercise restraint if we are to create any international momentum toward joint supplier restraint. Tougher management guidelines will not be sufficient. —Management realities. A ceiling is probably the only way to force the hard choices necessary to actually cut the volume of arms transfers. Tab A Major Issues of Disagreement2 Washington, undated DOLLAR VOLUME CEILINGS Vance recommends Control 3(b). He believes there is a need for a ceiling in the early years of the new arms sales policy, because it would help us discipline ourselves and manage the program more effectively than would a general statement on reduction. Also, it would force us to consider more explicitly the trade-offs between and among arms sales. Brown recommends Control 2. He believes that establishing a ceiling would: 1) reduce our flexibility; 2) encourage purchasers to cluster their orders early in the fiscal year; 3) result in the ceiling being used as a floor; 4) lead to enormous accounting problems; 5) spur Congress to put ceilings or subceilings into law. He notes, however, that a ceiling is politically attractive and the only sure way to meet our goal of restraint in the conventional arms area. Warnke recommends Control 2, agreeing that the ceiling cuts into our flexibility and may become a target. He would recommend, however, using the term “significant reduction.” Smith (JCS) recommends Control 1. Benson (Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance) recommends Control 2, believing that reductions in arms sales can be achieved without an inflexible ceiling. Lance recommends Control 2, but would also use the term “significant reduction.” 2 Secret.
