September 18–December 16, 1978
517
other things, Khalil will cite for President Carter all of the concessions
that Sadat has made since the beginning of the peace process and com-
pare them to the few that the Israelis have made.
4. Request that no indication be given to Khalil that Mubarak has
provided us with an advance copy of the Sadat message.
Eilts
146.
Letter From Egyptian President Sadat to Israeli Prime
Minister Begin1
Cairo, November 30, 1978
Dear Prime Minister Begin,
I am addressing this letter to you with full awareness of the his-
toric responsibility we both share before our peoples who gave us a
solemn mandate to build a solid structure for peace. We owe it to this
generation and the generations to come in both countries not to leave a
stone unturned in our pursuit of peace. The ideal is the greatest one in
the history of man and we have accepted the challenge to translate it
from a cherished hope into a living reality.
You will recall that when I addressed the Israeli people from the
rostrum of the Knesset more than a year ago, I said “In the history of
nations and peoples, there come up certain moments when it becomes
imperative for those who are endowed with wisdom and vision to
penetrate beyond the past with all its complications and residue to
usher in an undaunted elan toward new horizons”.2 I believe that we
are now witnessing one of these moments. It is a moment of truth
which requires each one of us to take a new look at the situation and
reexamine his thinking and calculations. I trust that you all know that
when I undertook my sacred mission to Jerusalem against all odds and
in the face of the most formidable complications, I was not trying to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat,
1–12/78. No classification marking. Carter intialed “C” at the top of the letter, indicating
that he saw the document. Quandt wrote that the letter was “probably” written by al-Baz.
(Quandt, Camp David, p. 285)
2 For the full text of Sadat’s November 20, 1977, address to the Knesset, see Israel’s
Foreign Policy, Historical Documents, vols. 4–5: 1977–1979, Document 73. Begin’s speech to
the Knesset, which followed Sadat’s, is ibid., Document 80.
