Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
595
The missiles, for instance, to be torn down are comparable in age
and payload to our Minuteman II missiles and to our Polaris missiles,
presently deployed. Under the agreement, they will not be permitted
to replace these dismantled systems with modern ones. Our own
operational forces have been kept somewhat below the permitted
ceiling. Thus, under the agreement, we could increase our force level, if
necessary.
SALT II will also impose the first limited but important restraints
on the race to build new systems and to improve existing ones—the
so-called qualitative arms race.
In short, SALT II places serious limits on what the Soviets might do
in the absence of such an agreement. For example, without SALT II, the
Soviet Union could build up to some 3,000 strategic systems by 1985.
With SALT II, we will both be limited to 2,250 such weapons.
This new arms control agreement will, obviously, serve our na-
tional interests. It will reduce the dangerous levels of strategic arms
and restrain the development of future weapons. It will help to main-
tain our relative strength compared to the Soviets. It will avert a costly,
risky, and pointless buildup of missile launchers and bombers—at the
end of which both sides would be even less secure.
Let me turn now to the third of the four questions—how can we
know whether the Soviets are living up to their obligations under this
SALT agreement?
No objective—no objective—has commanded more energy and at-
tention in our negotiations. We have insisted that the SALT II agree-
ment be made verifiable. We are confident that no significant violation
of the treaty could take place without the United States detecting it.
Our confidence in the verifiability of their agreement derives from
the size and the nature of activities we must monitor and the many ef-
fective and sophisticated intelligence collection systems which we in
America possess.
For example, nuclear submarines take several years to construct
and assemble. Missile silos and their supporting equipment are large
and quite visible. Intercontinental bombers are built at a few plants,
and they need major airfields. Our photoreconnaissance satellites
survey the entire Soviet Union on a regular basis, and they give us high
confidence that we will be able to count accurately the numbers of all
these systems.
But our independent verification capabilities are not limited only
to observing these large-scale activities. We can determine not only
how many systems there are, but what they can do. Our photographic
satellites and other systems enable us to follow technological develop-
ments in Soviet strategic forces with great accuracy. There is no ques-
