738
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Well, by that time we had suffered so many postponements in this
business that it really looked as if we were damn close to the end of the
road, and we said, “Well, all right, if the Mullahs can’t act until Friday
they can’t act until Friday, and that is too bad, but we have got to have
some kind of a demonstration on Wednesday. We can’t let this thing
just drift because if it drifts it is going to drift away from us.”
The Shah’s statement3—incidentally it was from Baghdad—was
by that time receiving a good deal of circulation by word of mouth,
and that was having a good effect, so although there were discour-
aging signs, it didn’t look too desperate, so we sent out. [8½ lines not
declassified]
Mr. Waller: [less than 1 line not declassified].
Mr. Roosevelt: Well, they did. Incidentally, those troops didn’t get
to Teheran until after the thing was pretty well over, but they served a
very useful purpose on the way because the one place in which there
were serious pro-Mossadeq demonstrations on Wednesday was Ha-
madan, and these boys hit Hamadan just as the Iran Party and the
Tudeh was out on the streets, and they shot them up a bit and sent them
scurrying back to their hiding holes and came rolling on to Teheran. No
one could understand just how this happened. The General Staff was
very puzzled about it later. And incidentally in Hamadan the author-
ities were entirely confused. They couldn’t see how a man from Ker-
manshah had suddenly fallen upon them and taken care of their
problem, so that was the first good news on Wednesday.
Then at about 9:00 o’clock in the morning, which I think is rather
early, isn’t it, for demonstrations to start—
Mr. Waller: Much too early.
Mr. Roosevelt: By God about 9:00 o’clock in the morning they
started getting word from the Bazaar that there were crowds out and
that they were tearing the Iran Party Headquarters to pieces, that they
tore down “Bakhtar Emruz”, and I think this was [less than 1 line not
declassified].
Mr. Wilber: I wondered because one of the statements we got was
that that mob was headed by people from Zuhrkhaneh exercise clubs,
sport clubs, and [less than 1 line not declassified].
Mr. Roosevelt: We don’t know. We will find out in due course, but
we don’t know yet, but when their targets appeared we felt fairly confi-
dent that [less than 1 line not declassified] and they went after “Bakhtar
Emruz” which was the most virulent, and pro-Mossadeq, and anti-
3 See Document 269.
