December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
655
Prime Minister Rabin told me the first time I met him30 that Israel
wanted direct negotiations, diplomatic recognition, and a recognition
by Egypt of Israel’s security needs. Israel has achieved all of those
things now.
We have an interest in a relationship with Israel, and it is to our
mutual advantage, because it enhances stability in the region. We also
have an interest in good relations with Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan,
as well as others. We want to see Israel strengthened. If there is no
peace, if there is a reversion, and if the Arab world turns totally hostile,
then our help to Israel, will be seen as a threat to Egypt. We lived with
that in the past, and we can go back to that again. You know the domi-
nant role that Egypt can play in the Arab world. Egypt needs a stable
relationship with Israel, obviously. Saudi Arabia needs stability in the
Middle East. I don’t believe that there is a direct threat to Israel in the
near future, not for the next five, eight, or ten years. At the least, the
threat will not come from the military forces of Egypt, even combined
with Jordan and Syria. Israel can defend herself and would be able to
punish anyone who would threaten her. This alone should be able to
deter war. But after Iran, radical elements in the Middle East may be en-
couraged. I know for a fact that the major restraint on PLO activity has
been the influence of Egypt and the benign influence of Saudi Arabia.
They cannot fully control the PLO. I know about the bombs that go off
in Israel, but an Egypt-Israel accommodation would be a major stabi-
lizing factor and a restraint on radicalism, dissention, and revolu-
tionary Palestinian groups.
Sadat has never spent any time with me talking of an Israeli attack
on Egypt. But the major topic here today has been the idea that Egypt
will attack Israel. Sadat has proved that he wants peace for Egypt, not
just a temporary truce. There is no way to guarantee what happens
when we are all gone. I hope while you and Sadat are in office that the
treaty can be concluded. It will open up the way for a new Egyptian-
Israeli re-relationship, so that you can show the advantages of peace to
everyone. The advantages of trade, cultural exchange, economic ex-
change, and the beneficial influences of Israeli technology, the example
of democracy. This help reduces the risks of war. At present, Egypt has
a more benign relationship with Israel than it does with Syria. After the
treaty is signed, the euphoria of Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem and of the
Camp David agreements will be restored. This can evolve into a perma-
nent Egyptian-Israeli ties. I have never heard Sadat threaten Israel or
try to break off the negotiations. He has negotiated in good faith, as
have you.
30 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–
August 1978, Document 18.
