Non-Proliferation
819
provoke a much less dangerous nuclear arms race than the Pakistani-
Indian case.
Until now, the relatively long time lag between each new entry
into the nuclear club has eased the task of containing the resulting re-
verberations. The expanding list of states with large and growing
stockpiles of plutonium-bearing spent reactor fuel creates the potential
for a more destabilizing spread of nuclear explosive capabilities. While
it is true that the decision to traverse the nuclear threshold will be made
by autonomous political units, a chain reaction may be established as
each successive proliferating state anticipates the security implications
of the nuclear program of other states. Not only are “proliferation
chains” possible in specific regions (the Middle East, Latin America,
Far East), but nonsecurity motivations may also set them off across re-
gions—e.g., Brazil following Pakistan, Iran following Brazil—as as-
piring regional powers compete for international prestige and status.
The attitudes and policies of the major nuclear powers will
perhaps be the single most important determinants of the ultimate con-
sequences of the proliferation process. They have an obvious common
interest in preventing the nuclearization of regional conflicts that could
involve the superpowers in a serious confrontation. However, crosscut-
ting interests impair their ability to employ cooperatively the military,
political, and economic measures necessary to lessen the regional inse-
curities driving the resort to nuclear diplomacy. Paradoxically, Taiwan,
West Germany, Japan, and South Korea—to cite a few—are cases
where great power competition has led to a nuclear umbrella for
weaker allies that now serves to restrain further nuclear proliferation.
The challenge to US policy arising from the proliferation process
will therefore be twofold: to continue to slow the spread of nuclear
weapons and to cope with such additional proliferation as occurs.
Judgments advanced earlier in this discussion suggest that the first of
these tasks is likely to become increasingly difficult. And both tasks are
certain to conflict to some degree with other important objectives, such
as controlling the pace of conventional arms transfers, disengagement
from regional conflicts, and advancement of human rights. Hence diffi-
cult policy choices will be required.
The transfer of increasing quantities of sophisticated conventional
weaponry to LDCs may be necessary to deflect them from developing
nuclear weapons or, if that fails, from brandishing or using them once
they have been fabricated. US military capabilities may need to be in-
creased or reoriented to deal with new and more powerful potential
adversaries. Some longstanding tacit or explicit alliances may need to
be reevaluated in terms of the costs of association with or intervention
on the behalf of new nuclear states or their rivals. The adoption of any
or all of these courses of action may well interfere with other policy ob-
