Chapter 4, February–April 1990  569
that could be considered, and I just want to say that it’s not by mere 
chance that I said we need to think about different variants, different 
options, and different kinds of tradeoffs. We are continuing to look at 
this problem and I understand that the President might write a letter 
of reply to what he’s received from Gorbachev and I think it would be 
good if you were to bring such a letter when you came to Moscow. You 
could bring it to President Gorbachev and I would not rule out a solu-
tion on this issue at that time.
Baker: I understand that. Are you saying there might be some solu-
tion to banning MIRVed mobiles or at least substantially reducing them 
that might be different from what I gave you in Namibia and different 
from the response we just received from Gorbachev?2
Shevardnadze: Yes. Another variant is a possibility. There are some 
ideas we are working on. They have not jelled yet. But we are continu-
ing to look at this, and I think our ideas will develop in a short time.
Baker: That’s good to hear. It makes a difference in how we respond 
to the Gorbachev letter.
Shevardnadze: In Windhoek, I said it was very important that there 
be equivalence and equitable tradeoffs.
Baker: There are two things I want to raise and I want to make 
certain that there is no misunderstanding from yesterday. First, when 
I use the term deMIRVing I’m talking about a ban or a phased reduc-
tion in ICBMs with MIRVs. I understand that you, in the letter from 
President Gorbachev to President Bush, are willing to consider if it 
could be extended to all missiles, not just ICBMs. I don’t want there 
to be any misunderstanding about what I’m talking about—I am 
talking about ICBMs only. Maybe there is no misunderstanding but 
I just want to be sure that the record is clear about what it is I was 
referring to.
Shevardnadze: But you are speaking about deMIRVing of ICBMs of 
all types.
Baker: Yes. Another matter arose that is more troubling. And that 
really arises from the briefing I received on the papers3 that Marshal 
Akhromeyev gave to Ambassador Bartholomew last night. Our leaders 
set for us the goal of resolving all of the substantive issues in START 
by June. But I am seriously troubled by the approach on those papers, 
because they make it virtually impossible to achieve that goal. There’s 
at least two problems. Let me explain.
2 See Document 91.
3 See footnote 3, Document 96.
