786  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
against their own country out of their own lives and actions in support 
of Communist charges, etc.”
Page 22
Suggest second sentence, second paragraph, would be somewhat 
strengthened by insertion “public” preceding “information on local 
political and economic conditions, etc.”
Page 25
Suggest last sentence, penultimate paragraph, be reworded so as to 
make it clear it refers to rights of communication with U.K. Charge, etc., 
covered by Agreed Announcement and not right of release which is not 
“trivial”. Suggest some wording along following lines: “Most of them 
have even been denied the meager privilege of communicating with 
the United Kingdom Charge at Peiping and receiving visits from him 
pending their release as was provided for in the Communist pledge of 
September 10, 1955.”
Page 30
It seems to me we need to find some better conclusion than giving 
currency to the ostensibly plausible Communist proposition that there 
is a difference between those who have “committed offences against 
the law and those who have abided by the law”. As it stands I do not 
think that we make a convincing case for the valid conclusion of the 
last paragraph. My suggestion would be something along the follow­
ing lines as a substitution for the last three paragraphs:
“This commitment clearly applies to all Americans, and partic­
ularly to those in prison. As the Chinese Communists had finally on 
­September 6, 1955 agreed to grant exit permits to those Americans who, 
although not in prison, had up to that time also been denied permis­
sion to leave the country, only the cases of Americans in prison were 
under discussion at the time the Chinese Communists made this public 
commitment. It will be noted that the Announcement states and it was 
clearly understood that the Chinese Communists had committed them­
selves ‘further to adopt appropriate measures’ so that these remaining 
imprisoned Americans could ‘expeditiously’ return.
“Nevertheless the pattern of continued Chinese Communist efforts 
to use these innocent and unfortunate victims of Chinese Communist 
‘justice’ for political purposes is clear. On the date of the Announcement, 
September 10, 1955, and four days before making their demand for a 
meeting with the Secretary of State, the Chinese ­Communists announced 
the release of ten of these imprisoned ­Americans. On ­October 27, 1955, the 
date of the opening of the 4-­Power Foreign ­Ministers’ meeting in Geneva, 
and also the date the Chinese ­Communists embodied their demand for 
a meeting with the Secretary of State in a formal document, the Chinese 
Communists announced the release of two more imprisoned Ameri­
cans. On November 17, 1955, the day following the close of the 4-­Power
