370 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV been lost on the Soviets. They are embarked on a determined campaign both to increase their own projection capability and to deter or neutralize ours. Their increased emphasis on a quasi-­military role for the Soviet merchant and civil air fleets, the growth of long-­range offensive surface and submarine forces, growing amphibious capability, progress in wide-­body aircraft technology, and pressures to obtain access to ports and airfields in Third World countries are some of the key signs that the Soviets appreciate the utility of power projection and intend to narrow our lead. Additionally, the change in character of Soviet conventional forces, combined with Western dependence on imported oil, has expanded the area of potentially critical US/Soviet confrontation into a region—­the Persian Gulf—­which possesses little in-­place deterrent. Therefore, we believe it is essential to continue to modernize all aspects of US offensive and defensive power projection capability. Breakout Potential: US industries are clearly more efficient, productive, diverse and technologically sophisticated than their Soviet counterparts. On the other hand, the Soviet near term capacity to produce military hardware exceeds ours by a substantial margin. With a determined effort, there is no doubt that the United States could eventually overtake and surpass the Soviet Union if forced into an accelerated arms buildup. However, given their “running start” and the time it would take us to reorient, retool, and expand our military production base, the overtake point is open to some question. The decisive issue could be whether the nature of the race were a 100-­yard dash or a marathon. We believe this asymmetry in production base wields significant influence in the calculus of the strategic balance. 4. (S) Placing the above sobering military judgments into the broader context of the total power balance, the Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude: • The Soviet system has neither the political appeal nor the economic vitality of the United States; the USSR derives the majority of its influence in the world from the actual or potential use and deployment of its military power. • The Soviets have experienced political setbacks and reverses in their efforts to exert influence abroad where the application of military pressure (direct or proxy) was either inappropriate or foreclosed. • Although the Soviets traditionally have been very cautious in the direct use of their own military forces outside their immediate sphere of control, their present position of strategic nuclear equality, with accelerating momentum toward a margin of overall military superiority, could create further incentives for greater risks. We believe that the greater the Soviet perception of freedom of action in the military realm, the greater the danger that they might attempt to exert the leverage of military
