370  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
been lost on the Soviets. They are embarked on a determined campaign 
both to increase their own projection capability and to deter or neu-
tralize ours. Their increased emphasis on a quasi-­military role for the 
Soviet merchant and civil air fleets, the growth of long-­range offensive 
surface and submarine forces, growing amphibious capability, prog-
ress in wide-­body aircraft technology, and pressures to obtain access to 
ports and airfields in Third World countries are some of the key signs 
that the Soviets appreciate the utility of power projection and intend to 
narrow our lead.
Additionally, the change in character of Soviet conventional forces, 
combined with Western dependence on imported oil, has expanded the 
area of potentially critical US/Soviet confrontation into a region—­the 
Persian Gulf—­which possesses little in-­place deterrent.
Therefore, we believe it is essential to continue to modernize all 
aspects of US offensive and defensive power projection capability.
Breakout Potential: US industries are clearly more efficient, produc-
tive, diverse and technologically sophisticated than their Soviet coun-
terparts. On the other hand, the Soviet near term capacity to produce 
military hardware exceeds ours by a substantial margin. With a deter-
mined effort, there is no doubt that the United States could eventu-
ally overtake and surpass the Soviet Union if forced into an accelerated 
arms buildup. However, given their “running start” and the time it 
would take us to reorient, retool, and expand our military production 
base, the overtake point is open to some question. The decisive issue 
could be whether the nature of the race were a 100-­yard dash or a mar-
athon. We believe this asymmetry in production base wields significant 
influence in the calculus of the strategic balance.
4. (S) Placing the above sobering military judgments into the 
broader context of the total power balance, the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
conclude:
• The Soviet system has neither the political appeal nor the eco-
nomic vitality of the United States; the USSR derives the majority of its 
influence in the world from the actual or potential use and deployment 
of its military power.
• The Soviets have experienced political setbacks and reverses in 
their efforts to exert influence abroad where the application of military 
pressure (direct or proxy) was either inappropriate or foreclosed.
• Although the Soviets traditionally have been very cautious in the 
direct use of their own military forces outside their immediate sphere of 
control, their present position of strategic nuclear equality, with acceler-
ating momentum toward a margin of overall military superiority, could 
create further incentives for greater risks. We believe that the greater the 
Soviet perception of freedom of action in the military realm, the greater 
the danger that they might attempt to exert the leverage of military
