equivalent of a tael, comformably to the respective weights and legal
standards of each one of the eight gold currencies mentioned in the said
Article VI.; in other words, insofar as the franc is concerned, for each
Haikwan Tael owed to Belgium or to Spain or to France or to Italy, China
must pay 3.75 francs in gold or 3.75 × 0 gr. 290322 of fine gold.
In support of its definition of the words “in gold”, the Chinese note does not
present any argument except the assertion that the known reports of the
discussions between the Signatory Powers leading up to the Final Protocol
were favorable to the Chinese Government’s contention. The eight
Ministers are in a position to state that the reports of these discussions show
the unanimous desire of the Signatory Powers to give to the words “in gold”
the sense which they have set forth in the preceding paragraph. That is
confirmed, moreover, by the documents pertaining to this matter. It suffices
to call to mind the principal ones.
China having accepted the principle of the Indemnity on October 20, 1900,
the Powers concerned themselves on the one hand in making separate
estimations of the sums to which each one was entitled under this count and
on the other hand in fixing the total sum which could be paid by China
without hampering the progress of its Government and the development of
the country. This last sum was fixed, on May 7, 1901, at 450,000,000 Taels
by a letter from the Dean of the Diplomatic Body to the Chinese
Plenipotentiaries. It was less than the total amount of the individual
indemnities of the Powers which it was finally necessary to reduce. To
bring about these reductions, to subsequently settle their respective portions
of the total indemnity and finally to assure the just division of the arrears of
the total indemnity in the proportions to be agreed upon among themselves,
the Signatory Powers adopted gold as the basis of their calculations and the
payments to be received. They decided and China agreed that the indemnity
although expressed in Haikwan Taels was an indemnity “in gold” and that
the rate in gold of the Haikwan Tael should be fixed on a definite day. This
decision was transmitted to the Chinese Plenipotentiaries on July 30, 1901,
in the following terms: “The sum of 450,000,000 Haikwan Taels payable
‘in gold’ at the rate of exchange of April 1, 1901, at 4% interest, represents
the grand total of the indemnity demanded by the Powers. [”]
