National Security Policy  1157
Cold War. Unified Commanders have formulated plans and are 
active in assuring increasingly effective utilization of their resources 
in the cold war. MAAGS, missions, attaches, rotational forces, pre-­
stockage of equipment, exchange officers on military staffs and in mil­
itary schools, weapons demonstrations, show of force, official military 
visits and assistance in national disasters contribute to the over-­all cold 
war effort. In order to limit the Sino-­Soviet initiative in cold war, the 
United States must develop a broad range of capabilities whereby it 
may counter Sino-­Soviet Bloc and communist activities in many parts 
of the world. Portions of South America, Southeast Asia, the Middle 
East, and Africa are areas of particular vulnerability.
Mutual Security. In both limited and general war, a substantial 
contribution is expected from our allies. Military planning takes cogni­
zance of the limitations and capabilities of indigenous forces. Although 
our national security is predicated upon the concept of collective secu­
rity, the United States must continue to develop adequate strength and 
a strategy for its employment to deter or successfully wage war, sur­
vive as a nation capable of controlling its own destiny, and to maintain 
the leadership of the Free World.
Summary. Statements in previous annual reports and evaluations 
by the JCS recognized the probable diminishing relative military advan­
tage of the United States vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union. From the position 
we occupied with a great manned bomber fleet supported by a sub­
stantial stockpile of nuclear weapons, at a time when the Soviet Union 
was very limited in long-­range bombers and nuclear weapons, it was 
to be expected that our margin of advantage would certainly decrease. 
The statements referred to seem less appropriate today, as our over-­all 
military power continues the greatest in the world.
Our task is to maintain our effective retaliatory capability and to 
improve our ability to defeat or contain local aggressions. The probable 
strength of the Soviet Union in ballistic missiles calls for major effort 
on our part to increase the survivability of our retaliatory strike forces. 
This need has given emphasis in our programs to increase warning, 
quick reaction, dispersal of bombers, and hardening, mobility and con­
cealment of missiles.
In last year’s report it was stated that by the end of FY 1962, with a 
continuance of present U.S. and Soviet trends and programs, and with 
no major breakthrough, each side may be expected to possess military 
strength of potentially decisive proportions. It concluded that in such 
a situation an advantage, possibly conclusive, could accrue to the side 
taking the initiative. Although this is possible, the progress made in 
our programs referred to above, to make certain the survival and read­
iness of effective retaliatory power, gives reasonable assurance that in
