1048  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
a We evaluate this program as “probable” with varying degrees of confidence concerning detailed characteristics. Each missile listed will probably go through 
various stages of development which are not necessarily reflected in this table. We estimate that considerable energy will be expended on second generation 
longer range missiles, particularly on an ICBM of greatly improved operational characteristics. [All footnotes are in the original.]
b Date at which one or more series produced missiles could have been placed in the hands of trained personnel in one operational unit. In the case of the ICBM, 
it is the date on which a few—say 10—series produced missiles are in the hands of one or more trained units at existing launching facilities.
c Generally a ballistic missile can be fired to ranges as short as approximately one-­third the maximum operational range without serious increase in CEP and 
to even shorter ranges with degraded accuracy.
d CEP is the radius of a circle within which, statistically, one-­half of the impacts will occur. Inherent missile accuracies are somewhat better than the accuracies 
specified in the table which take into consideration average degradation factors. The accuracies specified are approximate figures which we apply to all ranges 
to which the missiles are likely to be fired.
e The type of warhead employed with Soviet ballistic missiles will vary with the specific mission of the missile. In general, however, we believe that for mis­
siles with maximum ranges of 350 nm or less, high explosive (HE), nuclear, or chemical warfare (CW) warheads will be employed in accordance with Soviet 
military doctrine, depending upon nuclear stockpiles, missile accuracy, character of the target, and results desired. We estimate that for missiles with ranges 
of 700 nm and over, only nuclear warheads will be employed, although we do not exclude the possibility of CW use in 700 nm missiles for certain limited 
purposes. We believe that the USSR is capable of developing techniques for missile dissemination of biological warfare (BW) agents, although we have no 
specific evidence relating BW and missile research and development. In view of operational considerations we consider BW use in ballistic missiles unlikely, 
although possible for certain special purposes.
f The Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of the Navy, believes that an IOC date of not earlier than mid-­1960 should be used 
for planning purposes. The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, agrees that it is prudent to assume for planning purposes that 
the IOC had occurred by 1 January 1960, but believes that the Soviets actually had only an emergency capability at that time. See footnotes to paragraph 3.
g The current missile is believed to employ an ablative rather than a heatsink nosecone. A reduction in warhead weight would permit a greater range or the 
incorporation of penetration aids in the nosecone.
SUMMARY TABLE IV—Continued
