August 8–September 17, 1978
73
with Begin. The President remarked that he felt Sadat was considering a
rather drastic move about a month ago.
Ambassador Eilts noted that there will be two critical dates coming
up. In October there will be the renewal of UNEF, and then in No-
vember there will be the anniversary of his trip to Jerusalem.4 Sadat is
turning over in his mind what he should do if there is no movement.
He will find it difficult to acknowledge that his peace initiative has
failed. He may grasp at anything to keep it alive. He has confidence in
the President and he looks to him for guidance. He has said that he
would not let him down. That will give us scope to work with to pre-
vent a failure. If the results of Camp David are inadequate, then pres-
sures will begin to build at home and from within the Arab world. The
Saudis might want him to acknowledge the failure of his initiative, and
then there would be pressures for reconciliation and an Arab summit.
Sadat knows that the United States is the only country that can help
achieve peace. The Saudis basically share the same goal of reaching
peace. They have some influence in Egypt because of the aid they pro-
vide. If Sadat decides to go the route of Arab reconciliation, there could
be a summit within a couple of months. He could keep the peace
process alive by going to the United Nations and calling for a resump-
tion of the Geneva Conference,5 but if that were to fail, Sadat would in-
creasingly look to the option of war. Egypt is not now ready for this and
it will take time. Israel is stronger than in October 1973. The step that
would be taken prior to preparing for war would be reconciliation with
the Arab world. Neither Sadat nor Gamasy wants war. The losses
would be high. They might have to take the risks, but they do not want
it.
Secretary Vance stated that if no agreement is reached on the
deeply substantive problems, but if Sadat feels that the American posi-
tion is fair, he might agree to a renewal of the no war pledge in return
for a freeze on settlements. Ambassador Eilts agreed that a fair state-
ment of the U.S. position might lead Sadat to reiterate his no war posi-
tion. Ambassador Lewis felt that Begin would not agree to a freeze on
settlements in return for a no war pledge, since Egypt was already com-
mitted to a peaceful resolution of differences in the 1975 Sinai II agree-
4 See footnote 3, Document 4.
5 The Geneva Conference was first established in December 1973 to find a compre-
hensive settlement to the Arab-Israeli dispute. President Carter attempted to reconvene
the Geneva Conference in 1977, but came to view bilateral negotiations between Egypt
and Israel as the avenue to an eventual settlement following Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem in
November 1977. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January
1977–August 1978.
