740
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
itation on arms purchases. In August, Mexico hosted a meeting of all
but three Latin American countries to extend this commitment on re-
straint to the entire region and to begin to develop concrete ways to
carry it out.
As you know, we have also been actively pursuing this issue with
the Soviet Union. In our last round of bilateral talks with the Soviets in
July, we made considerable progress in defining a framework for re-
straint in conventional arms transfers, which provides, among other
things, for the development of general criteria that could guide the ac-
tivities of both suppliers and recipients in their arms transfer activities.
The Soviets also indicated that interim restraint arrangements are pos-
sible where regional conditions are favorable. It is my judgment that
this framework, if agreed upon among a number of suppliers and re-
cipient nations, can provide the basis for working toward genuine re-
straint, thus slowing the pace of East-West competition in the arms
trade.
Neither we nor the Soviets, however, contemplate a purely bilat-
eral solution to the problem of arms transfers. Proceeding on the basis
of the UN SSOD program of action, we are exploring ideas for practical
discussions on restraint arrangements between suppliers and recip-
ients. In this regard, the Soviets have also asked US to come to the next
meeting in December prepared to discuss ways of involving other
major suppliers who seek solutions to this problem, as well as means to
achieve practical discussions between suppliers and recipients.
I believe, therefore, that the time is right to try building further
upon the approach which you outlined at the UN Special Session.
Thus, I would like to propose that representatives of our two gov-
ernments undertake further discussions, designed to explore the possi-
bilities of supplier and recipient cooperation in support of efforts for re-
straint. These talks could most usefully take place in concert with the
British and Germans, and I am writing in this vein to Jim Callaghan and
Helmut Schmidt. Of course, I would also welcome separate discussions
with your government, either before or after a four-power meeting.
I am particularly mindful of the practical problems which arms re-
straint would pose for individual supplier nations. The arms trade does
not exist in a vacuum, but is also related to weapons production for
national defense and our common security; to national balances of pay-
ments; to arms trade among nations in the Western Alliance; to fos-
tering national technological bases that will help sustain civilian econ-
omies; and to our common security concerns in the developing world.
At some point, these issues will also need to be considered, if we are to
ensure that no supplier nation is to bear a disproportionate burden.
In view of the complex factors involved, including the differing na-
tional interests and perceptions of suppliers and recipients, it will not
be easy to achieve an international regime for arms restraint, even for a
