Arms Control and Disarmament  1279
would give good assurance of obtaining electromagnetic data on shots 
as [text not declassified]. Data on U.S. high air bursts is, of necessity, 
very limited. It does indicate that the electromagnetic signal strengths 
from high altitude tests are considerably smaller than from surface 
tests. However, the electromagnetic signals [text not declassified] were 
obtained at ranges of 1350 miles and 2400 miles, respectively.
It is, therefore, recommended that an installation of about 30 electro­
magnetic stations co-­located either with seismic or acoustic stations (see 
Figures 10 and 11) would permit taking maximum advantage of the elec­
tromagnetic technique. Since the technique does not provide indepen­
dent detection at the present time, its purpose would be to strengthen 
acoustic and seismic evidence of a clandestine test. In about one year 
improved sorting techniques may permit independent detection by the 
electromagnetic component and correspondingly increase its value.
It should be noted that relatively simple gamma ray shields of lead 
or water surrounding the bomb will prevent detection at useful ranges 
by the electromagnetic system. For example, there was a calculated 
and measured attenuation of the electromagnetic signal by a factor of 
[text not declassified] for the U.S. test which was shielded by water. [text 
not declassified] The signal strength, at long range detection distances, 
would thus be reduced well below the detectable limit.
d. Nuclear Sampling. The nuclear sampling network required to 
detect radioactive clouds from tests of 1 kiloton or larger in the USSR and 
China introduces a requirement to intercept air masses emanating from 
tests in this area at all altitudes from the surface to 50,000 ft. The difficulty 
of this problem arises principally from the fact that clouds from tests in 
the very low kiloton range have been observed to be no more than a few 
thousand feet thick. Setting up a picket line to insure interception of all 
such clouds by sampling aircraft is obviously impractical. It is estimated 
that a daily air filtering effort along a meridian at 135°E, at altitudes 
of 10,000, 20,000, 30,000 and 40,000 feet would provide ample coverage 
of air masses emanating from tests in both the USSR and China. Tests 
conducted near the east coast of these countries would produce clouds 
which would still be relatively small in extent as they pass the flight 
lines and would have the greatest chance of escaping detection. Clouds 
from tests further inland in Asia would be stretched out to considerably 
greater lengths and permit a greater chance of detection.
Several months after a moratorium on testing nuclear devices has 
been in effect the analysis of nuclear debris samples would become 
considerably more sensitive than they now are for the detection of 
fresh nuclear debris, since background levels from old debris would 
be considerably reduced. As a result, smaller samples would still pro­
vide significant radiochemical analyses. The number of disintegra­
tions per minute of 2.7-day Mo99 at various times after detonation is 
given in the following table for a sample size of 107 fissions, a rough
