1956 1185 glad hear anything you able say this morning that would explain this apparent contradiction. 2. Wang replied after listening my statement on question renun­ ciation force he could find nothing new. With regard April 19 draft which I had again referred to in statement, it already repeatedly been rejected by their side. They could not agree to unreasonable demand contained in April 19 draft. That precisely because they could not agree to any division their territory by foreign state or forces, and could not agree any intervention by any foreign power in their internal affairs. He presumed that if in his position I would also adopt same attitude this regard. 3. Wang said he very surprised to hear my references to state­ ments of leading members his government with regard liberation Taiwan. As they had consistently announced in past it entirely matter China’s internal affair as to means by which she liberated Taiwan. They would never allow any other people interfere as to by what means China achieved liberation Taiwan as they had all along made clear it entirely within framework China’s internal affairs as to what means she used in liberating Taiwan and they had also made clear existing tension in Taiwan area was international issue between China and America. These were two entirely separate matters and there was substantive difference between them, as had consistently been made clear by them in past, and therefore confusion of two matters not permissible. 4. Wang pointed out as he had already in past, that my side had on one hand persisted in demanding an infringement of his country’s sovereignty insofar as question renunciation force concerned and this been cause failure reach agreement. On other hand my side had evaded discussion question lifting embargo so no result been achieved regard their proposal on lifting embargo. In spite this their side still will­ ing seek appropriate amelioration insofar as existing practical issues between two countries concerned. 5. Continuing from prepared statement Wang said, it belief his side that removal now of artificial barriers hindering human contacts and cultural exchanges would contribute to removal barriers and relaxation tensions, and was thus fully in accord desires two people. They considered that desire American journalists come to China for news coverage and desires Chinese and American theatrical compa­ nies was practical feasible and justified. He therefore proposed two of us make agreed announcement this respect. His specific proposal was as follows (here he read text draft announcement telegraphed sepa­ rately). He was sure text made it quite clear announcement entirely reasonable. He was ready to listen to anything I had to say with regard this proposal. He handed me text.
