3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
894
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ployment was being discussed, he was aware of the possibility that it
would raise concerns on the part of the Soviet Union and thus had
made it clear to the Saudis and publicly that the planes were strictly for
Defensive 3. He assured Dobrynin that both our naval movements and
the AWACS deployment were thus done strictly in preparation for con-
tingencies which we hoped would never arise.
8. Dobrynin asked whether the U.S. was discussing with other
countries the creation of some joint flotilla. The Secretary responded
that we had no concrete idea in mind for keeping open the sea lanes,
and that the situation might never go beyond the discussion stage. As
he had said we saw the risk diminishing at present. We had no desire to
get into the Persian Gulf with our naval forces and hoped the region
states would patrol the Gulf and keep it open.
9. Dobrynin commented that the U.S. already had a sizeable
strength in the area and asked why, if we saw the risk diminishing, it
was necessary to continue to beef up our naval forces there. This served
only to increase tensions, he said. The Secretary responded that the Ira-
nians had a continuing ability to disrupt the flow of oil. While we did
not want the contingency to arise where we would need to act to pro-
tect the oil flow, we could not act as though the risk did not exist.
10. Continuing his argument, Dobrynin stated that the Secretary
had earlier in the conversation spoken of the need for mutual restraint.
But after his conversation with Gromyko the U.S. had sent an addi-
tional carrier to the area—an action he implied showed lack of restraint.
The Secretary pointed out that Iran had displayed an inclination to in-
dulge in irrational acts; the U.S. was already the victim of one such act.
It was impossible to know what role Iran might see for the hostages, or
what it might perceive as the best way of bringing pressure on Iraq.
11. Asked by Dobrynin for his general impression of the present
military situation, the Secretary responded that it appeared to be stabi-
lized at a containable level but that the conflict might be a prolonged
one. The Iraqi Foreign Minister had told him their objectives were lim-
ited, though there had been subsequent movements into Iran. It was
possible Iran could force a stalemate and thus the Iraqis faced a di-
lemma—whether to sit where they were or to take some additional ac-
tion. If they choose the latter, the next steps in the conflict would be
unpredictable.
12. Dobrynin asked whether it was true, as he had heard, that the
Secretary had advised Iraq not to move its aircraft into other states of
the region. The Secretary responded that he had not discussed this with
Iraqi Foreign Minister Sa’dun Hammadi except in terms of the possi-
bility that the conflict could spread. He had told Hammadi that if it did,
other nations would have to decide how to respond, and the Soviet
Union would then have to decide its own reaction—especially if insta-
