1230
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
When Harriman and Young drafted their cable to Vance on behalf
of the delegation, they were not aware of your recent action clarifying
your earlier decision on cutoff. As Secretary Vance points out, that clar-
ification should be sufficient to reassure the delegation that they will
have sufficient flexibility on this issue at the Special Session.
Tab 1
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter5
Washington, June 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Special Session on Disarmament
Ambassadors Young and Harriman have reported to me that the
success of our efforts to ensure a positive UN Special Session on Disar-
mament, as well as to protect our non-proliferation interests, may
hinge on our response to the desire of non-nuclear weapons states for
firm negative security assurances and a commitment in principle to
explore more steps to achieve nuclear disarmament. Both of these
demands reflect general commitments we made under the Non-
Proliferation Treaty in return for the promise of other states not to ac-
quire or develop nuclear weapons. I support the suggestion of Ambas-
sadors Young and Harriman that you review our position on these two
issues.
All of the other nuclear weapon states have stated their readiness
to offer additional assurances to non-nuclear weapon states or have al-
ready done so, and the non-nuclear weapon states have strongly urged
that we do so. We risk being isolated on this issue, even from some
close allies. Prime Minister Callaghan told the Session that the UK
wants to agree with other nuclear weapon states to give such assur-
ances. I urge you to reconsider your decision on this matter.
Ambassadors Young and Harriman and I suggest that the United
States be prepared to state agreement with the language of our pro-
posed negative security assurance that had received general inter-
agency (JCS however remained hesitant) and Allied approval last
month. It would clearly strengthen the delegation’s hand on a major
SSOD issue. How it is implemented will be important, particularly with
the Federal Republic of Germany and Republic of Korea. I believe it
5 Secret.
