430 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement should draw up a charter for the effort, showing just who would participate—­i.e., from what agency, having what qualifications—­ whose time would be devoted to the effort, and who would comprise the top-­standing body. To indicate the need for a competent body in this area the President cited the importance of a periodic inspection of the inspection system and operations incident to supervision of suspension of atomic weap­ ons tests. Dr. Kistiakowsky added the point that everything to this point has been done on paper. He thought there was need for a high-level com­ mand (actually a task force) under the Joint Chiefs of Staff whose job would be to conduct monitoring and inspection, carry out maneuvers and tests against various combinations of forces and develop the neces­ sary doctrine. The President thoroughly agreed. Dr. Killian recalled that our group at Geneva had proposed that we set up in the United States a small pilot system to see just how the proposals would work. Dr. Killian next said that there is a group studying ways of improv­ ing the inspection system for the supervision of test suspension, thus offsetting the effects of the findings of the Hardtack II series of tests (which indicated that the test system devised last summer at Geneva is less effective than was then thought). The President said he saw possi­ ble merit in a scheme which allowed underground tests up to perhaps 10 KT. A corollary would be, however, that we would have to tell if test shots greater than this size were fired. Dr. Killian next referred to some of Dr. Kistiakowsky’s impressions and observations about the Soviet missile capability, since these impres­ sions ran counter to our best intelligence estimates. Dr. Kistiakowsky said he was very much impressed with the importance that the Soviets attach to long-­range ballistic missiles. These are in fact a focal point in their whole defense concept. They referred to it as a special area not sub­ ject to discussion at the Geneva meeting. He said it is his opinion that they now have an operational long-­range missile force. The President said he could accept this possibility, but still holds a question as to the numbers and accuracy of such weapons. He then asked the question, if the Soviets should fire these weapons at us, where this action would leave them. They would still be exposed to destruction. In his mind there is the question whether this is a feasible means of making war; he granted that it is a feasible way of destroying much of the nation’s strength, but the resulting retaliation would be such that it does not make sense for war. He said he thought it would be at least a few years before the Soviets could conceivably have enough missiles so as not to have grounds to fear retaliation. A.J. Goodpaster Brigadier General, USA
