August 8–September 17, 1978
205
President’s Daily Diary; Carter, Keeping Faith, pages 398–399) There,
Carter presented Begin with a set of photographs taken at the summit
and signed by Carter and Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat with per-
sonal dedications to Begin’s grandchildren, mementoes Begin received
emotionally. In an entry in his personal diary, Carter noted that the epi-
sode represented a “turning point” in Begin’s attitude toward reaching
a peace agreement “from obdurate objections to an obvious desire to be
successful.” Begin asked Carter to step inside his cabin, where he in-
formed Carter “he was sorry, but there was no way he could accept the
Jerusalem letter from US to Egypt. I told him we had submitted a new
version of it, told him to read it over, and call me and let me know what
he decided.” Begin replied that he would telephone in “about fifteen
minutes” and Carter returned to the Aspen Lodge, he noted, “very de-
jected.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 242)
Upon returning to the Aspen Lodge, Carter recorded in his per-
sonal diary: “Sadat was there, and we went over the entire text of the
Sinai and the West Bank/Gaza framework.” (Carter, White House Diary,
page 242) According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with
Sadat and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance from 3:40 to 6:10 p.m. (Carter
Library, Presidential Materials) Carter noted in his diary: “Sadat made
a few minor suggestions which I knew would suit the Israelis.” (Carter,
White House Diary, page 242) According to the President’s Daily Diary,
Begin telephoned at 3:57 p.m. and spoke briefly with Carter. (Carter Li-
brary, Presidential Materials) Carter summarized the call in his per-
sonal diary: “Begin called to let me know that they would accept the Je-
rusalem letter, which removed the last major obstacle with Israel! [Or
so I thought].” (Carter, White House Diary, page 242)
While making arrangements to return to Washington, Barak deliv-
ered to Carter Begin’s draft of the West Bank and Sinai settlements lan-
guage, which, Carter noted, “was completely unsatisfactory and in vio-
lation of what they had agreed the night before.” (Carter, White House
Diary, page 242) Begin telephoned Carter at his cabin and informed the
President that “he could not accept my language on the Knesset vote,
because he interpreted it as a threat to the independence of the parlia-
ment.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, page 400) Following their conversation,
Vice President Walter Mondale informed Carter that Begin was then
meeting with Sadat at the latter’s cabin. In his personal diary, Carter
described subsequent events:
“I ran out the front door, and Begin was just leaving Sadat’s cabin
in a golf cart with Barak. Begin was quite happy, saying they had had a
love-fest, and that Sadat had agreed to Begin’s language on the Knesset
vote. I knew this was wrong, and every time I asked Barak to tell me ex-
actly what Begin and Sadat had said, Begin would interrupt him and
