444
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
A Possible Scenario
The substance of our negotiating position remains as you approved
it to be given to Waldheim January 13 (Attachment 3).4 The issue is
how to construct a series of steps which can lead to the release of the
hostages and to a resolution of those U.S.-Iranian issues which must
be resolved.
We would operate on the assumption that it continues to be desir-
able to have a variety of approaches to the Iranians, especially Khomeini
if he is well enough. A number of contacts tell us that no one can ask
Khomeini to do something; it is necessary to create a situation which
he analyzes as ripe for a certain step. Several prominent figures are
already planning visits to Tehran. As part of this process, various
visitors to Iran would concentrate on two points: (1) the need for a
decision to release the hostages or at least to remove them to more
humane conditions in custody of responsible authorities; (2) the need
to help publicly in Iran to change the climate of opinion. These people
would not have a mandate to negotiate on our behalf. Most of them
are already in the process of trying to go to Tehran. They would include:
—Any representatives of the Islamic Conference who decide to
approach the Iranians.
—Mohammed Heykal can meet with Khomeini if he is well enough
and the captors in our compound as well as with Bani Sadr.
—Andy Young could also presumably see both.
—Sadiq al Mahdi would go with significant Islamic credentials
and can see Khomeini.
The following steps are an elaboration of Approach 2 above, taking
into account suggestions made by our French contacts. They are devel-
oped as a controlled set of steps so each step contains a move by each
side and the process can be stopped before the next step begins if Iran
does not do its part.
—Step 1 would be a combination of moves designed to confirm
with President-elect Bani Sadr as well as with Ghotbzadeh that an
agreed channel for managing a scenario exists and that a decision has
been made on both sides to make a series of reciprocal moves that could
lead to a resolution of the current problem:
—Ghotbzadeh has responded to the Jordan/Saunders trip to Lon-
don by sending the French lawyers to Washington with tangible evi-
4 Attached; printed as Document 137.
