644 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement The President then brought up the matter of a recent Air Force pro­ motion list which had been sent to his desk. The promotion of the five officers involved (to three star general) would have resulted in exceed­ ing current vacancies; however, the recommendation had included no notation to that effect. As a corollary to this matter, the President expressed the opinion that there are too many high ranking slots in all three Services. He told the story of a colonel in North Africa who had recommended his own promotion to brigadier general on the basis that he could not do his job as a colonel. When informed that he could then be sent home, the officer changed his mind. Further, the President pointed out that he had been a three-­star general with a five-­star British admiral under his command. General Twining stated that they are working on a study in this connection and will make recommendations in the near future. He rec­ ognized that the President had normally been prompt in signing pro­ motions, and had recommended in the strongest terms that under such circumstances any promotion should be accompanied by an analysis of the necessity for exceeding the quotas and a complete presentation for the President. General Twining had stated that the President should not be hit cold on these matters. The President admitted that he had been somewhat shocked by the fact that there had been no indication on this promotion list that the quotas had been exceeded. * * * The President now brought up the matter of publicity in connection with our defense posture. Specifically, he has been advised by General Persons that the American public should know more about missiles and armaments. In order to give proper publicity in this matter, General Persons feels that we should do something a little different. Speeches are inadequate. Accordingly, it has been recommended that the President make a trip to a Strategic Air Command base, to Cape Canaveral, and to a NIKE site, and at each location, he should make an appearance to the press and attempt to give some understanding of what our defense struc­ ture is all about. Accordingly, he requests a restudy of our public infor­ mation policies on the part of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to determine what type of facts the President might give out under these circumstances. General Twining, while he expressed approval of this scheme, pointed out that facts and logic are often wasted when the opposition employs tactics similar to those of Senator Symington on the matter of airborne alert. While testifying before Congress, General Twining had been asked by Senator Symington how many aircraft were on air­ borne alert that particular day. There had been a recent exercise which involved an airborne alert in SAC, but that exercise having been ter­ minated, General Twining so advised Senator Symington. As a result, Senator Symington had made a great issue of this matter to the effect that
