Bulgaria
263
independent role, and specifically would like to upgrade relations with
the US. End summary.
3. Following the Ambassador’s meeting with Mladenov reported
reftel, Ambassador Gotsev (Chief of MFA Fourth Department responsi-
ble for relations with US and Western Europe) arranged a private
luncheon tete-a-tete with the Ambassador. In an unusually open and
frank discussion, Gotsev emphasized the Bulgarian leadership’s desire
to raise substantially the level and range of its relations with the US.
He stated that Mladenov, himself a member of the Politburo, had
in advance discussed with President Zhivkov his meeting with the
Ambassador, and had been authorized to seek closer political and
economic ties with the US. Mladenov considered the Ambassador’s
return to Washington for consultations at this juncture as the best
opportunity to make an authoritative probe of the American reaction,
and he was awaiting with interest whatever the Ambassador would
be able to bring back by way of a response. Following his meeting
with the Ambassador, Mladenov had told Gotsev: “I hope the Ameri-
cans realize that I have extended my hand, and grasp it.”
4. Gotsev commented that the US was of course the most important
country in the world. Bulgaria enjoyed very close ties with the Soviet
Union, and had no wish to change that relationship. At the same time,
some of the Bulgarian leaders, including Zhivkov as well as Mladenov,
wished to increase the role which Bulgaria herself plays in world affairs.
They had no illusions as to the limited role which a small country
could aspire to. Nonetheless, Bulgaria’s role in the Balkans could be
of some significance to the US as well. Moreover, while Bulgaria had
been extending its political contacts and economic ties with other West-
ern countries, in particular the FRG and increasingly Japan, this had
not so far developed with respect to the US.
5. Gotsev stated that some members of the Bulgarian leadership
were frankly skeptical as to whether the US shared an interest in
improving relations. Also, some members of the leadership through
their own particular experience represented in effect “a (West) German
lobby” and a “Japanese lobby”—there was no “American lobby” yet.
He commented that whenever a major trade deal with a Western part-
ner was being decided upon by the leadership, Zhivkov would ask
about the quality of technology compared with that of the US; while
differences obviously existed among various advanced countries, the
basic benchmark was normally taken to be the US.
6. Gotsev stated that despite Bulgaria’s close economic relations
with the Soviet Union, and with other members of Comecon, there is
a potential for increased economic ties with the West—and preferably
with the US. The Bulgarian leadership was not at all satisfied with the
stagnation of Bulgarian-American trade at a relatively low level and
limited scope.
