1218 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement 27. The Junta Patriótica. Having functioned successfully as the clandestine coordinating committee of the four parties conspiring to overthrow the Pérez Jiménez dictatorship (AD, COPEI, URD, and PCV), the Junta Patriótica has come into the open and has enlarged its membership to include representatives of all social groups, including labor, students, the Church, and the business community. The Junta’s concern is to preserve that spirit of “national unity” among civilian elements which is deemed essential to prevent a recurrence of military dictatorship.7 Its sanction is its capability to renew the general strike which brought down Pérez Jiménez, a capability which it demonstrated anew during the Castro León crisis in July and again in September. 28. Organized Labor. Labor unions are an important political force in Venezuela, although less than ten percent of the labor force is organized. The principal unions are concentrated in the chief urban areas and the oilfields. AD, COPEI, URD, and the Communists have all been active in labor leadership; most unions are affiliated with one or another of those parties. Conversely, the parties are highly sensitive to labor sentiment. 29. The Pérez Jiménez regime took severe repressive action against most AD, COPEI, and URD labor unions. In contrast, its attitude toward certain Communist unions was relatively lenient: they were even allowed to maintain open contact with the CTAL and WFTU, Communist international labor federations, throughout the period of the dictatorship. The Pérez Jiménez regime also employed “former” Communist leaders in the government-sponsored unions with which it sought to replace those which had been suppressed. The explanation given was that these Communists were useful informants. It is also notable that the regime feared Acción Democrática more than it did Communism and was willing to use Communist hostility toward AD for its own ends. Many AD labor leaders in exile gained further experience working against Communism for ORIT.8 30. The favor of the Pérez Jiménez dictatorship temporarily improved the Communists’ relative position in Venezuelan labor leadership. Since the fall of the dictatorship, they have been able to exploit this advantage. However, it was the surviving AD-­sympathetic unions which took the lead in organizing labor resistance to the dictatorship, and, with the return of AD and COPEI labor leaders from exile and prison, these unions have regained the leading position in the labor 7 In this the Junta has before it the example of the Liberal and Conservative parties of neighboring Colombia which, despite a long history of often bloody mutual antagonism were able to combine to put an end to military dictatorship and to re-­establish democratic constitutional processes. [Footnote is in the source text.] 8 Organisacion Regional Interamericana de Trabajadores, the anti-Communist competitor of the Communist CTAL in Latin America. [Footnote is in the source text.]
