Human Rights —To begin the lengthy process of strengthening the international institutions (including the UN and its commissions, the IFIs and the regional human rights organizations) so that ultimately they can become the primary focus of international human rights activity. We have partially met this objective. The UN and OAS commissions are vastly improved and some progress has been made in gaining support in the IFIs. There is still a long way to go. Recommendation: That you use the attached paper to background the press at the time of the December 6 White House human rights event.5 Attachment Paper Prepared in the National Security Council6 Washington, undated Human Rights Performance: January 1977–December 1978 Over the past two years the human rights situation worldwide has improved but in several countries deteriorated. Worldwide trends indicate significant patterns of change. Since January 1977 there have been human rights improvements in 41 countries where 2½ billion people live. Most of these countries, however, still have less than good human rights records. In at least 10 countries, the standards of human rights have declined, affecting almost half a billion people. On a regional basis, these changes have been noted: —Yugoslavia’s human rights record is by far the best in Eastern Europe and it has improved in the last year. Hungary has improved on such issues as emigration, family reunification and travel. Human rights abuses have increased in Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union’s record has deteriorated, although the regime has apparently liberalized its Jewish emigration policy. —There have been a few changes in human rights practices in the Middle East over the past two years, although some improvements have been noted in Morocco, the Sudan and Syria. —Although many of the nations of East Asia and the Pacific region have found themselves at odds, to varying degrees, with U.S. human rights policy, improvements have been evident in South Korea, the Phil- 5 See Document 176. 6 No classification marking.
