1346 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement levels and rates of nuclear weapons development (we ahead and they catching up), and fact our policy more responsive to people. To carry out above suggestion, immediate start could be made by official statements interpreting fully for layman nature and degree genetic and other effects radiation based on reports National Academy Sciences and Radiation Committee. Attitude displayed these statements should deplore any damage caused people of world and future gener­ ations, and show desire give balanced interpretation in terms mean­ ingful to average man. Believe dismissal as “negligible” has become counter-­productive. Additional helpful step would be prompt and regular publication worldwide fallout data. Understand US in best position do this. Since widespread irrational fear partly based on lack of factual information, believe putting matter on route basis of common knowledge would dispel honest fear and defeat alarmists. Believe US can gain much by fully backing up Radiation Commit­ tee and scientific conclusions in its report, thereby showing our respect for scientific truth and at same time putting whole issue in reasonable perspective. Believe timing these steps urgent in view July release report, obser­ vation nuclear test, and forthcoming debates radiation, testing, and dis­ armament issues. Lodge 325. Memorandum for the Files by Spiegel (S/AE)1 Washington, May 3, 1958 The following are my comments on USUN 1259: I realize that we are on a “sticky wicket” with respect to the fallout problem. I do not believe, however, that a “change in public posture” on the hazards is called for. I fail to see how our position can be charac­ terized as being “apologetic” for fallout. I believe that if anyone takes the time to read carefully Dr. Libby’s remarks and reports such as the one issued by the AEC’s Advisory Committee on Biology and Medicine 1 Source: Comments on U.S. position on fallout. Confidential. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Atomic Energy Files: Lot 57 D 688, Fallout.
