involved is not too complicated, I am disposed to telegraph for the desired authority in accordance with the suggestion contained in the concluding paragraph of Instruction No. 552 of February 11th last. As to section (g), the Austrian Government adheres to the view that it would be preferable to retain only so much of the text of the original draft as is embraced in the following words, to wit: “Salesmen who vend directly to the consumer shall not be considered commercial travelers.” Dr. Schüller does not himself, however, object seriously to retaining the original phraseology of section (g) as proposed by the Department if the United States especially wishes its retention, but he thinks that the provision especially enumerating peddlers would be surplusage in view of the Austrian policy with respect to peddlers explained on page 16 of my beforementioned despatch No. 374. To sum up, section (c) is inacceptable to the Austrian Government. The Austrian Government prefers that section (g) be modified in the interest of clarity as hereinbefore explained, but will not stand out against the retention of the original draft. If section (c) be omitted a relettering of some of the sections of Article XI will, of course, become necessary as the Department suggests in its before-mentioned Instruction No. 527. Article XII. The Austrian Government takes note that the United States accepts the amendment proposed by it to section (c), namely to strike out everything after the semi-colon in line 5, so that the paragraph will read as stated on page 9 of the Department’s Instruction No. 527. The proposal of the United States to insert the words “or other competent authorities” in the third line of the second paragraph of section (b) of Article XII after the word “officials” and to strike out the word “customs” in the ninth line of this same section, so that the section as amended will read as set forth on page 10 of the Department’s Instruction No. 527, is accepted. Article XV. As a result of considerable discussion and explanation and in the interest of uniformity the proposal to substitute for the first paragraph of Article XV the first paragraph of Article XVIII of the Treaty with Germany,
