March 27–December 31, 1979 909 —an outright freeze on the autonomy negotiations; —public announcement of an extreme, “final” Israeli position on autonomy which would torpedo the negotiations; —a rash of new settlements in sensitive areas; —measures which would further tighten the Israeli hold on East Jerusalem, such as the transfer there of more GOI offices; —a law providing for the blanket acquisition of land when needed for settlement in the territories; —approval of the right of Israelis to purchase land in the territories; —additional moves toward the annexation of the Golan. 10. We cannot assume that concern over Israel’s relationship with Egypt will necessarily inhibit such GOI moves. Those Cabinet members who would advocate this kind of sharp Israeli riposte believe that Egypt’s own interests dictate continued adherence to the peace process. The issue would be played as U.S. support for a Palestinian state and a threat to Israeli security; it would be argued that any resultant damage in the Egypt-Israel relationship could in any case be contained. For its part, the Labor opposition is unlikely to have a moderating effect on the Israeli reaction. It has already expressed its concern over the new U.S. approach to Res. 242, although it has placed responsibility on the Likud for mishandling the issue, damaging both the U.S.-Israeli relationship and Israel’s political position. 11. A “minimal” resolution. We do not know if a resolution that uses Camp David-style language such as “legitimate rights” or “participation in determination of their own future” and does not posit Palestinian national rights would be acceptable to the Arabs. As far as the Israelis are concerned, such a resolution would not be seen as much better than the maximal language. The initial reaction is likely to be not much different than that to a “maximal” resolution, but as long as the U.S. stopped short of endorsing a Palestinian state explicitly or implicitly, we believe Israel would be inclined to refrain from the most provocative actions. Still, our support of or failure to block even a “minimal” resolution would have a traumatic effect on Israelis and seriously damage U.S. credibility. The wound on the Israeli psyche would be a long time healing. 12. Softening the blow. There is little we can do to soften the blow in Israel should we either endorse or abstain on a Palestinian rights resolution. There is no way we will avoid a crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations. Aside from a few cheers from the ultra-dovish side of the Israeli political spectrum, our bringing the PLO into the peace process will not be seen as a constructive act by the Israeli Government or public. Indeed, it is this eventuality that they most fear. And even if they recognized it
