March 27–December 31, 1979
909
—an outright freeze on the autonomy negotiations;
—public announcement of an extreme, “final” Israeli position on
autonomy which would torpedo the negotiations;
—a rash of new settlements in sensitive areas;
—measures which would further tighten the Israeli hold on East
Jerusalem, such as the transfer there of more GOI offices;
—a law providing for the blanket acquisition of land when needed
for settlement in the territories;
—approval of the right of Israelis to purchase land in the
territories;
—additional moves toward the annexation of the Golan.
10. We cannot assume that concern over Israel’s relationship with
Egypt will necessarily inhibit such GOI moves. Those Cabinet
members who would advocate this kind of sharp Israeli riposte believe
that Egypt’s own interests dictate continued adherence to the peace
process. The issue would be played as U.S. support for a Palestinian
state and a threat to Israeli security; it would be argued that any resul-
tant damage in the Egypt-Israel relationship could in any case be con-
tained. For its part, the Labor opposition is unlikely to have a moder-
ating effect on the Israeli reaction. It has already expressed its concern
over the new U.S. approach to Res. 242, although it has placed responsi-
bility on the Likud for mishandling the issue, damaging both the
U.S.-Israeli relationship and Israel’s political position.
11. A “minimal” resolution. We do not know if a resolution that
uses Camp David-style language such as “legitimate rights” or “partic-
ipation in determination of their own future” and does not posit Pales-
tinian national rights would be acceptable to the Arabs. As far as the Is-
raelis are concerned, such a resolution would not be seen as much
better than the maximal language. The initial reaction is likely to be not
much different than that to a “maximal” resolution, but as long as the
U.S. stopped short of endorsing a Palestinian state explicitly or implic-
itly, we believe Israel would be inclined to refrain from the most pro-
vocative actions. Still, our support of or failure to block even a “min-
imal” resolution would have a traumatic effect on Israelis and seriously
damage U.S. credibility. The wound on the Israeli psyche would be a
long time healing.
12. Softening the blow. There is little we can do to soften the blow
in Israel should we either endorse or abstain on a Palestinian rights res-
olution. There is no way we will avoid a crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations.
Aside from a few cheers from the ultra-dovish side of the Israeli polit-
ical spectrum, our bringing the PLO into the peace process will not be
seen as a constructive act by the Israeli Government or public. Indeed,
it is this eventuality that they most fear. And even if they recognized it
