September 1953–December 1954
949
allowed to delay the program or to divert its funds to private pockets or
unproductive ventures. Moreover, the desired political effect will not
be obtained unless special care is taken to assure sufficiently broad par-
ticipation in the benefits of these projects.
44. The Shah and Zahedi appear convinced of the need for an effec-
tive development program and have some capable men associated
with them in this effort. However, the problems ahead cannot be solved
without effective US and UK guidance and support. Given such guid-
ance and support, the Economic Planning Council may be able to
commit the government to worthwhile projects which, though unpop-
ular with certain vested interests, would be difficult for subsequent
governments to repudiate. Iran will also have continuing need for tech-
nical assistance in carrying out projects in the field.
45. Finally, while the economic development programs currently
envisaged should eventually result in a significant increase in over-all
output and a rise in the general standard of living, Iran will continue to
be plagued by recurrent economic and financial problems which will
require firm government action. Unless carefully managed, the devel-
opment programs may themselves contribute seriously to inflationary
pressures.
46. In general, however, Iran will probably make some gradual
and uneven progress in improving its economic position. Both public
and private foreign trade is likely to increase, particularly in view of the
strong and growing desire of Japan, Germany, and Italy to participate
in the Iranian market. Barter trade with the USSR may increase in abso-
lute terms, though its relative importance is likely to decline in view of
Iran’s expanding relations with the Western world.
III. Military
47. Iran’s present armed forces, numbering over 150,000, are orga-
nized primarily for control of the tribes and other internal security
duties.7 Their traditional loyalty is to the Palace rather than to the gov-
ernment as a whole, and all but the Gendarme´rie report directly to the
Shah as Commander-in-Chief rather than through any civilian min-
ister. The recent uncovering of a widespread Tudeh ring within the
armed forces indicates that they have been vulnerable to subversive in-
fluences. However, most of the currently disloyal elements appear to
7 The Iranian armed forces consist of a conscript army of 120,000; a Gendarme´rie or
rural police force of 20,000; and a small Air Force, Navy, and Frontier Guard, the latter for
border patrol and customs duties. The Air Force, Navy, and Frontier Guard are subordi-
nate units of the Army. The Gendarme´rie is under the control of the Ministry of the Inte-
rior, except in time of war, when it comes under Army command. [Footnote is in the
original.]
