Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
121
Christopher and repeated the need to distinguish between kinds of mil-
itary governments.
David Aaron suggested joining the two agreed approaches—the
movement toward globalism and establishing a closer affinity with de-
mocracies—by a Presidential trip to selected democracies, say in Latin
America as well as in Africa or Asia.
Aaron also said that if we are going to be sincere about moving
toward a global approach, we must make clear that our policies with
respect to democracies or repressive regimes must be the same in Latin
America as in Africa or Asia. Given the special constituencies in the
U.S., that would not be easy. We will have to go out of our way to do
that.
Human Rights
Christopher said that it was very important for us to stay com-
mitted on our policy on human rights, but at the same time, we must
explore affirmative ways to express our policy.
Solomon said that we should work with Congress to make clear
why they should not be thinking about a Latin American policy on
human rights. He and Christopher agreed on the need to obtain more
discretionary authority and make more relevant distinctions in the ap-
plication of our policy. If we define gross violations as torture or de-
grading treatment, instead of denial of due process, then we only single
out seven–ten countries rather than 60–80. Then, we can have some
impact.
Todman said that we should look at aid as a way to improve
human rights conditions in very poor countries. For example in coun-
tries like Haiti, violations of human rights occur often because of im-
poverished conditions, and it does not make much sense for us to cut
off aid in these circumstances.
Arms Transfers
Christopher asked whether the United States, as a declining source
of arms to Latin America, is justified in adopting a special policy on
arms transfers to Latin America.
General Brown reminded everyone that in the early Kennedy
years we tried to get Latin American governments to shift defense ex-
penditures to nation-building, but as sovereign states, they just turned
to other sources to buy arms. As long as they are going to buy, he pre-
ferred that they buy from us rather than the Russians.
Sloss from ACDA said that we must approach this problem glob-
ally at both ends. Discuss it with the Soviets and with other suppliers,
and at the same time urge restraint by purchasers. If this does not work,
he is inclined to agree with George Brown.
