Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  333
opportunities to build confidence and enhance predictability, by pro-
tecting against the risk of technological surprise.
— The U.S. likewise would urge the Soviet side to pursue the U.S. 
concept for building confidence with regard to the testing of space-­
based ABM systems based on other physical principles and their com-
ponents capable of substituting for ABM interceptor missiles. The U.S. 
assurance of October 28, 1988, and U.S.-­proposed notification measures, 
are designed to build confidence that testing is not creating a cover for 
prohibited deployment and is not a base for a territorial defense.
— The U.S. space-­based sensors proposal is a practical means to 
solve the verification problems posed by advancing technology for 
such sensors.
47. Finally, Cooper said, the U.S. position remains that a START 
Treaty should not be held hostage to a defense treaty. A key premise of 
the ABM Treaty was that it would be soon followed by implementation 
of significant limitations on and reductions of strategic offensive forces. 
This did not take place. Instead, Soviet strategic weapons had increased 
four-­fold, and U.S. weapons two-­fold. Thus the U.S. will not pay again 
for a START Treaty with new limits on defenses, Cooper concluded.
48. Grinevskiy thanked the U.S. side for such a broad presentation 
of its position. Nazarkin proposed that the sides begin with the neg-
ative and end with the positive; Bartholomew countered that it was 
better that way than the reverse.
49. Nazarkin said Cooper had presented a gloomy picture of the 
situation concerning the negotiations and the ABM Treaty. Nazarkin 
agreed with that assessment; unfortunately the situation was at a dead 
end. But Nazarkin absolutely disagreed with the reasons Cooper had 
given; he categorically rejected the accusations against the Soviet side 
for creating this situation and being against constructive dialogue. 
Nazarkin said that in his experience when accusations began, that 
meant that the side making the accusations was not interested in a solu-
tion; the Soviet side had other interests and therefore had no interest 
in making accusations against the U.S. side. The Soviet side wanted to 
search for a solution. Nazarkin hoped that in Wyoming the sides would 
be able to exchange opinions and jointly find a way out of a situation 
where they were really talking past each other. But for that a joint effort 
would be required and not accusations.
50. Cooper said that while he agreed in general with Nazarkin’s 
appraisal of the D&S negotiations, he did not agree that things were at 
a dead end. Cooper said he had gone through the specifics of the U.S. 
position, including the need to clarify the Washington Summit joint 
statement, which the sides agreed should be the foundation of a D&S 
Treaty. He had only pointed out that the fact that there was no JDT 
was due to the Soviet side’s refusal to include U.S.-­proposed language
