National Security Policy  67
quo and to divide and weaken the alliance; Soviet leaders have made it 
perfectly plain that a loosening of the Soviet grip on East Germany and 
the other satellite countries will not be permitted. In the unlikely event, 
however, that the USSR should make a serious proposal for a com­
plete mutual withdrawal from Germany—­especially if coupled with 
an unequivocal assurance against Soviet re-­entry, and with a specific 
US guarantee—European reaction is likely to be more favorable. As 
modern weapons development progresses, the European governments, 
and the West German government in particular, may come to believe 
that withdrawal of US forces from Germany and German withdrawal 
from NATO would no longer represent a critical loss to NATO’s overall 
strength. The time may come when they would be willing to pay this 
price for the withdrawal of Soviet forces from a broad central European 
area, even without a simultaneous agreement on German reunification, 
in the hope that reunification and a general detente would follow in 
due course.
45. General Prospects. In the internal politics of Western European 
countries, there seems generally to be taking place a gradual shift of the 
political center of gravity toward the left, but it is not so great a shift as to 
be likely to produce strongly leftist governments—­certainly not popular 
front governments. During the next few years center parties, where they 
are predominant, may be obliged to rely more extensively upon socialist 
support; socialist parties, where they are in power, will need to pursue 
moderate policies in order to retain power. While these shifts seem to 
presage somewhat less responsiveness to US influence and somewhat 
greater interest in social programs at the expense of military programs, 
they are not likely to produce major changes in foreign outlook.
46. The coming into effect of recent agreements for European 
economic integration appears likely to enhance political and military 
cooperation among the continental countries. Already France, West 
Germany, and Italy are more closely concerting their foreign and mili­
tary policies, and this trend is likely to continue. However, the schemes 
for economic cooperation and the European atomic community are 
not likely to mature fully for many years. A number of important and 
complex issues have yet to be resolved, including the extent to which 
concessions to special interest groups—­particularly in France—­may 
exert a restrictive influence on the cooperative effort. In addition, the 
problem of assuring preferential British access to the continental mar­
ket in a way which will not damage Commonwealth ties or upset the 
carefully negotiated arrangements among the continental countries is 
likely further to complicate relations between these countries and the 
UK. Nonetheless, these developments reflect a strong European desire 
to make integration a reality, and the US will probably be dealing with 
a more unified continent than in the past.
