378
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
They began by presenting me with the English version of the formal
request of extradition for the Shah from the Iranian government.6 They
said that now it was publicly known that such a request had been
made, and in spite of their public statements that they did not intend
to extradite the Shah, they had a legal process which could not be
ignored; that if they attempted to ignore it, it would only play into the
hands of the students and leftists in Panama who were using the Shah’s
presence in Panama to try to bring down the government and Torrijos.
I prepared myself for a long discussion about the Shah and the
problems that he was causing the Panamanians, but from that point
on the entire conversation focused on the hostage situation and their
hope that this new information might be helpful to their early release.
Marcel began by giving me a detailed chronology of the past couple
of weeks. He said that in late December two men presented themselves
in Panama as representatives of the Iranian government. They pre-
sented letters from the Foreign Minister requesting the formal extradi-
tion of the Shah from Panama. They also issued a verbal invitation for
the Panamanians to send back to Iran with them a personal representa-
tive to meet with the Foreign Minister. The Panamanians sent Marcel
and Romulo Escobar back to Iran with them.
The two men—who I will call Mr. X and Mr. Y7—now live in
France and are longtime friends of Mr. Ghotbzadeh. Mr. X has known
the Ayatollah Khomeini for ten years. He practices law in France.
Mr. Y is an Argentinian who was formerly associated with the Peron
government. He also is a longtime friend of the Foreign Minister.
Traveling with these two men, the Panamanians traveled to Iran,
arriving last weekend. They had four separate meetings with the
Foreign Minister. The other two men accompanied the Panamanians
to these meetings and seemed to Marcel to be on very close terms with
Ghotbzadeh. Their meetings with the Foreign Minister took place right
after the Waldheim visit so Marcel has some information and reports
on Ghotbzadeh’s attitude that are interesting and possibly relevant.
They met with the Foreign Minister on Sunday, January 6th from
10:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. and later that same day from 8:00 p.m. to 8:45
p.m. On Monday, January 7th, they met with the Foreign Minister from
10:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. and later that afternoon from 4:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m. They made much of showing me their schedules, appointment
books, etc., to convince me that they had seen the Foreign Minister
and had spent this much time with him. Based on all that I saw and
heard, I believe that they did. Marcel also took copious notes of those
6 See Document 109.
7 Mr. X is Christian Bourguet; Mr. Y is Hector Villalon.
