793.00/54: Telegram [Document 521] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, July 2, 1925—10 a.m. [Received July 3—5 p.m.] 255. Department’s 125, July 1, noon;1 123, June 27, 3 p.m.;2 my 249, June 26, 4 p.m.;3 my 238, June 20, 3 p.m., paragraph 2. 1. Simultaneously with presentation of identic note, reported in my 247, June 24, 6 p.m.,4 Chinese Government brought note to senior minister5 stating its willingness that negotiations respecting the Shanghai incident take place Peking but setting forth 13 points which the Chinese Government considered should be the basis for such negotiations. Even with the most sympathetic attitude towards the Chinese Government’s desires in the matter these points entirely unacceptable. They include matters not even germane to precise question to be decided, such as arrangements between employer and employee, dismissal of an official against whom there is no charge but that of having an irritating manner, and the like. 2. Through the senior minister the Heads of Legation concerned have informed Foreign Office that the 13 points for reasons above stated could not seriously be considered as affording basis for negotiations. 3. When the senior minister so acquainted the Minister for Foreign Affairs, latter stated that the two notes of June 24th must together form basis for anticipated negotiations. That is, Shanghai negotiations must include question of readjustment of treaty relations between China and the powers. Minister for Foreign Affairs still maintains position despite efforts by Monsieur Cerruti to show scope of our negotiations of necessity could not include the question of readjustment of treaty relations which we had referred to our respective Governments. The Chinese Government have asked Messrs. C. T. Wang, W. W. Yen and Admiral Tsai Ting-kan to constitute committee to negotiate with French and Italian Ministers and myself on behalf of interested diplomatic representatives. Heads of Legation have drafted agenda for negotiations which now being submitted to Chinese Government. 4. C. T. Wang has called upon me informally to ascertain my ideas regarding scope of the anticipated negotiations. He stated that without any doubt the
