Yugoslavia 825 developments since your visit to China last fall. The central question remains the problem of Taiwan, which is an issue with significant domestic aspects in each country. —On Korea, we believe that our publicly stated policy contains certain elements of flexibility, and we continue to watch for some sign of movement from the other side. We remain firmly committed to the security of South Korea, and we will not take actions which would result only in tactical gain for the North at the expense of the South. —We have seen signs that some of the states which traditionally support the North may have suggested that Pyongyang consider a more flexible approach to the resolution of questions which contribute to the tense atmosphere on the peninsula. —Has the North’s approach to the situation changed in any way? For example, would they be willing to support moves toward contacts between their supporters and the South in exchange for reciprocal moves on our part, as we have proposed? —What measures could supporters of both Koreas take to stimulate a resumption of the dialogue between North and South Korea? 253. Editorial Note At 10:30 a.m. on March 7, 1978, President Jimmy Carter welcomed Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito to the White House with an arrival ceremony on the South Grounds. In his welcoming remarks, Carter called Tito “a remarkable man,” someone “who has understood for a long time our own Nation’s commitment to détente and the true significance of this misunderstood word.” Carter also underlined that “the independence and the territorial integrity of Yugoslavia is one of the basic foundations of world peace now and in the future.” In his remarks, Tito stressed the “continuing, successful, and comprehensive development of relations” between the two countries in “the already established principles of independence, sovereignty, mutual respect, and understanding.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pages 473–475) Following the welcoming ceremony, Carter and Tito, as well as the Yugoslav and U.S. delegations, met in the Cabinet Room for the first scheduled meeting between the two Presidents. No record of the conversation has been found. The Department summarized the visit in telegram 67384 to Belgrade, March 16. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780116–1326) The Yugoslav side prepared a transcript of the conversation which was found in the Archives of
