723.2515/1634: Telegram
[Document 232]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 12, 1925—6 p.m.
For Pershing: I called in Chilean Ambassador today and read him my telegram to
Ambassador Collier of Oct. 10, 6 p.m. Ambassador Mathieu agreed with construction
of award and its legal effect as stated to Collier by me in telegram referred to, and
expressed gratification that I had authorized our Ambassador in Chile to make such
statement to Minister for Foreign Affairs. He then said that it was his opinion that
trouble had arisen from Peruvian agitators on the Ucayali who had fomented trouble,
and that great mistake of Chileans had been to respond in kind, and that they had done
so fourfold.
Ambassador Mathieu then said that in present political situation in Chile, for
Government to withdraw the Chilean forces from the province would be very difficult
if not impossible. The civil parties had at last all agreed upon a single candidate for
Presidency.66 Candidate of the military party had been withdrawn, showing that Chile
is succeeding in subordinating military to civil control. But situation is still very
delicate and military would deeply resent action of withdrawal as reflection upon them;
he felt that precisely same end could be reached by keeping army in the provinces but
by confining them to their barracks; then they could cause no difficulty.
The Ambassador referred to the carabineers, police, etc., stating that trouble lay not
with individuals of minor rank but with those higher in scale. He named two who were
certainly implicated in what had been taking place, and said that while they are good
fellows, they are only second or third-rate men, and desired to acquire credit for
themselves by winning plebiscite. He thought that if Chilean Government would
remove them and appoint first-rate men in their places who would have respect and
confidence of all concerned, trouble from minor officials would immediately cease.
The very fact that first-rate men should replace two high provincial officials would
show minor officials they would have to change their tactics, and new appointees on
taking office would also make fact plain to them. He said that of course these men
could not be thrown out of office in brutal sort of way, but should be permitted to
resign as of own volition stating that as they had lost confidence of Peruvians and of
American Commission they did not wish to stand in way of well-known desire of
