300 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 101. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Vest) to the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake)1 Washington, January 26, 1978 Your Meeting with Czechoslovak Ambassador Jaromir Johanes, Friday, January 27, 2:30 p.m. PARTICIPANTS The Director, S/P Phillip S. Kaplan, S/P James H. Glenn, EUR/EE Jaroslav Johanes, Czechoslovak Ambassador to the United States SETTING Ambassador Johanes recently indicated to Jim Glenn, EUR/EE, at a reception that he would soon begin a series of courtesy calls on various high-level officials of the Department of State and of other executive agencies. His call on you is the first of this series. Since requesting an appointment with you, he has requested similar appointments with Secretaries Blumenthal and Kreps.2 He has not indicated an interest in discussing any specific subject during these calls. We do not expect that he has anything new or extraordinary to discuss with you. Rather, we speculate that he simply wants to extend his personal contacts with U.S. officials, or that he is testing us to determine if we are willing to extend to him the same degree of access to U.S. officials which we have been pressuring his Government to extend to our Ambassador to Czechoslovakia, Thomas R. Byrne. ISSUES 1. Human Rights and the Implementation of the Helsinki Final Act Essential Factors: The Czechoslovak Government last October convicted and sentenced four dissidents, including three signatories of 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers, S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–Jan 1981, Lot 82D298, Box 11, Classified Correspondence, 1978. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Glenn; cleared by Schmidt. Luers initialed the memorandum for Vest. No record of the meeting has been found. The Ambassador’s first name was corrected by hand in the subject line. In a handwritten note, presumably to Leo Reddy, the Secretariat Staff Director, S/P staff assistant Mary Ann Casey remarked: “LR—PK [Phillip Kaplan] will ask desk do memo. TL says ok if desk sits in w/PK. PK will ask desk & let you know. TL wants reschedule appt for next week or week after so won’t conflict w/for. pol. report. Pls let PK know new date. I will meet on whatever new date is. MAC.” (Ibid.) 2 In telegram 49472 to Prague, February 25, the Department informed the Embassy that Ambassador Johanes, having failed to secure a meeting with Secretary Blumenthal or Secretary Kreps, decided to cancel his appointments at Treasury and Commerce. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780088–1267)
