12  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
more ships. I would defer one attack submarine and two patrol frigates. 
And I would cut back on some experimental ships.
Dr. Brzezinski: There are political reasons for continuing with the 
attack submarine.
Secretary Brown: In a number of cases, the political and the man-
agement/efficiency factors are on opposite sides. In this first cut, I 
have proceeded only on management grounds. We will get the political 
input later.
President Carter: I would like to make our decisions on a non-­
political basis, but I’m not naive. The question is how to give the nation 
maximum security on X number of dollars—­that should be our con-
stant, single criterion. If domestic or international political interests are 
involved, we need to understand when we are yielding on a political 
basis. That is my realm. If we yield to the Congress or to a foreign coun-
try, I need to know what the trade-­off is. Let me be the one to say we 
can cut defense capacity on political grounds. Of course, I may have to 
do it.
Secretary Brown: That’s why I did it this way.
President Carter: Good.
Secretary Vance: With regard to the B–1, the arms control decisions 
can make the case. You should look at the other alternatives before 
making any decision.
President Carter: That’s why I need to understand the consequences 
of procurement, deferral or slow-­down. As we talk to the Soviets, their 
understanding that the B–1 is still alive is a major factor. The Soviets 
perceive the B–1 and cruise missiles as a real threat. A commitment to 
the B–1 would indicate to the Soviets that we are still committed to 
the triple method. If I were Brezhnev, I would want to understand the 
ultimate intentions of the US. I plan to put all possible pressure on the 
Soviets this spring and summer to get substantial mutual reductions. 
We should keep the option on the B–1 open as long as we can. I don’t 
know the advantages and disadvantages yet.
Secretary Vance: On cruise missiles, we are making a major commit-
ment to go ahead.
Secretary Brown: There are 250 in the total R&D program. We are 
committed to developing some kind of cruise missile. But we can shift 
from one to another—­from air to land to sea. All options can be kept 
open.
President Carter: Also nuclear and non-­nuclear.
Secretary Brown: The non-­nuclear missile is much further off. There 
are tougher guidance programs. We are committed to develop some 
but not necessarily deploy them. And we’re not committed to one or 
another developed use. They’re not unique now.
