(b) It is the citizenship of the firm that the commercial traveler represents, and not his own, that governs the issuance to him of a certificate of identification. The High Contracting Parties agree to empower the local customs officials or other competent authorities to issue the said licenses upon surrender of the certificate of identification and authenticated list of samples, acting as deputies of the central office constituted for the issuance and regulation of licenses. The said officials shall immediately transmit the appropriate documentation to the central office, to which the licensee shall thereafter give due notice of his intention to ask for the renewal or transfer of his license, if these acts be allowable, or cancellation of his bond, upon his departure from the country. Due notice in this connection will be regarded as the time required for the exchange of correspondence in the normal mail schedules, plus five business days for purposes of official verification and registration. The paragraph as herein amended is included in the Treaty signed with Hungary (Article XII) as well as in the Treaty with Germany (Article XV). In the Treaty with Esthonia a most favored nation clause relating to commercial travelers (Article XIV) was agreed upon in lieu of articles corresponding to Articles XI and XII of the draft submitted to Austria. The United States and Salvador are parties to a special convention relating to traveling salesmen, signed in 1919 (3 Treaties, Conventions, etc., 2826, Treaty Series No. 651, 41 Stat. 1725), and consequently no articles are included in regard to them in the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights signed February 22, 1926. No question has been raised in regard to Article XIII other than that considered above in connection with Article VIII and none has arisen in relation to Article XIV. The Department’s views in regard to the questions that have been raised by Austria in regard to Articles XV and following, as well as in regard to such further questions as it may decide to ask to have considered in relation to Article VII and its views concerning the results of your negotiations on Articles I to VI inclusive, as reported in despatch No.
