Article VI. As intimated on page 11 of my despatch No. 374 of December 18, 1923, I have always regarded the fate of this article as more or less turning on the final wording of Article V. Dr. Schüller feels none too happy about Article VI, but he was visibly affected by my assurance that Germany and Hungary had accepted it. I was able to show him this provision, chapter and verse, as printed in Treaty Series No. 725 containing the treaty between the United States and Germany. He agrees that the article as proposed by the United States may be incorporated in the instant treaty. This I regarded as most gratifying because it obviates any exchange of notes which the Government of the United States regards as distinctly prejudicial to its interests. Recurring now to Article I. Dr. Schüller finally agreed to waive the request that paragraphs (A), (B) and (C) as set forth on page 2 of Department instruction under reference, be incorporated in Article I. I do not think that he attaches as much importance to provisions of this character as do some of his associates. (See, for example, my despatch No. 1030 of May 4, 1926, and Department’s instruction No. 477 of June 18, in reply thereto,77 in relation to the repatriation of one Oscar Rosenfeld. This is one of several cases which have been the subject of correspondence between the Foreign Office and this Legation in recent months, and is typical.) Dr. Schüller seemed to be more anxious to cut off possibility of the Austrian Government being confronted with a demand of costs incurred on behalf of indigent and mentally deranged Austrian nationals, and also for costs incurred for the burial of dead paupers. I gather that this has been a rather fruitful source of controversy between Austria and some of the Succession States. In some cases I am informed, understandings exist under which the states affected assume charge of their indigent and deranged nationals at the frontier. I felt at liberty to assure Dr. Schüller that the Austrian Government was not likely to be confronted with demands of this precise character from the Government of the United States; that it was contrary to its practice to insist upon the deportation of indigent and deranged nationals of other Powers found within its borders, unless such nationals came within the purview of the deportation provisions of the immigration law. It is possible that Dr. Schüller’s agreement to drop the provisions (A), (B) and (C) may
