Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
721
145.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 1, 1980
SUBJECT
Foreign Policy Discussion (U)
I think it would be useful if in the informal group discussion you
took Senator Muskie through the following process:
1. Outline to him your fundamental approach to world affairs and
the key principles of your foreign policy.
2. Indicate to him very clearly the central guidelines that you have
set on some key issues. This is essential to avoid new disputes and zig-
zags. The world must understand that there is constancy and conti-
nuity in Washington and that we are not entering into a new grand de-
bate. (You might give him your State of the Union message2 to read and
tell him that this is where you stand.)
3. Focus on those genuinely important issues that do require a
policy review and new decisions. Indicate the preparations needed and
our approach to upcoming key events (a calendar is attached).3
4. Run through more quickly the remainder of the U.S. foreign
policy agenda (as per the attached papers).4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 38, Memcons: President: 5/80. Secret. There is no indication that the President saw
the memorandum. On May 3, the President met with Brown, Brzezinski, Muskie, Aaron,
Christopher, Owen, Tarnoff, Lake, Newsom, and Read at Camp David from 9:05 a.m. to
12:02 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) A record of
this meeting is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Sub-
ject File, Box 38, Memcons: President: 5/80. In his diary entry for May 3, the President
noted that the participants had “discussed the relationship between State and the NSC,
Defense, the White House, and Congress. I emphasized that I wanted to work with the
deputy and assistant secretaries in State so I could have some benefit from their pro-
posals, other than just to have a conglomerate watered-down, lowest-common denomi-
nator recommendation—which has always been the case. It became more obvious as we
discussed the situation that Cy had been bogged down in details and captured by the
State Department bureaucracy. Everyone felt good after the meeting, and it resolved a lot
of problems that could have been handled a long time ago had Cy been willing to let
anyone penetrate the State Department shell.” (White House Diary, pp. 424–425)
2 See Document 138.
3 Not attached.
4 Attached but not printed are 11 papers: “The USSR,” “Western Europe,” “Middle
East (less Persian Gulf,” “Iran Crisis,” “Security Framework—Southwest Asia,” “Latin
America and the Caribbean,” “East Asia,” “Defense Posture in Support of Foreign
Policy,” “Global Issues,” “Economic: International Energy,” and “Economic: North-
South.”
