1979 629 considerable warning of their intentions, and could be the basis for launching our missiles upon warning of the follow-­up ICBM attack. He also noted that the systems dash capability responded to the concerns about catastrophic security breakdown that had been expressed by the PRC in the previous meeting on this issue. He suggested that while we could leave it out and thus save about $1B in the cost of the trench system, he would not want to see the system cancelled later for lack of such a capability. (S) With respect to verification of the system, Bill Perry said that within several hours any trench can be opened up enough to allow the Soviets to see that it contains only a single missile transporter; uncovering the trench completely might take a day. The trench could be left open several days, and as many as 10 to 20 percent of the trenches could be open at one time—­opening could be done on a regular schedule or in response to Soviet requests. The key to this verification scheme is arranging the deployment area so that missiles and transporters cannot be brought in and taken out between surveillance opportunities. In response to questions by Warren Christopher, Secretary Brown noted that we would need to ask the Soviets to open any mirror-­image system perhaps once per year, and that given a reasonable Soviet design, we could deal with the amount of cloud cover encountered over the Soviet Union. (S) George Seignious asked what we would do if the Soviets responded to our deployment with a different system. Secretary Brown commented that no US system solves this problem—­the real issue is: does our action say that the Soviets can deploy something that is not verifiable? (S) At several points in the meeting Dr. Brzezinski asked questions about the possibility of designing the system to run on the surface using a large road vehicle. This would allow it to move out of its shelter complex if sufficient warning were available and achieve even higher levels of survivability. Secretary Brown responded that without strategic warning, the system would be far tougher to kill inside its shelter complex than on the surface trying to disperse. He also argued that use of the M–X or mostly-­common missile implies a transporter with a gross weight of roughly a million lbs. This would require special roads within the deployment area which would have significantly greater environmental impact than the covered trench. Finally, he noted that while the system might have greater survivability in some scenarios, its ability to move outside the designated deployment area would raise verification concerns. (S) Dr. Brzezinski noted our apparent willingness to spend billions to protect this force from bolt-­from-­the-­blue attacks, and questioned whether we wouldn’t regret being confined to our trenches if the Soviets
