Chapter 2, January–June 1989  25
an end-­game issue, the development of consensus on a U.S. position 
will be contentious and should start now.
Paul Nitze will be providing you in a separate memo his thoughts 
on START, including options for the ICBM force, and Defense and 
Space issues.
Tab 2
Paper Prepared in the Department of State9
Washington, undated
Defense and Space
Our current D&S position is designed to retain the ABM Treaty 
until strategic defenses prove feasible, to allow U.S. testing meanwhile 
under the “broad” interpretation, and to lay the groundwork for Treaty 
termination and ABM deployment after a “non-­withdrawal” period 
of 8–10 years. It also proposes mutual agreement to end ABM treaty 
restrictions on testing and deployment of sensors (“sensors go free”); 
and we have declared unilaterally our right to do limited testing in 
space of certain ABM weapons during the nonwithdrawal period.
This approach is questionable on several grounds. It has caused 
deadlock with Congress, gridlock in the negotiation and has little Allied 
or other support. Moreover, we are arguably protecting testing options 
we do not intend to exercise (but the Soviets might): SDIO plans no 
space-­based weapons testing—­or other activity requiring the “broad” 
interpretation—­until at least 1996.
Thus, the review needs to consider:
— What SDI program makes sense technically and would be sup-
ported by the Congress.
— What objectives to pursue in future negotiations with the Soviets 
on Defense and Space.
Conclusion: The broad/narrow issue has, on balance, been a hin-
drance to SDI. We need to re-­focus our efforts on practical steps to 
1) achieve consensus with the Hill, 2) keep SDI on track, and 3) achieve 
some common ground with the Soviets (who have shown some inter-
est in loosening ABM Treaty restrictions on sensors and testing). The 
answer may lie in agreement with the Soviets on what specific space-­
based ABM tests the two sides can conduct without reference to broad 
9 Secret; Exdis.
