March–August 1953 627 said ‘if situation so bad’ they willing ‘get rid’ of Mossadeq but they would insist Mossadeq be replaced by some member Natl. Front. Makki urged that decision be delayed until after 30 Tir (21 July) anniversary Qavams effort overthrow Mossadeq. C. At private interview with Mossadeq 12 July, latter told Massoudi, the publisher of Ettelaat: (1) ‘very angrily’ that Eisenhower letter ‘did not hurt Iran, but it did hurt American prestige in Iran, very much.’ (2) The govt. ‘is prepared’ for mass demonstrations expected 30 Tir (July 21). (3) That Mossadeq has no intentions of going to Majlis 14 July for scheduled interpellation because ‘they (the opposition) want to kill me.’ Instead Mossadeq plans close Majlis and call for public referendum. Source commented: Eisenhower letter has had tremendous impact and Parliament press people and foreign policy now turning against Mossadeq. His position is most critical of career. Only weapon left to him is power of arrest. I expect mass arrests of opposition to begin from 14 July. Any attempt by Mossadeq to close Majlis ‘sure’ to alienate deputies; ‘They don’t want to lose their jobs and positions of influence.’ 2. Following received from station 13 July: “Current developments possibly affecting plan: 1. Mossadeq threatening dissolve Majlis and hold referendum. 2. National Movement Fraction reported believe govt. must answer interpellation but to avoid joining opposition on this issue are rumored preparing resign or absent selves from Majlis. 3. Mossadeq possibly to ‘permit’ demonstrations which would be anti-American in character. 4. Within 48 hours Mossadeq will go on radio and take case to people. 5. Press calling for expulsion Point Four Director Warne and Embassy Press Attache´ Bruce, closing U.S. Embassy and other U.S. installations and charging U.S. has joined British against Iran. 6. Tudeh sponsored Youth Festival of several thousand which convened July 9 still in session. 7. Tudeh has set up ‘Board of July 21 Anniversary’ resolved to organize a common demonstration.” 3. On night of 11 July [less than 1 line not declassified] stated following to station: “A. Opposition greatly encouraged by Eisenhower letter.
