stipulations of this article shall not extend to the treatment which either Contracting Party shall accord to purely border traffic within a zone not exceeding ten miles (15 kilometres) on either side of its customs frontier”. If the Department sees no particular objection, I should be glad if the preference of the Austrian Government could be approved. Article XI. Commercial travelers. This article has been amended in accordance with the authority accorded on pages 2 and 3 of Department’s Instruction 602 of June 23, 1927. The Austrian Government further proposes to add at the end of the first sentence of paragraph (a) of this article: “Commercial travelers shall not be subject to any other fee or tax on account of such activity”. This is also a recent proposal of the Department of Commerce. It is said that in some of the Succession States an attempt has been made to tax Austrian commercial travelers upon the proceeds of sales made by them. This has happened especially in Czechoslovakia, and the insertion of such a clause in the treaty between the United States and Austria would strengthen the attitude of Austria upon this point, and would be much appreciated. Article XII. Commercial travelers. The changes made, noted on pages 3 and 4 of Instruction 602 of June 23, 1927, have been incorporated. Furthermore, the Austrian Government, pursuant to the desires of the Ministry of Commerce, proposes to strike out paragraph (d) in regard to advertising matter brought by commercial travelers in appropriate quantities. The Austrian law imposes a tax on advertising matter, except in very small quantities, brought in by commercial travelers, as it would on any other printed matter. The negotiators did not fail to note that this particular provision is “subject to the customs laws of the respective countries” in accordance with its express terms, but nevertheless they thought that the words “appropriate quantities” would be prolific of constant controversies, under cover of the favored nation principle, with the Succession States. The policy of the Austrian law in this respect is fixed, and inasmuch as this principle is recognized, it is felt that to introduce a provision which might lay the foundation for controversy would be most unwise. The Department of Commerce is most insistent upon this particular point.
