National Security Policy 175 actions at a higher level of provocation than in the past which will confront us with increasingly difficult decisions. Therefore, the United States. . . .” REASON: A logical consequence of nuclear parity is an increasingly provocative attitude on the part of the Sino-Soviet Bloc. Aggressive actions stemming therefrom will pose an ambiguous threat to national security. Nonetheless, they must be resolutely opposed at the moment of their initiation, if the Free World is to avoid a steady attrition of its position. Appendix B Washington, undated VIEW OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF, U.S. AIR FORCE on BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY (C) 1. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, has reviewed the draft state­ ment of policy (NSC 5810) which was prepared by the National Security Council Planning Board for consideration by the National Security Council at its meeting on Thursday, 1 May 1958. 2. It is the view of the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, that the majority position on NSC 5810 is suitable as a basic statement of United States policy. In reaching this conclusion the following areas have been espe­ cially considered: a. Over-­all U.S. Strategy. The basic U.S. security objective should continue to be the maintenance of a position of military strength per­ mitting aggressive political action to achieve, by peaceful means, U.S. national objectives. NSC 5810, as written, is a comprehensive and ade­ quate development of this objective. It provides a comprehensive basis for the development and execution of those programs in the political, economic, military and other fields necessary to give meaning to the basic strategy. The supporting military forces and tasks, and their prior­ ities, necessary to provide the position of strength to permit the exercise of U.S. initiative in world affairs, are correctly and adequately described. In this connection, in the annual report to the National Security Council on the Status of U.S. Military Programs as of 30 June 1957, the Department of Defense indicated, based on Joint Chiefs of Staff advice, that forces are in fact in existence to fulfill the military commitments and the basic objectives outlined in basic policy.2 b. Nuclear Parity. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force agrees that we may be approaching a position of relative nuclear parity between the 2 NSC 5720, Part 1. [Footnote is in the original.]
