1036
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
aid meets the critical nutritional needs of people in the most seriously
affected countries; (2) food aid has maximum developmental impact;
(3) it stimulates receiving countries to increase their own food produc-
tion; and (4) our food aid and population program policies are mutu-
ally supportive.
Three specific aspects of the Food for Peace program help to fur-
ther the goals enumerated in the first paragraph of this Section. Title II9
food commodities are provided through private U.S. organizations like
CARE and Church World Service and the UN World Food Program,
which run their supplemental feeding activities in the context of nutri-
tion and health education as well as agricultural extension programs.
Particularly where these food and education programs are directed at
pregnant or breastfeeding mothers and young children, family plan-
ning information should be included along with nutrition education.
The passage of Title III of the Agricultural Trade Development and As-
sistance Act (P.L. 480) furthers goal (2).10 Title III permits the President
to forgive Food for Peace loans to those countries who have used funds
generated by the sales of U.S. food commodities for development pur-
poses including voluntary family planning. Finally, with regard to goal
(4), our records show that there has been a family planning component
to several Food for Work projects (e.g., in India, Egypt, and Peru); and
consideration, as recommended in the Interagency Task Force’s First
Annual Report to the President, should be given to expanding this ap-
proach wherever feasible.
We conclude that, where food production and population are
clearly out of balance, the leaders of countries requesting U.S. food
assistance should be reminded at an appropriately high level of:
(1) longer-term anticipated worldwide food shortages, citing FAO and
other data in that connection, including increased commercial demand;
and (2) Congressional requirements that our assistance be increasingly
concentrated on countries that make effective use of such assistance, in-
cluding their performance in improving agricultural output and nutri-
tion and reducing population growth. Such an intervention should be
made by Ambassadors in a way that would be most likely to produce
effect without causing offense.
This would also provide a useful opportunity to review what the
particular country is doing to ease the food-population problem and,
9 Title II of Public Law 480 provides for the donation of U.S. agricultural commod-
ities to private voluntary organizations and international organizations for use in foreign
humanitarian feeding programs.
10 See footnote 31, Document 245.
