1072  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Agropecuario, which in turn should be financed to an increasing extent 
by the commercial banks rather than by the Central Bank. This raised a 
problem of interest rates but he believed it could be handled.
Identification of U. S. with Program
He said he knew his financial and social programs could succeed 
only with close U. S. cooperation and help and that it would be in the 
best interests of both Governments for the U. S. to be closely identified 
with progress on all fronts. I entirely agree. He stated that he wished to 
formulate the specific aspects of his programs, and carry them out, in 
close consultation with us and to give the U. S. maximum credit in the 
process. I am sure he will.
PE–25.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge 
of Peruvian Affairs (Poole)1
 
Washington, August 7, 1959.
SUBJECT
Peruvian Request for Military Aircraft
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Berckemeyer, Embassy of Peru
Maj. Gen. Guillermo Van Oordt, Air Attaché, Embassy of Peru
ARA—Mr. Rubottom
WST/P—Mr. Poole
Ambassador Berckemeyer and General Van Oordt called at the 
Ambassador’s request to discuss further the Peruvian Government’s 
request to purchase military aircraft. The Ambassador apologized to 
Mr. Rubottom for disturbing him when the latter was about to leave 
for the Santiago Conference2 but explained that he felt it was urgent to 
inform Mr. Rubottom of the replies he had received from Lima on the 
matter. In addition, he said General Van Oordt was being transferred 
to Lima to become Chief-­of-Staff (i.e. Commander) of the Peruvian Air 
Force and he wanted the General to explain the Peruvian position to 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 723.5622/8–759. Confidential. Drafted 
August 11.
2 Assistant Secretary Rubottom served as principal adviser to Secretary Herter at the 
Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs at Santiago, Chile, August 
12–18; for documentation, see CH–23; CR–24; DR–11; VE–34.
