100  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
82.	
Telegram 495 to Geneva1
Washington, August 14, 1955
495. For Johnson.
Your 457 and 458 presumably crossed our 492 which authorizes 
you to agree to joint statement as urged by Wang. This is only conces­
sion you should make at August 16 meeting apart from minor drafting 
changes not involving matters of substance. No retreat position as sug­
gested by proposed substitute paragraph in latter part your 458 autho­
rized and no possibility of any retreat position should be intimated.
We believe it essential to hold tenaciously to our basic position on 
return of all detained nationals as part of any agreement on representa­
tion before we proceed to discussion of Item 2 of Agenda. Wang is eager 
to obtain representation arrangement and to open up Item 2. If we yield 
on these key points before we obtain firm commitment covering all our 
nationals we are left without any suitable pressures which we can exert 
on behalf remaining detained nationals. It would be doubtful if we 
could obtain their release without responding to new demands made 
by Chinese communists under Item 2.
You should maintain unremitting pressure on Wang for acceptance 
our principle, relying heavily on statements in Chou’s July 30 speech 
that “The number of American civilians in China is small and their 
question can be easily settled” and “it should be possible . . . to reach, 
first of all, a reasonable settlement of the question of the return of civil­
ians to their respective countries.”
Draft text “agreed announcement” your 457 approved subject to 
observations below based on our 492.
(A) In Para. 1, first sentence, “Chinese mainland” preferable to 
“PRC”. You may concede this point if you consider advisable.
(B) In same sentence, “now” should be inserted before “entitled” 
and before “prevented” to make clear that declaration is subject to rea­
sonable termination.
(C) Your Para 2 believed slightly less desirable than Para. 2 our 
492, in that latter accords clear right of investigation to Embassy after 
initiative taken by a national entitled to return.
You should cable us promptly exact text you propose submit.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1355. Secret; Priority. Drafted 
by McConaughy; cleared in draft by Dulles and Sebald; cleared in substance by ­Robertson. 
The time of transmission is illegible.
