Preface Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the administration of James E. Carter. The subseries will present a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of President Carter’s administration. This volume documents the intellectual assumptions and themes underlying the foreign policy decisions made by the administration. Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Much of the documentation included in this volume was drawn from public sources. Speeches and policy statements were garnered from a number of published sources, the most important of which were the Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States and the Department of State Bulletin. A very useful source of information on the intellectual assumptions underlying foreign policy proved to be the briefings that President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbiginew Brzezinski periodically provided to the press. The background briefings can be found in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Schecter/Friendly (Press) File, Subject File, Box 1. Among the classified sources consulted, the most useful were found in the Presidential papers and other White House records maintained by the Carter Library. A number of collections from the National Security Affairs (NSA) files are relevant to research in this area. Within the NSA file, the Brzezinski Material and Staff Material collections yield important documentation. Within the Brzezinski Material, the Subject File, Schecter/Friendly (Press) File, and Brzezinski Office File are especially useful; the Subject Chron File within the Brzezinski Office File contains copies of Brzezinski’s Weekly National Security reports to the President. Of the lot files of the Department of State, the most useful for the purposes of this compilation were the Policy Planning Staff (S/P) Director’s Files. Anthony Lake’s records, which are available at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), contain copies of Vance’s and Muskie’s speeches, Policy Planning Staff-authored studies on a variety of topics, background materials related to the Department’s development of goals and objectives statements, and documentation on issues such as human rights and foreign assistance policy. The files of Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance include important documen- IX
