304 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 4. Wang said he could not but feel that this state of affairs was unsatisfactory and he hoped I would put forward concrete views with­ out further delay. Shillock 229. Telegram 776 to Geneva1 Washington, September 23, 1955, 6:11 p.m. 776. For Johnson. Chicom propaganda on international subjects during past week continued stress Communist efforts ease international tensions and gave considerable attention Geneva talks. Peiping states agreement item one welcomed by world opinion as “new event in Sino-US rela­ tions.” Nevertheless regarding Geneva talks, Peiping took occasion criticize US on three points. US charged 1) with refusal move on to item two of agenda before implementation of agreement item one; 2) of distorting agreement on item one; and 3) violating agreement procedure releasing news. Peiping asserted these actions perpetrated “with ulterior motives” for purpose “obstructing” talks and “prevent­ ing conciliation.” Regarding first criticism Peiping harped on alleged US violation “normal procedures of international conferences” stating that when agreement reached on item one it “common sense” proceed to item two. US “return” to item one portrayed as contrary to “unanimous wish of peace-­loving people” and Times of India quoted to effect US stand “may virtually block further progress.” US also accused attempting keep item one open to put pressure on Peiping in conduct domestic matters and prevent further negotiation since US has “5000” Chinese students “return” of whom would require long time. Criticism two maintained US had stated China would invite UK assist return to US of Americans wishing return to US while US would invite India. Peiping appeared to read into alleged USIS treatment indi­ cation US intends not repeat not invite UK and charged US with schem­ ing to stall current talks and “obstruct operation of agreement.” 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2355. Confidential. Drafted by Jacobson; cleared by McConaughy and in IAD.
