532 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV R&D, lead to the danger of delay in determining the performance of improved Soviet strategic systems and imprecise or belated identification of advanced or novel systems. With respect to ASW R&D, [2 lines not declassified] we believe we can learn enough about Soviet progress to identify major new developments before they reach operational deployment. —The military capabilities of US and Soviet strategic forces are highly dependent on their prospective performance under actual operational conditions. US intelligence, however, confronts serious gaps in information and analysis about Soviet force performance, and cannot by itself judge the net effects of interaction between the forces of the United States and the USSR in the event of crisis or conflict. 112. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Director of the Federal Preparedness Agency (Bray)1 Washington, January 26, 1979 SUBJECT Program Review (U) The President has directed that you undertake a major review of your agency’s programs and make recommendations to the Special Coordination Committee for appropriate improvements and changes. (C) All Federal agencies involved in continuity of government programs are directed to cooperate fully in expediting this review. (U) An ad hoc group, chaired by the NSC staff and including representatives from OMB, OSTP, the Office of the Special Assistant to the President for Administration, and you will coordinate the review. The ad hoc group will approve the review’s terms of reference and follow its progress. (U) The review should include the following areas: —Protection of national leadership. Recommend improvements in the procedures and methods for ensuring effective Presidential succession 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 21, PD/ NSC–41 [1]. Confidential. Copies were sent to Vance; Brown; McIntyre; Jones; Turner; Press; Burdyl Tirana, Director of the Defense Civil Preparedness Agency; Marvin Beaman, Director of the White House Military Office; and Dinneen.
