1978  301
accepted (3 predicted, 4 actual; 6 predicted, 10 actual; 3 predicted, 6 
actual; respectively). Therefore, the number of Soviet missile warheads 
could increase substantially by 1985.
The United States at present has about a 2:1 advantage in total stra-
tegic warheads [less than 1 line not declassified]. The NIE Best Estimate 
(assuming a SALT II agreement with a 1,200 MIRV limit) projects a U.S. 
advantage of about 1.5:1 (roughly [less than 1 line not declassified]) by 
1985. This estimate assumes an SS–NX–18 and Typhoon missile with 
three and four RVs, respectively. The Soviets recently demonstrated 
a potential capability to deploy seven RVs on the SS–NX–18: at least 
two tests released four RVs and simulated three additional releases. 
With seven RVs per SS–NX–18 and Typhoon missile the Soviets would 
reduce our advantage to about 1.3:1 in 1985. Putting the situation in 
another way, our lead could be eliminated entirely if, for example, the 
Soviets increased the number of RVs on the SS–NX–18 and Typhoon 
missile to 14, or on the SS–19 from six to 16. These fractionation levels 
would probably be feasible on follow-­ons to existing missiles and on 
the new Typhoon SLBM.
The ban on increasing numbers of RVs on existing types which 
we have proposed in SALT would make this erosion of our lead far 
more difficult because it would prevent fractionation of the payloads of 
existing types. However, even our current SALT fractionation proposal 
(limiting new ICBMs to 10 RVs and new SLBMs to 14 and freezing frac-
tionation of current ICBMs and SLBMs) still permits the Soviets even-
tually to catch up with us in warhead numbers by replacing all existing 
systems with permitted new types with the maximum permitted RVs 
(e.g., by increasing the SS–19, SS–NX–18 and Typhoon to 10 RVs). 
Soviet tests of existing systems with more RVs before signature would 
pose a problem (though formally our position takes the pre-April 15, 
1978 level as the base).
We should therefore recognize that our lead in strategic warheads 
could largely dissipate by 1985, or even disappear altogether if the 
Soviets chose that course. This capability could be delayed by SALT but 
is unlikely to be blocked entirely. Our ability to claim future strategic 
equivalence on the basis that their lead in throw weight is offset by our 
lead in warhead numbers, is thus fragile.
We do, however, have several options available to counter a Soviet 
push to close the gap in numbers of warheads. The Cruise Missile Car-
rier (CMC) program provides an option for a major and rapid increase 
in strategic capability. For example, a deployment of 100 CMCs. [2 lines 
not declassified] This deployment level could be achieved by FY 1987 
with an orderly program, and earlier if extraordinary effort is deemed 
necessary. The current U.S. SALT position would count each CMC as 
one in the 1320 aggregate. The Soviets have proposed a limit of 20 cruise
