Yugoslavia 927 worry about NATO or Chinese counteractions on other fronts. While at present there is no evidence of Soviet intention to intervene in Yugoslavia, Soviet actions must be viewed as uncertain and changeable, and dependent on Yugoslav military and political strength as well as on opportunities presented and commitments elsewhere. Strategy Over the near term the US can take steps to reassure the Yugoslavs and to keep the Soviets on the defensive. As post-Tito scenarios emerge, the US can take additional steps, as necessary and generally after consultations with the Yugoslavs and our key allies (recognizing Yugoslav sensitivity to NATO actions). The politico-military measures suggested below would complement economic and other political instruments of US diplomacy. Decision Point 1: Near Term Objective: indicate a high level of political interest in Yugoslavia’s independence and unity, and continue to strengthen Yugoslav political and military ties with the US and the West, through small and nonprovocative, but cumulatively important steps. US actions could include: —at the time of Tito’s death, US and allied statements of support for Yugoslavia, —visits by Secretary Vance and top military officials, —intensified consultations with key allies, —implementation of more forthcoming US arms sales policy, and expanded IMET, —possibly intelligence cooperation on terrorism. Decision Point 2: Cohesion (Post-Tito Scenario 1) Objective: continue to demonstrate a high level of political interest. If the Soviets pursued divisive tactics, the US should take a tougher stance toward USSR. If the Yugoslavs showed signs of succumbing to Soviet pressures (e.g., for greater naval or overflight rights), the US should make countervailing efforts to reassure and dissuade the Yugoslavs. Specific US policies to counter divisive Soviet tactics might include: —warnings to the USSR, and encouragement of allies and others to do the same, —provision to Yugoslavs of information on Warsaw Pact military activities, —if necessary to signal the USSR, carry out selected US and allied force redeployments, exercises, or augmentations. Decision Point 3: Cohesion with Liberalization and/or Westward Shift (Post-Tito Scenario 2) Objective: measured political support for Yugoslavs (complementing economic steps, such as strengthening EC ties). Our policies would remain those at Decision Point 2, intensified as necessary. We could face difficult choices if events in Yugoslavia moved too fast.
