986 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Iraq believed that Iran’s military weakness provided an opportunity to humiliate Khomeini and destroy the Iranian Government. Iran similarly is bent on undermining the Iraqi Government. Thus, both parties to the conflict have far-reaching goals. Vrhovec said that Yugoslavia had tried to open sensitive communications with the parties to see if they could be calmed down, but both were unpredictable. Secretary Muskie said that with the threat of blocking the Straits of Hormuz and blocking shipping in and out, the international community could not afford to lose time in ending the hostilities. 7. UN initiatives on Afghanistan. Under Secretary Newsom asked what Yugoslavia knew about possible UN initiatives on Afghanistan. Vrhovec said he had talked to Agha Shahi yesterday, and it was hard to see what could be achieved. Shahi was consulting on his initiative concerning an international conference which would focus on Soviet withdrawal and efforts to calm the situation. However, the “other side” had another resolution in its pocket designed to undo the Shahi proposal. To have two competing resolutions would be a bad thing. In Yugoslavia’s view it would be good to get a consensus resolution to resolve the problem but not to see rival ideas put forward. 8. Yugoslavia economic situation. As Secretary Muskie was about to leave for a UNSC meeting, he told Vrhovec that he and the President were deeply interested in Yugoslavia’s efforts to deal with its economic problems and anxious to be as helpful as possible. Muskie pointed out that the President has expressed this interest before in Belgrade and maintained it today, and that public opinion supported U.S. efforts in this regard. He invited Vrhovec to convey the Yugoslav position on this, on the situation in Poland, and on other matters of concern to Under Secretary Newsom, who would report to him on the remainder of the discussion. Vrhovec, who was clearly not up to date on the current state of Yugoslavia’s efforts to obtain financing, began by stressing that a Western bail-out was politically unacceptable to Yugoslavia. Thus, they sought middle ground between the purely bilateral approach they favored and the global syndication which had been pressed on them by Chase. Ambassador Loncar pointed out that this conceptual problem had been resolved through Yugoslavia’s two-track approach, and that the main questions now were to be certain that the syndication in which U.S. bankers participated produced enough money to meet Yugoslavia’s expectations and that the negotiations be concluded as rapidly as possible. 9. Poland. Vrhovec pointed out that the U.S. approach to the situation in Poland had been a sensitive one. Events there represented a very serious development, unfavorable to the USSR. Yugoslavia regarded developments so far as positive, proving that a way of life imposed from outside was intolerable over time. Vrhovec noted that so far the
