624
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
lems of the developing countries. Romania has had many debates with
the Soviets on this point. The Soviets see it as a heritage of colonialism
and not a problem of development. There is some validity to the Soviet
position but it is his view that the Soviet Union will eventually play
a more active role on the North-South problems. Secretary Vance asked
how this could be achieved. Ceausescu replied that when these matters
are discussed by the United Nations it is a helpful way to involve
the Soviets and socialist countries. Secondly, when the developing
countries play a more substantial role in the development of concrete
programs and initiatives, the socialist countries will be put in a situation
in which they must respond.
Secretary Vance said that he thought that the United Nations
should be used to stimulate socialist country participation and he
thought perhaps the capital “Overview Committee”2 would be a good
vehicle. He believed that if the developing countries were to press the
Soviets and other socialist countries into a more constructive role, it
would be more acceptable to the Soviets than if the United States
were to do so, since the Soviets could consider our efforts a source of
confrontation.
Ceausescu replied that the developing countries want to keep the
issue in the United Nations and it would be desirable for the developed
countries to support developing countries’ initiatives. The developing
countries need help from the developed countries, particularly in mod-
ern technologies but they need also to work more effectively among
themselves. Ceausescu then said the United States for its part will have
to look to world needs. General Motors, for example, can no longer
expand production for American consumers but must project its techni-
cal and production capacity to finance world needs.
Soviet Leadership—Dr. Brzezinski then asked the President for his
estimate of the younger leaders around Brezhnev and what policies
they might follow. Ceausescu replied in gest that he did not see many
young people around Brezhnev. Then he added, more seriously, that
there are some relatively younger people who will have to play a role
but it was difficult to talk about individuals. Dr. Brzezinski asked the
President who had struck him as particularly effective in the second
rank in the Soviet leadership. President Ceausescu repeated that it was
hard for him to talk about individuals. He asked, rhetorically, who
could have predicted five years ago that Hua would become the leader
of China. Dr. Brzezinski said, of course, no one can predict but the
2 On December 19, 1977, the UN General Assembly passed Resolution 32/174
establishing a Committee of the Whole—the “Overview Committee”—with the mandate
to look at the world economic situation as a whole, and to review and encourage progress
being made elsewhere in the North-South dialogue.
