448  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
mance made it impossible for the Central American countries to take 
action” jointly to break relations with Cuba and you wonder whether 
Cuba’s insulting view of San José as the situs for the Meeting of Foreign 
Ministers3 “might not change President Mario Echandi’s attitude 
toward Fidelismo.”
In fairness to Echandi, and in the hope that the Department will 
not let the disappointment that I share with you were unable to per-
suade Echandi to join in a break relations, I wish to recall certain things 
to your attention; as Echandi himself did to mine, at the time I obtained 
his immediate support to the Peruvian initiative for action in the OAS 
on the Cuban problem.
As I have constantly reported there has never been any doubt 
Echandi’s own ideological condemnation of “Fidelismo.” He also was 
one of the earliest Latin leaders to advocate OAS action against Cuban 
communism. His most concrete move towards that was the offer he 
made last month which I presented to the Department in my April visit 
to Washington.4
As that time you will recall that Castro had just denounced the 
Rio Treaty.5 Echandi and I worked out a plan whereby, using this cur-
rent threat to the Inter-American System, Costa Rica would join with 
Colombia or with the U.S., or both, or with any other politically palat-
able Latin States in a declaration in the forum of the OAS which would:
1. Demand a showdown on whether Cuba in fact adhered to the 
Rio Treaty.
2. Would praise the original objectives of the Cuban revolution and 
would offer hemisphere moral and economic support to accomplish 
these objectives if and when Cuba’s Government would give proof that 
it intended to accomplish these within the principles of the Declaration 
of Santiago,6 and was willing to divorce itself from International 
Communism.
The plan in (2) above had been advocated by me before the March 
28th Castro denunciation of the Rio Treaty in my letters to Assistant 
3 Documentation on the Sixth and Seventh Meetings of consultation of Ministers of 
Foreign Affairs of American States, held at San José, August 16–29, 1960 is presented in 
Volume. V.
4 Ambassador Willauer departed from San José on April 21 for consultations 
in Washington. Documentation on these consultations is in OAP Files, Lot 64 D 66, 
“Interdepartmental Memos: Costa Rica, 1960.” He returned to San José on May 3.
5 Reference is to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, opened for sig-
nature at Rio de Janeiro, September 2, 1947; for text, see 4 Bevans 559.
6 Reference is to Res. I adopted by the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of 
Foreign Affairs of American States, held at Santiago, August, 12–18, 1959.
