938
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Israelis. (These two subjects will be covered more fully in separate
reports.)
9. Finally, Sadat confirmed Begin’s agreement to withdraw from
Santa Katerina by November 16. He said he did not expect you to be
present for the ceremony on November 19 this year but would want
you to attend the celebrations there in November, 1980. He invited me
to this year’s ceremony, and I accepted.8
Atherton
8 The following day, September 10, Strauss met with Khalil. Strauss reported that
during the meeting the Egyptian Prime Minister “filled in many of the blanks in my
meeting with President Sadat.” In what Strauss called “one of the most valuable talks I
have had since embarking on the Middle East negotiations,” Khalil suggested that the
United States conduct policy on “parallel tracks: within and outside the autonomy talks.”
Moreover, after outlining Egypt’s goals in the peace process, Khalil noted that to achieve
these, “we must first stop all Israeli military action in Lebanon and all PLO terrorism
within Israel.” (Telegram 2941 from Jerusalem, September 13; National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P840131–1695)
291.
Message From the Special Representative of the President for
Middle East Peace Negotiations (Strauss) to the Department
of State and the White House1
September 13, 1979, 1100Z
Subject: Strauss’ Visit to Israel. For President Carter from Ambas-
sador Strauss.
1. Secret-entire text.
2. Summary. Day visit to Israel has resulted in more progress on
two fronts than I would have expected. Our bilateral relationship is
much calmer than it was in August, and I have the sense that last
month’s storm has passed, although substantial suspicion of the U.S.
will undoubtedly boil up periodically as long as negotiations on
Palestinian-related issues continue. In the autonomy talks, I believe we
have established that the negotiations will move into “second gear” by
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 43, Robert Strauss, Middle East, 9/9–15/79. Secret; Sensitive; Immediate; Nodis. Sent
for information Immediate to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem. The telegram is not num-
bered. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House
Situation Room.
