634 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III from this authority led to a decision to drop the whole proposal. We now have less flexibility to negotiate future trade liberalization. 221. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, June 22, 1979 SUBJECT Tokyo Summit (U) This memorandum reviews the US position on Summit issues, in light of recent events—including discussions with the Summit Preparatory Group,2 German Economics Minister Lambsdorff, and French leaders (Giscard, Barre, and Francois-Poncet) in Paris last week,3 as well as the EC heads of government meeting, which ended today.4 (U) [Omitted here is discussion of energy.] II. Macro-Economic Policy 1. Short-Term. Giscard wants the communique to register the Summit governments’ intent to offset the contractionary effects of higher oil prices through their domestic macroeconomic policies. There are differences of view as to how work can be done to this end. All agree that the effects of oil price increases cannot be passed through in the form of wage increases without disastrous effects, and that this should be made clear in the communique. The unresolved question is whether Germany and Japan will continue to maintain high growth rates, or cut back to fight inflation. Both are clearly leaning in the latter direction. We should join the other Summit countries in urging these two countries to continue to maintain the rates of growth in domestic demand to which they committed themselves at Bonn. This is in our in- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 24, President, Far East, 6/23/79–7/1/79: Cables and Memos, 6/22/79–7/3/79. Confidential. Sent for information. 2 The Summit Preparatory Group met in Paris June 15–16. 3 The discussions with Lambsdorff, Giscard, Barre, and Franc¸ois-Poncet were not further identified and no other record of them was found. 4 The EC Heads of Government met in Strasbourg June 21–22.
