1980  895
dangerous decade with our vital interests intact. During this period 
we must of course continue our efforts to constrain Soviet power and 
enhance stability via the SALT process, MBFR and other forms of arms 
control.6
II. BASIC ISSUES OF GRAND STRATEGY
In DoD’s view the sheer magnitude of these problems makes 
clear that a further major evolution of present policies and programs 
is required, despite the real accomplishments of the last few years. The 
accelerated DoD programs we believe essential will be presented to a 
PRC. This paper addresses corollary strategic and policy issues which 
also bear directly on our national security needs. Indeed there are clear 
tradeoffs here.7 To the extent that the policy initiatives DoD proposes 
are infeasible or prove unsuccessful, even larger US defense budgets 
than DoD is proposing will almost certainly be required.8
This is because what our friends and allies do for the common 
defense is fully as important as what we do ourselves. Indeed our own 
vital interests can only be adequately served, at a cost we can afford, by 
a “coalition” strategy and posture. Among other things, we cannot suc-
cessfully defend in WE, SWA, or the FE without extensive participation 
and cooperation of friends and allies. Thus rational burden-­sharing is 
the sine qua non of credible deterrence/defense.
Nor can we afford to address our security needs purely in terms of 
defense programs. A better dovetailing of US defense, economic, and 
foreign policies is equally essential, which raises a related set of issues.9
We have selected eight key issues for SCC debate and recommen-
dation to the President. What we decide on each of them will affect 
the others, as well as the size of future US defense programs. There-
fore, after considering each issue on its own, we ought to think about 
the overall situation to see whether our conclusions add up to a viable 
overall strategy for the 80s, which in turn should drive our security 
policies as well as programs.
Issue #1—Do the 80s pose a significantly greater danger of major regional 
or global conflict? This is essentially a matter of subjective judgment. But 
volatility and change in the so-­called Third World (and the opportuni-
ties this offers for Soviet or surrogate exploitation), together with grow-
ing stresses in Eastern Europe (especially Poland) and post-Tito risks 
in Yugoslavia, do seem to create greater likelihood of conflicts affecting 
6 Brzezinski wrote in the right margin next to this paragraph: “containment + 
decay?”
7 Brzezinski underlined “tradeoffs” in this sentence.
8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the previous 
sentence.
9 Brzezinski drew two short lines bracketing this paragraph.
