September 1953–December 1954
943
Long-Range Problems and Prospects
27. The conservative elements now in power will probably be able
to retain their control beyond 1955 if they remain prepared to continue
the authoritarian methods now in effect. However, unless they make
some progress in satisfying popular grievances and reducing popular
distrust of the government, they will remain vulnerable to the sort of
flareup, under Tudeh or nationalist auspices, which was touched off by
Razmara’s assassination and the oil issue in 1951. In the long run, more-
over, unless the traditional landowning group adjusts to a sharing of
political power with growing urban middle class elements, there will
probably be an increase in the disruptive potential of popular discon-
tent. While the armed forces will constitute a fairly reliable instrumen-
tality for coping with popular disturbance, they are not immune from
grievances common among civilians. A marked decline in popular ac-
ceptance of the present ruling group may therefore have an adverse ef-
fect on the reliability of the security forces.
28. The Shah appears to recognize the need to attack these prob-
lems before popular disappointment with the government reaches dan-
gerous proportions. However, many difficulties will be encountered
before even a modest start can be made. The government’s current at-
tempts to curtail corruption and build up public confidence in the bu-
reaucracy will make little progress without the active support of the
Shah. Even if government and military salaries are raised sufficiently to
provide a decent living, corruption will remain a major characteristic of
Iranian political life until such time as a tradition of public service has
become established. Efforts to spur social reform will almost certainly
encounter strong resistance from vested interests. Moreover, as the
government may fail to recognize, the development of greater political
stability will probably require, in addition to material advances, greater
effort to enlist the support of the opinion-forming intellectual and re-
formist elements. So long as these elements remain excluded from ef-
fective participation in political affairs and prevented by censorship
from expressing their views freely, they are likely to maintain an atti-
tude of strong opposition.
29. We believe that progress will be made on the strength of the oil
revenues and the impetus provided by US aid. In view of the resistance
likely to be encountered, however, the extent of that progress will prob-
ably depend on the willingness of the Shah to provide active, con-
tinuous, and consistent support. Given the Shah’s personal character-
istics, this willingness in turn is likely to depend on the ability of the US
and UK to convince the Shah of the necessity of such support and to
keep his attention focused on the problem.
30. In any event, however, Iran is likely to remain a basically un-
steady country for a number of years. Iran’s underlying social and eco-
