3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
915
Dr. Brzezinski replied that the language was related to economic
assistance which the Soviets had criticized as interference in Polish in-
ternal affairs. He felt that it was useful to keep it in. (C)
Secretary Muskie stated that the paragraph had to be read as a
whole. It hung together. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski suggested that he recommend to the President that
the group felt that the statement should be issued. He then inquired
again whether a hotline message should be sent. (C)
Secretary Muskie felt that the hotline message should be reserved
until something was imminent. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether we should precede the statement
with the hotline message. (U)
Secretary Brown thought the statement should be preceded by a mes-
sage; otherwise Brezhnev would not take the statement seriously. (C)
Admiral Turner was uncertain, as was Dr. Brzezinski. He stressed
that it was important to understand the psychology of the Soviet lead-
ership. When they received such a message, how would they react? (C)
Secretary Muskie pointed out that the statement went beyond pre-
vious statements and was therefore not likely to be taken as sheer pos-
turing. It was stronger than what we had said to Dobrynin. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then dictated the message from the President to
Brezhnev to his secretary. (U)
Secretary Brown noted that the message had the advantage of al-
lowing us to be both tougher and more reassuring at the same time. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski said he was coming around to this view as well. One
had to think about history. They would have to ask themselves
whether they had done all they could to prevent an invasion. (C)
Secretary Brown pointed out the last time they had used the hotline
was the night of the abortive rescue of the hostages in Iran. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski said that the hotline has been used on a number of
occasions in non-crisis situations. (S)
Secretary Muskie agreed that sending a message would be
useful. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski pointed out the serious consequences that a Soviet
invasion would have for East-West relations. In many ways it would
set things back to the ’50s. He asked whether it would not be useful to
have a meeting of the Political Directors. He then read aloud the mes-
sage to be sent over the hotline to Brezhnev. (S)
Secretary Muskie said it sounded fine. (U)
Admiral Turner was concerned that the sentence on “exploiting”
would be criticized and felt the word “politically” should be dropped.
The group agreed with this suggestion. (S)
