Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I —The scope of our cooperation has moved beyond collective defense: —through progressively more constructive economic summits, industrial democracies have coordinated domestic as well as international energy and economic policies to a greater extent than in the past (e.g. national energy import goals). —Venice Summit demonstrated essential unity of allies in insisting on total, not cosmetic, Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. —while we sought broader measures, the fact is that our allies have joined us in imposing significant economic sanctions on Iran for holding US hostages. —industrial democracies have joined together in a massive aid program for Turkey. —over past few years, Western democracies have shown an unprecedented degree of cooperation toward resolving dangerous regional disputes (e.g. Rhodesia, Namibia, Zaire-Angola). 6. Building stronger relationships with countries of growing importance on the world scene. —Normalization of relations with China has enabled us to deal directly and forthrightly with a quarter of the world’s population; buttressed our strategic position. —Have given new attention to our relations with developing nations of particular importance—Mexico, Saudi Arabia and Nigeria, for example. —Have strengthened our cooperation with regional organizations of growing importance—the OAS, the Andean Pact and the Caribbean Group in Latin America; the OAU in Africa; and ASEAN in Southeast Asia. —Our commitment to a fair result in Panama, to majority rule in southern Africa, and to the advancement of human rights and human freedom around the world has demonstrated that US is prepared to deal with developing nations on basis of shared interests and mutual respect. Significantly improved relationships in Africa, Latin America and Asia. In recent UN votes on Afghanistan and Iran, for example, most of developing nations stood with the US. Would have been highly unlikely a decade ago. —Made important progress on economic issues of shared importance with developing world: —new trade arrangements with developing nations under the new multilateral trade negotiations framework; —access of developing nations to International Monetary Fund resources sharply increased—including new $10 billion supplementary financing facility. —on energy, have supported commitment of World Bank to join with private and governmental sources to fund $33 billion to LDC oil and gas projects by 1985.
