756 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 6. The Defense position is determined by McElroy, Gates, Twining and Radford, who have the responsibility. The Chiefs who favor a dif­ ferent position will be given an opportunity to present their views in the NSC. Secretary HERTER made the following major points: 1. There are increasing indications that our allies and the uncom­ mitted countries are not sure that they want our protection if this means nuclear war. One symptom is the trend among some NATO members to seek joint control over the decision to use nuclear weapons in the NATO area; France wants to extend joint (tripartite) control to the whole world. 2. In a situation of US and USSR nuclear sufficiency, we should not automatically use nuclear weapons in limited war. If it proved neces­ sary to use them, we would, of course, do so. Under Secretary DILLON made the following major points: 1. State’s “Summary Statement of Foreign Policy Requirements Bearing upon US Strategy” calls for forces with a dual capability, the non-­nuclear component of which should be strengthened. 2. He understood the Defense position to be that we must use nuclear weapons to deter and fight limited war or put many more men and resources into our limited war capability. If our present planes can’t operate efficiently with iron bombs, we would need a new air force. Our Navy would have to be enlarged to fight without nuclear weapons. Admiral RADFORD made the following major points: 1. In consequence of a Presidential decision in 1953, our whole mil­ itary establishment is built on the use of nuclear weapons in any kind of military situation. Our present planes cannot operate efficiently with iron bombs and we have far too few planes to conduct non-­nuclear air warfare. Nuclear weapons are essential for anti-­aircraft and anti-­ submarine defense. 2. There are, however, practical restrictions on the use of nuclear weapons. There would be no casual use; use would be in accordance with careful prior planning. 3. It would take five years to reconstruct our military establish­ ment to fight limited war without nuclear weapons. 4. The US could not keep its present forces in the West Pacific unless they were armed with and could use nuclear weapons. If we found it necessary to put ground forces in Viet Nam, they would have to have nuclear weapons to keep from being overrun.
