138 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Board. The first and second studies seemed to him, on the whole, very reasonable. As to the third study—­to wit, the problem of the survival of populations in the period following their coming out of shelter after a massive nuclear exchange—Dr. Killian was not sure that further study would throw much light on this problem, although he believed that it was probably worth trying. As to the fourth study, proposed unilater­ ally by ODM, this seemed to Dr. Killian infeasible as an undertaking. At best, it would require years to complete, and would involve an enor­ mous effort if any conclusion were to be reached, although admittedly this was the heart of the problem. The Acting Director of ODM, Mr. Patterson, in response to a ques­ tion from General Cutler, said that he would not press for the time being the inclusion of the study proposed by the ODM Planning Board Member, although he reserved the right to bring the matter up at a later time, on grounds that ultimately it could not be passed over. Apropos of a remark by Dr. Killian that the public education pro­ gram proposed by the Interdepartmental Committee would tend to alarm the people of the United States, the President said that he must strongly disagree with Dr. Killian. He believed, on the contrary, that the program of public education would make us more effective. At this point General Cutler reminded the Council that the Holifield (Chet Holifield, D-Calif.) Committee would commence public hearings on shelter early in April. Perhaps, therefore, it would be advisable to hear now from the Vice President as to what these hearings were likely to involve. The Vice President replied that, generally speaking, the views that Dr. Killian had just expressed made very good sense to him, and that he would like to add that Governor Hoegh, as Federal Civil Defense Administrator, had just about the most thankless job in the world. While Governor Hoegh had done a fine job in producing the report of the Interdepartmental Committee, the Vice President said that he could not but be concerned also by the statements that Secretary Anderson had made at the outset of the meeting. The Vice President felt that if we went beyond educational and research programs in the field of shel­ ter, we would presently generate political pressures for a Federal shel­ ter program which might involve a serious loss in our active defenses and in our capacity for massive retaliation. He added that he shared the President’s viewpoint that there really wasn’t much difference, in terms of national survival, between casualties of 30 million and of 50 million Americans. While it might matter to the 20 million who were not killed, the Vice President believed that if 30 million Americans were killed in a nuclear exchange, there would be no hope of the United States surviving. What would really save the United States were our active defenses. While we certainly have to do something in the way
