International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
199
even current levels. Furthermore, increases in the U.S. trade deficit in
recent months were due to the faster pace of U.S. economic recovery
and to changes in our trade patterns with LDCs. Bergsten also noted
that on a trade weighted basis the dollar had actually strengthened in
last two years.
6. In response to Bergsten’s question on official export financing,
the Japanese denied that official export credit was major factor in ex-
pansion of plant exports. Noting that Japanese plant exports remain far
behind those of the U.S. and West Germany, Matsukawa (MOF) as-
serted that while Japanese plant exports had risen 42 percent in last
three years, EXIM Bank financing of such exports had only climbed
10.4 percent. Matsukawa also restated that despite rumors to the con-
trary, Japan still adheres to the Washington agreement on official ex-
port financing.
7. Japan’s import structure was defended on the grounds that
(A) no nearby industrial centers exist in Asia; (B) the huge Japanese do-
mestic market permits economies of scale that account for Japanese
competitiveness both at home and abroad; (C) the Japanese distribu-
tion system is too complicated to rationalize overnight; and (D) foreign
firms have not expended the necessary effort, time and resources to
carry out successful marketing strategies. Japanese further asserted
volume of manufactured imports is rising, but nevertheless, agreed to
our proposal to establish a joint steering committee to study, inter alia,
where impediments exist to the importation of U.S. products and how
they may be eliminated, which U.S. products might have the highest
sales potential in Japan and how MITI might be of more assistance to
U.S. exporters.
8. Views on North-South problems tended to converge. The Japa-
nese reiterated their intention to “more than double” ODA in five
years, but admitted that they had yet to decide whether it would be on
an absolute or portion of GNP basis. The Japanese questioned us
closely on our intention to emphasize aid for basic human needs and
suggested that not too sharp distinction need be made between aid to
infrastructure, where the Japanese plan to lay stress, and aid for basic
human needs. The Japanese also revealed they are considering an
“equipment loan” category to fall between project and commodity
assistance.
9. The Japanese expressed a desire for a follow-on forum to CIEC
limited to energy if possible but possibly encompassing other topics as
well. Cooper stated the U.S. is relaxed on this issue but would be happy
to consider any suggestions.
10. On outstanding U.S.-Japan bilateral trade questions such as
sweet cherries, citrus, frozen juices, computers and peripherals, and
color film, Cooper noted on two occasions that we are not unconcerned
