90
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Callaghan said that we need greater confidence but he also said
growth will be lower. We should make our people aware of the pos-
sible consequences for industrial democracies, of not winning the ideo-
logical war. This is not only true with the Third World, although it is
important because it will determine whether they look to us or to the
socialist countries, who have no unemployment and greater order, as
examples. But it will also have a serious impact on our own positions,
particularly on growth.
As presently worded, the communique does not sound a warning
note. It only talks of structural change without appealing to the
people’s attitudes and telling them that they share responsibility for the
health of the democracy. We cannot fail to invite people to live up to
their responsibilities. Each of us needs to do this. If we sound this
warning collectively, indicate the threat that our democracies are sub-
ject to, and bring about greater awareness in people, we can get support
from our people for the necessary measures that we need to accommo-
date structural change.
Carter: Thank you for your very cordial welcome. I come here not
as an economist, though I know many of you are very experienced in
this area, but as an eager student. I know many of you were former Fi-
nance Ministers and have valuable experience in working together. I
look forward to hearing your views so that when I get back I can make
better decisions. I recognize the deep importance of our decisions on
one another.
We in the US have set specific goals. I give you my assurances that
we will maintain our efforts to achieve healthy growth. I believe we can
meet our 5.8% target. When I came into office, we had 8.1% unemploy-
ment. I predicted we could get it down to 7.1% in my first year. Now it
is down to 7%. I believe this is because of a surge in new confidence.
This is in part reflected in a US rate of savings of 6% compared to 14%
in Germany. There has been a big increase in consumption of consumer
goods and we have gotten figures indicating an upswing in invest-
ment. This is the reason—after these changes in unemployment and
consumer spending—that we saw no need for the $50 rebate. We still
have more than $20 billion worth of stimulus in the economy. We have
tried to focus this on the structural needs of our economy. We have
paid direct attention to youth unemployment—particularly summer
jobs—as well as employment for adults. We plan to continue our direct
attack on unemployment. We hope to get it below 5% at the end of my
term. For instance, we have a $4 billion public works program.
But we are also concerned about inflation. Our basic or underlying
rate of inflation is 6–6.5%, although it is higher, about 12%, at the
wholesale level. This leads to uncertainties about the future, even
though results to date are encouraging. We do not want to stimulate
