International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 porters from getting back to agreed upon import quotas on any category of imports if they should fall short in a given year. This sets a very bad precedent. This provision virtually guarantees substantial import restraint for many of the textile and apparel categories, because they are subject to large annual fluctuations. It will therefore have a net depressive effect on international trade and increase our inflation rate. Given the very restrictive nature of this program, we should make it absolutely clear to the industry, as well as in public presentations, that this is a balancing item to the liberalizing effects of the MTN. Our position should be that this program is acceptable only in the context of balancing MTN costs and benefits. If the MTN should fail, we do not want to be saddled with this program. Moreover, we would not want to be on record with this program as the first in a series of very restrictive worldwide trade actions that might be taken if the MTN should collapse. In short, this program should only be implemented in the context of a signed, sealed, and delivered MTN. If it is presented to the industry in this light, it might also have a chance of making them real allies in the CVD and MTN ratification fights. 197. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, February 6, 1979 SUBJECT MTN (U) Introduction. You asked about the importance of the MTN to the U.S., France and others. This is a key question in the wake of the message that I brought back from my last meeting with French Trade Minister Deniau: that Giscard would veto the MTN argument if it were not altered in ways more favorable to France.2 (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 90, Economics/International: 1979. Confidential. Sent for action. Both Carter and Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page. 2 Owen met with Deniau, as well as other U.S. and French officials, in Paris on January 23. A memorandum of conversation of the meeting is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects File, Henry Owen, Box 22, Memcons:
