stated that from a superficial examination it seemed to him that the Japanese and American proposals covered practically the same ground, the main difference being that the American proposals, in which he was in full sympathy, were more detailed. He suggested, therefore, that the Committee consider the possibility of combining the two proposals into one, which would simplify and expedite the work of the Committee. The Chairman opposed this suggestion because, in his opinion, the American plan contained “many objectionable points which the Chinese Delegation would wish to reserve for answer after the statement had been examined into.” The Chairman declared also that while it was true that the two propositions had a number of points in common, yet the American plan contained a number of other things which were not found either in the proposals of the Chinese Government or in those of the Japanese Delegation. Dr. Wang proposed that the Committee proceed to a discussion of the Japanese plan, but objection was made by Sir Ronald Macleay. Dr. Wang, however, took occasion to say that the Japanese plan did not contemplate raising enough revenue to “enable the Chinese Government to abolish likin once for all as they had determined to do,” and that the revenue “would not be sufficient to meet the purposes which the Chinese Government had in mind.” A discussion ensued as to the functions of Committees A and B, Mr. Strawn remarking that the personnel was substantially the same and that there was no material difference between the work assigned the two Committees. Mr. Strawn again declared that the American Delegation desired to give China everything that was authorized by the Washington Treaty, which the Delegation could do without reference to its Government, and that the Delegation was prepared to recommend to its Government the speedy adoption of a new treaty which would give China something with which to abolish likin; that the American plan was designed to furnish sufficient revenues to meet the needs of China, but that the Japanese plan seemed to fall short in this respect. It was admitted that the surtaxes contemplated under the Washington Treaty would be insufficient for the purposes of China. After further debate, confined largely to a discussion of the functions of the two Committees and the personnel composing them, the Chairman submitted, just before adjournment, the Declaration of the Chinese Government regarding the Abolition of the Likin system91 (See pp. 25 and 26 of the Minutes of the Committee on Tariff Autonomy, November 3, 1925).
