Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: We said also the legitimate rights of the Palestinians. We also have rights. It is written this way. President Carter: What do you suggest? If Jordan does not participate, and the Palestinians are reluctant, how can we carry out the autonomy? Foreign Minister Dayan: I would personally distinguish three phases. We should invite all of the parties first. If they don’t come, then we could negotiate on Gaza alone. We talk about the powers and responsibilities just for Gaza. They could take a different form, and the areas would not have to be unified. President Carter: Do you agree that the basic goal is to prescribe a self-governing authority for the West Bank and Gaza both? Foreign Minister Dayan: There should be three stages. The general invitation, then if there is agreement on Gaza first, a specific negotiation for Gaza only and not the rest of the area. Then the invitation should stay open for Jordan and the inhabitants of Judea and Samaria to come in. It should be an open invitation. But the negotiations should not be done by Egypt, just by the people in the area and Jordan. So we would leave the door open. They would have to have their own negotiations on different issues. Secretary Vance: I agree on the general invitation. There should be negotiations on the powers and the modalities, and the invitation should remain open. But the negotiation of the powers and responsibilities would be largely common to both, and the modalities would be similar. Foreign Minister Dayan: Khalil said why shouldn’t the West Bank residents have both Jordanian citizenship and Palestinian citizenship. Deputy Prime Minister Yadin: Let’s forget about who wants what. Let’s look practically at the question. I was hurt when you said that you shared the views of those who think we are reluctant about the autonomy. There is a debate here in Israel. I was politically offended. We want to implement the autonomy on our terms. Now things are being turned upside down as if Sadat suggested autonomy. We should be practical. We should deal with the modalities in the whole area, and then implementation could come in Gaza first. But that might be counterproductive. If Jordan doesn’t join, why should we agree to what Sadat negotiates? Who gave Sadat power to negotiate for the West Bank? If Sadat can deliver the goods in Gaza, or Shawa, that is okay. But elsewhere Egypt can’t deliver. If we were to go Gaza first, we should forget the rest. Let them come when they are ready. President Carter: At Camp David we agreed that Jordan and Egypt would negotiate on the West Bank and Gaza combined. We also agreed that Egypt would participate on behalf of the other Arabs. It would vio-
