Afghanistan
607
Just as the Brezhnev Doctrine reinforced skepticism about Soviet inten-
tions in “socialist countries” such as Romania and Yugoslavia, so will
any overarching interpretation for Soviet military aid in circumstances
such as Afghanistan raise concern among actual or potential countries
assigned by Moscow to the “socialist orientation” category, i.e., all
countries of the Third World as the Soviets see it. Although Brezhnev,
speaking in Belgrade in 1971, denied the existence of any “so-called
new doctrine of limited sovereignty,” the label “Brezhnev Doctrine”
has continued to stick, and do damage to the Soviet image abroad.
8. Perhaps in part because of the history of the Brezhnev Doctrine,
Soviet leaders have so far played down ideological explanations for
their rendering aid to Afghanistan. The heavy emphasis has rather
been on meeting an Afghan request, in compliance with treaty obliga-
tions, and on rights reaffirmed by the UN Charter, with occasional
reference to the need to protect Soviet state interests, by liquidating a
situation which could have resulted, in Moscow’s view, in hostile bases
along the southern border. Soviet leaders and ideologists have made
a few random “stabs” at rationalizing their action in terms of stock
Marxist-Leninist formulas but nothing approaching a general theory
has yet been articulated. Among such attempts, which have sometimes
misled a few outside observers to conclude a “new doctrine” is being
offered, are:
—“Proletarian internationalism”: Two Central Committee appa-
ratchiks (Kobysh in Literaturnaya Gazeta, January 23, and Portugalov
in TASS, February 6) first used the hoary favorite, “proletarian interna-
tionalism”, in addressing the Afghan question. However, with the
exception of KGB Chief Andropov, the Soviet leaders themselves have
avoided resort to this rationalization in the specific context of military
aid to Afghanistan. (Andropov said that the Soviet aid was a “high
act of faithfulness to the principle of proletarian internationalism . . .”)
We assume Brezhnev and others have steered clear of “proletarian
internationalism” for the reason that Afghanistan obviously lacks a
proletariat of any significance for which such aid could be justified.
—“International duty” or “international solidarity”: Soviet leaders,
including Defense Minister Ustinov, have generally settled for one of
these hackneyed formulas to justify their military assistance on Marxist-
Leninist grounds. Both recur in the unsigned Novoye Vremya article
which prompted David Binder to speculate in the New York Times that
an “extended Brezhnev Doctrine” was in the making.3 Our problem
with the Novoye Vremya article, however, apart from the “unofficial”
3 The full reference to the article is: David Binder, “Brezhnev Doctrine Said To Be
Extended,” New York Times, February 10, 1980, p. 10.
