780 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX With regard to atomic power, the President stressed that the US is committed to nuclear energy but also to prohibiting transfers that could be used in nuclear explosions. There is no doubt that Yugoslavia is trustworthy and shares the same goals as the United States. Yet as the US develops laws, it may find that the rules governing sales of nuclear equipment are not as flexible as some might like. The President indicated that we would try to meet Yugoslav needs but that there might be difficulties from time to time. Again, the President hoped that problems could be discussed frankly and that any constraint would not be interpreted as a blow to our friendship for Yugoslavia. We will be as flexible as we can within the law, and the President suggested that Kardelj discuss these issues further with US Cabinet officers. Middle East The President asked for Kardelj’s assessment of the Middle East, saying that he wanted Kardelj brought up to date and was interested in his views. Kardelj said he had read the US statement issued that day and thought it was a step toward peace.3 In the Yugoslavs view, the Palestinians are the central issue. From the start their status has been a major cause of war. At present the Palestinians seem radical to Israel, but it is hard to keep up with their position. Yugoslavia has close contacts with the Palestinians and thinks they are ready to change. However, it is difficult for them to move without first having a guarantee of some rights. Qaddumi4 was recently in Yugoslavia and, knowing that Kardelj was coming to the US, asked what the US meant by “homeland.” Kardelj thought that the Palestinians were ready for peace; the Palestinian issue is a hard one, but the Palestinians seem ready to recognize Israel and the Israeli borders at the end of the first war. It is hard to see how relations between Israel and the Palestinians could be regulated, but if there were a long-term solution, then it should be possible to settle relations. The Palestinians would have access to the Mediterranean through Israel. Kardelj stressed that it would be important to have an independent Palestine; any other arrangement would be a hotbed in the Middle East, something that is up to the US to make Israel understand. Kardelj thought that with any Israeli concession the Palestinian position would soften. 3 In statements issued following Carter’s meeting with Syrian Foreign Minister Abd al Halim Khaddam, and with Jordanian President of the Royal Court Abddul Hamid Sharaf and Jordanian Foreign Minister Hassan Ibrahim, the White House stressed that it had “agreed on the importance of working to reconvene the Geneva conference by the end of the year.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pp. 1677–1678) 4 Farouk Kaddoumi also known as Abu al-Lutf, Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) leader.
