500.A15 a 1/486a
[Document 121]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
WASHINGTON, July 22, 1927.
MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I have not written you of late about the Geneva
Conference, as I thought the paraphrase of telegrams we are forwarding
would keep you fairly well posted, that is, if you have time to go through
them. I know it is quite a job and the discussion is often more or less
technical. Everything that comes from Geneva is taken up with the Navy
Department and I am keeping in close touch with the Secretary and with
Admiral Eberle and his Assistants. I cannot say that I am very hopeful of
any practical result from the Conference. As you will notice, there seems to
be very little trouble about an agreement so far as submarines and
destroyers are concerned, although no definite understanding has yet been
reached by the Conference, but there are very grave difficulties over the
question of cruisers. The principal points raised are, first, the total tonnage
of cruisers, and second, the size of cruisers and the gun caliber of their
armament. As to the first proposition, as you know much to the surprise of
everybody, Great Britain’s demands as to the tonnage of cruisers were
exorbitant. Japan would not think of agreeing to anything of the kind and so
far as the United States is concerned it would be perfectly unless, in fact,
injurious to make such an agreement. Admirals Jones and Long and Mr.
Gibson, who had been in touch with the British during the Preliminary
Conference and with the British Admiralty in London, were very greatly
suprised and disappointed. We had, in fact, no reason at all to think Great
Britain would demand any such thing.
You will notice that they started in with a suggestion of about 600,000 tons.
One of their experts even suggested 750,000 tons. They then came down to
562,000 tons and finally stated they would be willing to accept 462,000
tons up to 1936, but should build to 562,000 tons after that. Of course
neither Japan nor the United States was willing to agree to any such
proposition and after a long time I think the British Government came to the
