Chapter 6, June–December 1990 827 4. Improve Washington turn around time. We should: — Discontinue the use of Blackbird cables except for rare sensitive topics not intended to be disseminated beyond PCC principals (this was the original intended purpose of the Blackbird channel but Rick has never used it that way); — Formally establish a new procedure for ad referendum agreements that would automatically approve them after eight working days unless Washington directs otherwise; — Schedule a standing meeting of PCC principals every Wednesday evening and Saturday morning; at this meeting the basic rule would be: If a PCC principal doesn’t know enough to discuss the subject without an interagency study, defer to the Negotiator; — Forbid backstopping from delaying sending cables forward to the NSC beyond a Negotiating Group requested due date; — Direct evening and Saturday meetings of backstopping, PCC Subcommittee, or PCC when needed to meet a Negotiating Group requested due date. 5. Convince the bureaucracy that we’re serious. We should: — Convene a meeting in Room 450 of the Old Executive Office Building of all START players down through the backstopping staff level; — Have the President make a five minute drop-­by; — After the President’s departure, announce the new procedures set forth above. Stress that they have been agreed to at the cabinet level. 6. Convince the Soviet bureaucracy that we’re serious. We should schedule a summit for late this year. Probably nothing less will do the trick. The sooner a summit is scheduled, the better—­it will enable us to begin disciplining the bureaucracy now and leave us less vulnerable to charges of a last minute rush to completion. Tab I Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks (Burt) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)2 Geneva, August 2, 1990 Cotting START Done What is the problem? The President has directed, both publicly and privately, that we complete START in 1990. The President and his senior team seem to believe this goal can be attained. In fact, it cannot, 2 Secret.
