288  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Twining commented that the military authorities are concentrating on 
getting the F–86s on the islands into operational status quickly.
General Twining next reported briefly on SAC dispersal. He said 
he understood the President had expressed recent question about this. 
In general, our plans do not call for going beyond squadron dispersal 
and he did not think they should. He showed the President a graphic 
summary indicating that a substantial fraction are kept constantly 
ready and bombed up; others could be gotten in the air quickly, 
although not bombed up, unless there had been an alert warning (as 
in the case of the Lebanese crisis). The President raised for consider­
ation the idea of putting parallel runways on existing bases, since the 
runway presently limits the number of planes that could be gotten off. 
He then said he questioned the validity of planning which contem­
plated putting on one field more planes than could be reasonably got­
ten away. Additional runways on the base would cost much less than 
additional aircraft which probably can’t get off anyhow. He thought 
we should make all possible arrangements to “bomb up” rapidly and 
get the planes into the air. General Twining undertook to have this 
matter studied.
General Twining said that the Chiefs are making plans for troop 
withdrawal from Lebanon, so that when the time comes we will be in 
position to do it in a proper way. He thought any out-­movement of 
troops should be done quietly and with dignity, without making a fan­
fare. The President indicated general agreement, commenting that he 
would have to look at any specific proposal.
As a final item, General Twining said that Defense is moving for­
ward on the question of reorganization. A phased series of steps will 
be taken over the next three or four months. The President stressed the 
importance of watching the allocation of research and development 
projects very carefully—to see that once a project is assigned, other 
serv­ices do not duplicate the activity.
The President asked me to make sure Gordon Gray understood 
that General Twining should attend any meeting of the statutory mem­
bers of the NSC, and I did so.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
