590 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 212. Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, February 16, 1980 SUBJECT Afghanistan—What Next? Background One of our problems in dealing with Afghanistan is that we haven’t really expected a satisfactory outcome—i.e., a Soviet withdrawal. Our secondary objective—making the Soviets pay for their actions—is of considerable value but is certainly not a long-term policy goal. Given the Pakistani reluctance to be very involved with us (and the Chinese), I am concerned that, in some regards at least, we may find that we cannot extract a maximum price from the Soviets. The press leaks will make the Paks even less amenable and may, on their own, undercut our position in general. (S) From reading the intelligence reporting, I gather that the Soviets are finding the going a lot tougher than they expected. They probably realize that they are in for a long and costly operation but are no doubt determined to do whatever is necessary to secure their border. I have little doubt that they can succeed ultimately. (S) There is a lot of diplomatic activity going on. The Soviets are dropping hints about willingness to come to a compromise solution. The British are talking about an “Austrian” solution. The President’s comment about a Muslim occupation force has stirred interest.2 Jayawardene is trying to do something. Most important, perhaps, is the tough line that India is taking in private while still keeping its options open in public. (S) Evaluation This all may or may not provide us with something more than diplomatic and propaganda maneuvering space. I continue to believe that all alternatives are going to founder on the Soviet desire to have 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Thornton, Country File, Box 91, Afghanistan: 1/80–1/81. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. 2 In a news conference on February 13, Carter called for Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan and a Soviet commitment not to invade other countries, and suggested the use of a peacekeeping force comprised of Muslim troops during the transition period between Soviet withdrawal and the establishment of a neutral Afghan Government. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, p. 309)
