National Security Policy  865
genuine, and, if so, represented a technical feat of singular importance. 
The Russians had had to overcome great technical problems in con­
trolling from such a great distance the equipment which took the pic­
ture and transmitted it back to the earth. The photographs were being 
studied further. If the Russians should make the film available, more 
careful analysis would be possible.
[Omitted here are agenda items 2 and 3.]
4. U.S. OVERSEAS MILITARY BASES
(NSC Actions Nos. 1876, 2034 and 2070; Memos for NSC from 
Executive Secretary, same subject, dated January 14 and March 17, 1958)
At the end of the discussion of Moroccan bases, the President referred 
to the study by the late Frank Nash of U.S. overseas bases. He said that 
he believed that the base system should be looked at by an official who 
would go and study it every six months. He felt that we had our heads 
in the sand on the bases—the foreign countries concerned were excited 
about national aspirations and sovereignty and we were in the position 
of being blackmailed. He noted that only this morning, in connection 
with the paper on Libya, it had been indicated that we were likely to 
have trouble at Wheelus. He thought that the base agreements which 
had been made ten years ago were beginning to be outmoded. We could 
not continue to depend on these facilities on the same basis as in the past. 
He was tired, he said, of repetitions of formal studies, but he wanted 
someone to go off and look at the base situation and then to come back 
and report. Responding to the President’s point, Secretary Gates said that 
he would have someone look again at the Nash Report. Secretary Herter 
suggested that anyone who went overseas to survey U.S. bases should 
include the Prime Minister of Morocco in his consultations.
The National Security Council:
Noted the President’s request that the Secretary of Defense des­
ignate an official to re-examine the U.S. overseas military base system 
and review the findings and recommendations thereon contained in 
the Report to the President by the late Mr. Frank C. Nash (enclosure to 
the reference memorandum of January 14, 1958), reporting the results 
of such re-­examination and review to the President within six months.
NOTE: The above action, as approved by the President, sub­
sequently transmitted to the Secretary of Defense for appropriate 
implementation.
5. STATUS OF NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS AS OF JUNE 30, 
1959: THE USIA PROGRAM (NSC 5912)
Mr. Allen began his briefing by pointing out that the activity in 
which USIA was engaged was really an additional aspect of the conduct 
of our foreign relations. It had very recently been added as an activity 
of governments. Traditionally, communications between countries had
