168 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in their detailed planning guidance to the CINCs and the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff. (TS) Briefly stated, NSDM–242 and NUWEP establish that the fundamental objective of the current US doctrine of “Flexible Nuclear Response” is deterrence of conventional and nuclear attacks and attempts at coercion by nuclear powers against the US and its allies. This condition is established by an assured and evident US nuclear retaliatory capability effective across a wide spectrum of possible conflict situations. Should conflict occur, the strategy seeks to limit damage to the US and its allies through the control of escalation. This is to be accomplished by providing a wide range of employment options to the NCA for response to varying levels of provocation. These options are to be employed, in conjunction with other supporting diplomatic and military measures, to limit conflict to the lowest level feasible and coerce an enemy into negotiating a termination of the war on terms acceptable to the US and its allies. This is to be done while holding vital enemy targets hostage and threatening their subsequent destruction if the enemy fails to negotiate. The availability of such options is meant to enhance deterrence in the first place. To the extent that escalation cannot be controlled and an all-­out war occurs, the strategy seeks to maximize US power relative to an enemy by destroying the political, economic and military structures supporting the enemy’s status as a major power and those resources critical to his early post-­war recovery, limiting damage to the US to the degree practical, and by maintaining a strategic force in reserve for protection and coercion during and after a major nuclear exchange. (U) Present policy concepts emphasize preplanning to: enhance force efficiency and effectiveness, provide for rapid execution, and provide a solid basis for estimating consequences (expected damage levels, fatalities, risks, etc.). The full range of politico-­military conditions cannot be anticipated. Past experience has shown that national decisionmakers desire a full range of options to consider in determining appropriate solutions to a crisis. It is therefore prudent and necessary to maintain the capability for responding to a wide range of hostile actions. Therefore, nuclear employment plans have been designed to allow for flexible adaptation as events unfold prior to execution. Where only general plans can be formulated in advance, dedicated organizations and specialized planning procedures have been established within the military structure of the Joint Staff and unified and specified commands for the rapid development, assessment and execution of specific limited nuclear employment options. It is assumed that there will be a high degree of control and direction by the NCA which will require close interaction between political, diplomatic, and military actions in the face of rapidly, often obscurely unfolding events. An acceptable
