7a. This tendency towards decentralization, which is at least temporary, we cannot check through an attempt to confer a factitious existence upon a central administration not considered by the Chinese people to be representative. Nor would our appearing to stand in opposition to the course of the political development of China be something we could afford. In my opinion, the time has come when an accommodation to the progress so far shown by this development must be made by us. We have begun to do this to a certain extent already. For some time cases involving protection have been handled, not through the Foreign Office which lacks authority to act even if it should possess the good will, but more and more frequently through consular officers who deal with local authorities possessing all responsibility and power. And certain categories of claims, as arranged with the Foreign Office, are taken up in a number of provinces with the local commissioner for foreign affairs. This official acts under the instructions given by the provincial authorities, though nominally he holds his post under the Minister of Foreign Affairs. 8. Our position in regard to endeavoring to protect our nationals and secure fair treatment for them is anomalous in the present ultimate phase of the breaking up of central authority. Though the Peking administration really exists by virtue of the recognition extended by us and other powers, it gives us no help. Rather it is disposed more and more to act as a devil’s advocate against our interests and our rights. And the various regional or provincial authorities, resentful over what is construed by them to be our support of the rival faction in control of Peking, are antagonized and are only too ready to renounce those responsibilities which, if we dealt directly with them, they might be prepared to undertake. If our supreme duty in China is, as I conceive it to be, to do everything we can do legitimately and honorably to maintain the interests of Americans here and at home, we must to that end adopt methods conforming to actual conditions. We do not need to temporize, nor need we alter in its essentials our policy toward China as a whole, but, even though we look forward still
