Afghanistan 421 146. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in NATO Capitals, the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and the Embassies in the Soviet Union, New Zealand, Australia, and Japan1 Washington, January 6, 1980, 1320Z 4074. Subject: U.S. Response to Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan. 1. (C—Entire text) 2. The following is a catalog of the steps which have been decided upon affecting relations with the Soviet Union. Separate implementing instructions will be provided to Embassy Moscow and other posts as appropriate. This message provides a list which can be used in discussion with host governments of the range of actions decided upon so far. Some additional steps are still under review and may be decided upon at a later date. These measures are being taken in light of President’s statement that business as usual with the Soviet Union is impossible in light of their invasion of Afghanistan.2 In briefing host governments posts should be careful not to give the impression that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan is primarily a disrupting event in U.S.-Soviet relations. Rather, it is a subject of deep concern for the entire international community as evidenced by the fact that 50 nations have signed a letter calling for Security Council action.3 Steps which the U.S. has decided on in its bilateral relations with the USSR are designed to reinforce multilateral action in the UN and in NATO and to complement steps which other nations are taking in their bilateral relations with the Soviet Union. If the international community is to succeed in its aims of seeking a Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan and preventing similar Soviet moves in the future against small independent nations, the Soviet leadership must be fully aware of the costs of action such as the invasion of Afghanistan in multilateral and bilateral terms. Equally important, the U.S. and its NATO Allies are continuing plans to improve defense capabilities so that they can provide a more effective deterrent to Soviet military moves throughout the world. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800011–0876. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to Belgrade, Bucharest, Budapest, Prague, Sofia, Warsaw, Riyadh, New Delhi, Islamabad, Jakarta, Beijing, Seoul, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Buenos Aires, Bangkok, Kabul, and Manila. Drafted by Barry; cleared in A/O, S/REM, NSC, and S; and approved by Christopher. 2 In his January 4 address, Carter said that “neither the United States nor any other nation which is committed to world peace and stability can continue to do business as usual with the Soviet Union.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, p. 23) 3 See footnote 6, Document 136.
