North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979 1041 nance, and seek the support of other governments for specific proposals. As suggested and explained in the body of the memorandum, you may wish to take the following immediate steps: —Instruct EB and IO to coordinate an effort to seek agreement among the Group B governments, in as much detail as possible, on a set of priorities and initiatives for the series of international conferences on North-South issues to be held over the next 18 months. —Hold a meeting with Dick Cooper, Jules Katz, Bill Maynes, and me to discuss how we can: • Get a prompt USG response on the Inter-American Development Bank’s proposal for investment guarantees in the mineral and energy sectors. • Secure the support of industrial, developing, and OPEC countries for regional energy research and training centers in LDCs. • Advance the idea of bond guarantees, including obtaining the support of other countries for an IBRD study of a pilot project. • Obtain a more positive US position on further liberalization of the Compensatory Finance Facility. • Look at the overall LDC debt/balance of payment funding questions we are likely to face over the next several years, and how we ought to respond. —Request EB and H to keep tabs on the Food Security Act and to request intervention by you or other State officials if needed. —Ask Dick Cooper to review with Tom Ehrlich the role his staff might play in lobbying for domestic agency programs which support our North-South goals. UNCTAD V: Several features of UNCTAD V deserve note: —Sweeping resolutions demanding major restructuring of the world’s economy went nowhere. Rather than try to paper over fundamental disagreements between the G–77 and Group B, the Conference remanded the issues on which there was no agreement to the October UNCTAD Trade and Development Board meeting.3 —Expectations for dramatic results were lower than at previous ministerial level UNCTAD meetings, in part because progress on a number of key issues—the Common Fund, results of the MTN, the declaration on resource transfers in the COW, the negotiations on a rubber agreement, etc.—had deprived LDCs of politically attractive rallying points. —The energy issue deeply divided the G–77. Manila may mark the end of the taboo on discussing this issue in North-South fora, although
