816 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX promise absorbing the furor of the Arab world, which was, in Saudi view, [the] best that could have been expected.” Saud advised that if the United States was “going to pursue Phase II of peace process, it should take steps to open direct contacts with PLO.” Otherwise, he asserted, “it would be better to forget about [the] peace process for the moment and concentrate on bilateral relations with the Arabs while the dust settles.” (Telegram 2746 from Jidda, April 4; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790154–0337) 243. Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin1 Washington, April 3, 1979, 11:56 a.m.–12:07 p.m. MB: I had a wonderful visit to Cairo!2 The people of Egypt opened their hearts to me. In the morning, tens of thousands lined the streets on both sides, and cheered and waved, and took me to their hearts. I am very moved. I left my car for a while, to the disturbance of the Egyptian secret service, and went into the crowd, which was crying, “We like you; we love you.” It was absolutely wonderful. Yesterday’s reception was at the Qubba Palace. The evening was a “thousand nights into one”. It was fantastic. The hospitality was marvelous. President Sadat and I have some agreements—we will exchange Instruments of Ratification next week,3 after debate in the Egyptian Parliament on Thursday,4 likely concluding on Sunday; Monday5 or Tuesday we’ll exchange instruments at the American monitoring station in the Sinai in early morning. Butros Ghali with their document; Dayan will have our document. Will put up a tent with all three flags. If 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 4/79–11/81. No classification marking. The time is handwritten. At the top of the document, Carter wrote, “OK. J.” Carter’s handwritten notes related to this conversation are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 66, Middle East: President Carter’s Trip to Jerusalem and Cairo: 2–4/79. 2 Begin visited Cairo on April 2 for talks with Sadat. 3 The Instruments of Ratification were exchanged between the Under Secretary of the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Saad Afra, and the Director General of the Israeli Prime Minister’s Office, Eliahu Ben-Elissar, at the U.S.-Sinai early-warning monitoring station at Um-Khashiba on April 25. (Keesing’s Contemporary Archives, 1979, p. 29951) 4 April 5. 5 April 8.
