3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
61
evidently no need to speak at length of the great importance of this
problem, and of the fact that both sides, that is the Soviet Union and the
United States, must be interested in a solution to this problem in an
equal degree. There cannot be a situation where one side would be in-
terested more than the other. In the Soviet view this was the crucial
factor that made it possible and necessary to resolve the problem of
limiting strategic arms.
It was not fortuitous that the two sides had recognized and
adopted the principal of equality and equal security (Gromyko re-
peated and stressed “equality and equal security”). Furthermore, it
would be inadmissable for either side to seek unilateral advantages in
this area. It was no accident that this formulation had become part and
parcel of the very fabric of the Soviet-American SALT negotiations at
all levels, the highest as well as the lowest. All involved in SALT liter-
ally lived with this formula. Indeed, any other approach would be
nothing but an illusion and fantasy, and a waste of time. Gromyko
could use even stronger words, but he was sure that neither side was
interested in a different approach. He wanted to emphasize these facts
at the very outset of the discussions aimed at accomplishing the task at
hand, i.e., limiting strategic arms.
Of course, the very fact that our two countries had engaged in ne-
gotiations on a new agreement limiting strategic offensive arms was in
itself a significant and important achievement. It might have been con-
ceivable that the two sides, while desiring agreement, had not engaged
in appropriate discussions. However, one could hardly conceive of
anything like that, because the alternative would have been simply to
use our respective mass media to scold each other. That would indeed
have been a very gloomy prospect. The fact that we were now engaged
in trying to work out a new agreement proved that the first SALT
agreements were viable and had proved their practical value. If this
were otherwise, both sides would have drawn quite different
conclusions.
Gromyko thought the Secretary would recall that in 1974 the So-
viet Union and the United States had reached an understanding re-
garding conclusion of a new long-term agreement limiting strategic of-
fensive arms, and had practically agreed upon the parameters of such a
new agreement. The Soviet side believed that what had been agreed
upon reflected a mutually acceptable balance of the interests of the two
sides, and was fully in accord with the objective of curbing the strategic
arms race. It would be hard to find a more precise formulation than the
words “mutually acceptable balance of the interests of the two sides.”
Gromyko thought Secretary Vance would agree that an enormous
volume of energy, resources and labor had been expanded to achieve
what had been achieved. The Vladivostok understanding, as well as
