1304 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement nuclear explosions since conventional explosives may not give the same effect due to the evolution of large amounts of gas. The seismic signal will depend strongly on the medium in which the test is conducted. The volcanic tuff in which the Rainier test was con­ ducted probably gives a relatively small seismic signal; it is only equiv­ alent to an air shot of about 20 times greater yield. Hard rock would almost certainly give a stronger seismic signal while on the other hand it may contain the radioactive products in an even smaller volume. On the other hand, unconsolidated material which is found in many places near the surface of the earth may well reduce the seismic effects below those observed in the tuff because the signal should decrease with decreasing yield stress, and unconsolidated material may have a yield stress as low as one-­tenth of that of tuff (which has about 10,000 psi). It may also be possible, by excavating a large chamber to begin with, to reduce the energy found at large distances by a factor of 10. One possibility which may reduce the seismic energy is the excava­ tion of large cavities in salt domes. Such cavities may be tens or even hundreds of millions of cubic feet in volume, and need not be spheri­ cal. For example, a cavity 150 feet in diameter and 3000 feet long may have nearly the same effect as a spherical one of the same volume. The excavation of such a cavity would be fairly costly, and its use might be limited to a single occasion because it might cave in. To find out to what extent the seismic signal from an underground explosion could be reduced by suitable choice of medium, many tests would be required but most of these could be carried out at low yield. It is likely that reduction of seismic signal is easier for low-­yield shots than for high-­yield ones. Unconsolidated material is found only in the top layers of the earth and the required burial depth increases with yield, so that it may be difficult to find such material deep enough to successfully contain a 50-­kiloton test. The digging of underground caves large enough to give a substantial reduction of the seismic signal from a 50-­kiloton explosion will be very costly and may in fact be impossible, especially since for mechanical stability a cave must be smaller at great depth than near the surface. Thus it may well be possible to reduce the signal from a 5-­kiloton explosion so that it “looks like” 1/2 kiloton, but more difficult to make 50-­kiloton explosion appear like 5 kilotons. V. Identification It is shown in Appendix A that the seismic wave from a 1-­kiloton sub­ surface explosion in surroundings similar to those of the Rainier shot will be detected by the net of seismic stations proposed for the USSR in that appendix. However, there are about 2500 earthquakes per year in the USSR which give signals of similar strength. The most promising feature of seismic signals from underground explosions distinguishing them from earthquakes is that the first pulse from explosions always
