Peru  1033
The Archbishop said that the basic cause of the serious situation in 
the South is economic - too little work and too little income.
Mr. Waugh spoke of the active role being played by Communist 
groups in Uruguay and Bolivia and of the determined anticommunist 
activity by the Government in Paraguay. He commented on the need to 
work against Communism through the schools, labor unions and the 
church.
Financial Problems of Peru
Mr. Waugh said that the Exim Bank had decided a few years ago 
that the greatest help it could give to Peru would be by making loans to 
private companies, especially in the field of mining where large invest-
ments are needed. Later the Bank began to make numerous equipment 
loans to sugar mills, chemical plants, etc. It also made a loan to finance 
hospital equipment, though it is not particularly interested in loans of 
this type. He said he believed that more small loans had been made to 
finance supplies for Peru than for any other Latin American country, 
except perhaps Mexico or Brazil.
He said he had been discouraged by Peru’s failure to pass legislation 
which would make it feasible for the Marcona Mining Co. to expand its 
operation. The Exim Bank is prepared to loan about $10 million for this 
purpose, while $15 million or more would come from other sources. 
This would help Peru’s foreign exchange situation both immediately 
and in the long run. He said he wondered if it had been a good idea 
to include the legislation for the Marcona project in a bill covering an 
entirely unrelated irrigation project.
The Minister of Finance said that there was strong political backing 
for the irrigation project but that it had run into some difficulties since 
congressmen from other regions had raised objections to the use of all 
the Marcona royalties for this project. However, he thought the bill in 
question would have been passed by Congress if the session had not 
come to end so soon. He anticipates that the bill will be passed quite 
promptly by the next session of Congress.
Mr. Waugh said that the United States makes funds available 
through the Exim Bank and, as one stockholder, through the I.B.R.D. 
The two banks try to coordinate their programs. They exchange infor-
mation regularly.
Mr. Waugh said that Peru badly needs coordination of its devel-
opment programs. It is very difficult for the Exim Bank to know what 
projects to assist because Peru has worked out no system of priorities. It 
shifts from one project to another in accordance with political pressures 
of the moment. Peru should have an inter-­agency planning group with 
a small staff. Some of the political pressures to which the individual
