December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 683 Middle East settlement. While we would not presume to predict the focus of your ultimate negotiations, we do want to highlight for you several key elements which may be useful to you in the talks. (C) First, prior year assistance levels tend to become unbreakable minimums or floors later. That argues in our view for defining any settlement aid as a special one-time package with no hint of continuation in subsequent years. (C) Second, the US budgetary impact varies significantly with alternative forms (FMS credits versus Security Supporting Assistance) of aid, so that by moving to less “costly” forms, we can hold down our budget costs even as we look at higher dollar totals of aid. Along these same lines, our current FMS credit programs are basically off-budget, unsubsidized loans, except for Israel. For Israel, we have recently (and automatically) forgiven 50% of the FMS loans, thus making the program half grant and costing us 50 cents in outlays for each FMS dollar. (C) Whatever the dollar level you contemplate in the settlement, these elements—special one-shot rather than ongoing package, more FMS than SSA, and making the FMS “regular” as opposed to “half grant”— would help to mitigate what will in any case be a major budget cost and serious threat to your present fiscal ceiling, as well as a significant threat to our other aid, particularly development aid. (C) With these concerns in mind, we offer suggestions on three foreign assistance issues that may require your decision if a Middle East settlement is reached. (C) I. Israel’s $3 billion request for extraordinary aid. The Israeli request is for full US funding of the costs of (a) replicating in the Negev two Sinai airbases (estimated by DOD to cost about $1 billion, without all required infrastructure, if constructed in three years under US Corps of Engineers control with largely imported resources); (b) other Israeli military redeployments to new facilities (estimated by Israel to cost about $1.2 billion); and (c) military equipment additional to current procurement levels (estimated by Israel to cost about $750 million). (C) We see two options: Option 1. Full US financing of the airbases only ($1 billion), either on standard FMS long-term credit terms or—if a more liberal offer is required—on the unique terms (half grant, half long-term credit) now applicable to FMS credits to Israel. If this option is chosen, we would respond to the remainder of the Israeli request by a noncommittal offer to consider, as peace treaty implementation proceeds, requests for military or economic aid in the course of annual security assistance consultations. The commitment of $1 billion would result in budget outlays of $500 million about as follows: FY 79 $150 million; FY 80 $250 million;
