December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
683
Middle East settlement. While we would not presume to predict the
focus of your ultimate negotiations, we do want to highlight for you
several key elements which may be useful to you in the talks. (C)
First, prior year assistance levels tend to become unbreakable min-
imums or floors later. That argues in our view for defining any settle-
ment aid as a special one-time package with no hint of continuation in
subsequent years. (C)
Second, the US budgetary impact varies significantly with alterna-
tive forms (FMS credits versus Security Supporting Assistance) of aid,
so that by moving to less “costly” forms, we can hold down our budget
costs even as we look at higher dollar totals of aid. Along these same
lines, our current FMS credit programs are basically off-budget, unsub-
sidized loans, except for Israel. For Israel, we have recently (and auto-
matically) forgiven 50% of the FMS loans, thus making the program
half grant and costing us 50 cents in outlays for each FMS dollar. (C)
Whatever the dollar level you contemplate in the settlement, these
elements—special one-shot rather than ongoing package, more FMS
than SSA, and making the FMS “regular” as opposed to “half grant”—
would help to mitigate what will in any case be a major budget cost and
serious threat to your present fiscal ceiling, as well as a significant
threat to our other aid, particularly development aid. (C)
With these concerns in mind, we offer suggestions on three foreign
assistance issues that may require your decision if a Middle East settle-
ment is reached. (C)
I. Israel’s $3 billion request for extraordinary aid.
The Israeli request is for full US funding of the costs of (a) repli-
cating in the Negev two Sinai airbases (estimated by DOD to cost about
$1 billion, without all required infrastructure, if constructed in three
years under US Corps of Engineers control with largely imported re-
sources); (b) other Israeli military redeployments to new facilities (esti-
mated by Israel to cost about $1.2 billion); and (c) military equipment
additional to current procurement levels (estimated by Israel to cost
about $750 million). (C)
We see two options:
Option 1. Full US financing of the airbases only ($1 billion), either
on standard FMS long-term credit terms or—if a more liberal offer is re-
quired—on the unique terms (half grant, half long-term credit) now ap-
plicable to FMS credits to Israel. If this option is chosen, we would re-
spond to the remainder of the Israeli request by a noncommittal offer to
consider, as peace treaty implementation proceeds, requests for mili-
tary or economic aid in the course of annual security assistance consul-
tations. The commitment of $1 billion would result in budget outlays of
$500 million about as follows: FY 79 $150 million; FY 80 $250 million;
