936 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 281. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne) to the Secretary of the Cabinet (Watson)1 Washington, April 25, 1977 SUBJECT Cabinet-Level Task Force on International Health Following up on our recent phone conversation, here are the basic reasons for establishing such a group: 1. Enables the President to mobilize government-wide support on a cross-cutting issue which involves 18 federal agencies and departments. The far flung nature of this area means there are various competing interests, especially between State, AID and HEW. Any study or plan conducted within or among these agencies without executive office involvement in balancing competing interests during the phase when policies are being formulated merely perpetuates and may even further polarize and diffuse interests and responsibility. 2. Improves prospects for enactment of legislative reforms and fostering balanced policies within the Cabinet thus reducing resistance in Congress. The Congressional committee jurisdictional makeup encourages that HEW advocates will be pitted against State/AID advocates and any legislation or program proposals which do not take this into account enhances a confrontation between committees. I am interested in results and action, especially so that the President is in the position of leading and not reacting on this issue to Congressional initiatives which could emerge from four different committees representing distinct special interest constituencies, eg, those advocating a lead agency for HEW and those advocating a lead agency role for State. This is of particular significance in view of the effort by Senator Kennedy to seize the initiative of this issue from the President. 3. Helps to establish and strengthen the Cabinet structure concept in the Carter Presidency as a useful planning and decision making tool for the President. If this Administration is to achieve a reduction in the number of special purpose entities institutionalized within EOP, and demonstrate to Congress that the Cabinet can carry out planning and analysis functions of a cross-cutting nature, then we must begin now to use the Cab- 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues— Peter Bourne Files, Subject Files, Box 34, International Health, 4/1/77–4/28/77. No classification marking.
