National Security Policy  973
cohesively as it might be to the key problems now confronting the West, 
unless there is some return to the sense of urgency that existed when 
the alliance was formed. Improvements in the present structure of orga­
nizations and relationships could be of assistance. In general, however, 
the Western European public has settled down into a pattern of pros­
perity in which it will be difficult to arouse great support either for 
increased defense measures or for large-­scale aid to underdeveloped 
countries.
V. STABILITY IN THE UNDERDEVELOPED AREAS
A. General Problems
Nationalism and Attitudes Toward The Major Powers
60. Generally speaking, the force of nationalist feeling will remain 
undiminished in the underdeveloped areas. The nations that came into 
being soon after World War II, now entering their second decade of 
existence, are becoming somewhat less strident. On the other hand, the 
newer nations, and those due to emerge in Africa in the future, will 
have continuing spasms of extreme nationalism, especially where the 
break with the colonial power is accompanied by bitterness.
61. It is worth noting that the next decade will see not only the 
throwing off of almost all remaining colonial ties, but probably some 
additional adjustments of national units. Many new states have been 
built on uncertain foundations of national identity (e.g., Indonesia, 
Pakistan, the individual Arab countries). In Africa, where the bulk of 
the new nations of the 1960’s will be, political boundaries bear little 
relation to tribal or other natural divisions. Moreover, cultural ties, 
political objectives, and in many cases economic factors often point to 
wider regional groupings, such as the UAR, Black African federations, 
and a possible Maghreb grouping in North Africa. The result could be 
a number of changes in political boundaries, involving partition, some 
type of federation or both. Such changes would not, however, neces­
sarily reduce the effect of nationalist feeling: at least in the Arab World 
they could intensify it.
62. The onetime colonial powers are, of course, now largely “ex,” 
save in Africa. Elsewhere in the underdeveloped areas anticolonialism, 
in its narrow sense of resentment at present or past political domina­
tion, is declining and will decline further. The same feelings, however, 
can be and are applied equally strongly against real or apparent dom­
ination in the economic sphere, as illustrated in Latin America. Old-­
style anticolonialism is being replaced by “have-­not vs. have” feelings 
no less serious and potentially harmful, compounded by regional and 
color consciousness. For all of these antagonisms, the US is a prime 
target; if there is any comfort it is that the USSR is becoming more and 
more tarred with the same brush.
