92  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
We could suggest that future Mutual Security Programs would be 
geared increasingly to this need.
Our Latin American request could thus symbolize the “nation 
building” goal that the U.S. set for itself in the period ahead.
This goal might be further dramatized in a major Presidential 
address to the General Assembly this fall.
The President could recall his trips to Asia and Latin America, and 
cite the first-­hand evidence which moved him to propose increasing aid 
for such purposes as housing, health, agricultural, and education pro-
grams. He could call on all countries—­large and small—­to take action 
to this end: bilaterally and through existing multilateral instruments. 
He could announce that he would recommend enlarged U.S. programs 
along these lines to his successor.
5. This course of action could be a triple play.
(a) It would do much in Latin America to contain the appeal of 
Castroism and to offset the adverse effects of any U.S. action against 
Castro.
(b) It would regain the initiative for the free world in this post-­
Summit lull, by directing free men’s efforts to a new and constructive 
goal instead of to brooding about Communist pressures and proposals.
(c) It would enhance world-­wide respect for U.S. leadership, by 
dramatizing our support of groups and programs which are designed 
to improve the lot of the common man and thus to enhance “stability 
through change”.5
[Here follows as outline for a Presidential message to Congress 
concerning a new initiative for Latin America.]
5 In a memorandum to Smith, dated July 6, Rubottom stated in part the following: 
“I will stand with you 100 percent on this recommendation and I believe the NACOIAA 
will do likewise. At an appropriate occasion today I will tell Mr. Dillon something of my 
supporting views.” He also informed Smith that ARA had set in motion a specific plan-
ning effort, and that the two would fully coincide. (PPS Files, Lot 67 D 548, “American 
Republics 1960–1961”)
