793.00/91 [Document 654] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State MANCHESTER, MASS., July 20, 1925. [Received July 21.] No. 701 SIR: I have the honour to inform you that His Majesty’s Government have given the most careful consideration to the views of the United States Government as set out in your note of the 13th instant regarding the suggested reply to the representations recently addressed by the Chinese Government to the Corps Diplomatique at Peking. The conclusions which His Majesty’s Government have now arrived at are as follows: — After the fullest possible review of the facts of the situation His Majesty’s Government are still of the opinion that it would be inadvisable to make any delay in acquainting the Chinese Government with the attitude of the Powers. In this opinion they are supported by the replies received from the other governments whom they have consulted. Nevertheless, in deference to the views of the United States Government, His Majesty’s Government are prepared to endorse the proposal submitted by the Italian Government96 which appears to be in substantial accord with the procedure contemplated by the United States Government. His Majesty’s Government are also prepared to adopt a series of amendments which the Japanese Government have proposed to the draft joint declaration conveyed to the Acting Secretary of State in my note No. 683 of July 7th. I am forwarding the text of these suggested amendments under cover of a separate note and a perusal of them will show that they go far to meet the views of the United States Government regarding the Commission to consider the question of extraterritoriality. At the same time, however, His Majesty’s Government would deprecate giving the investigations of this Commission so distinct a lead as is implied in the relevant passages of your note under reference. Taking into account the above considerations, which call for an amplification of the proposals conveyed to you in my note No. 677 of July 3rd last, His Majesty’s Government are of opinion that the reply of the Corps Diplomatique at Peking to the representations of the Chinese Government should consist: (1) of an emphatic statement that there can be no discussion of particular reforms much less a review by the Powers of their treaty relations with China until the Chinese Government have given evidence of their ability and willingness to suppress disorders and to enforce respect for the safety of
