422 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 65. Memorandum From Richard Davis of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)1 Washington, December 20, 1989 SUBJECT Your December 21 Meeting on START: Resolving the ALCM Issue You are meeting at 1:00 on Thursday2 afternoon with Baker, Cheney, and Powell to discuss START issues. As you know, Arnie has been chairing an off-­the-­record group to support your discussions. That group has completed an issue paper on ALCMs (Tab 1). Although the paper has not been distributed outside the NSC staff pending your approval, it is likely that the members of the group have prepared their principals to discuss the ALCM issue when they meet with you. This memo provides our suggestions about how to structure the ALCM discussion and our thoughts about possible negotiating approaches with the Soviets. Objectives and Stakes The primary U.S. objective is to maintain the flexibility to deploy large numbers of nuclear ALCMS notwithstanding START limits, and to insulate conventional ALCMs from START constraints. Imposing tight limits on Soviet ALCMs is no more than a secondary priority. Soviet goals are a mirror image. The primary Soviet objective probably is to constrain the U.S. ALCM force as much as possible. Moscow may be particularly concerned about foreclosing any significant increases beyond the currently planned U.S. ALCM force. The Soviets evidently do not plan to deploy a large ALCM force themselves and therefore do not believe that tight ALCM constraints would significantly limit their actions. Despite these opposing objectives, the key ALCM issues in dispute—­counting rules, range threshold, and distinguishability—­ are perfect for horsetrading among them. At the same time, there is considerable uncertainty about which side has a greater stake in how the overall ALCM question is resolved. Consequently, there is a wide range of views about how much leverage we can get elsewhere in the 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, Scowcroft Close-Hold Files, Box WI–13, NSC Original Files—IF—Brent Scowcroft Folder #4 [8921239–8921549]. Secret. Sent for information. Sent through Kanter. A stamped notation indicates Scowcroft saw the memorandum. 2 December 21. No minutes were found.
