244  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
probably unsatisfactory to IMF, particularly in light earlier assurances 
more rapid depreciation.3
3 In telegram 176 from Santiago, October 31, Ambassador Howe reported his discus-
sion of the day with Chilean Finance Minister Vergara, and Vergara’s opposition to the idea 
that the IMF would continue to support the Ibáñez Government in spite of its violation 
of commitments and then present the new Government with unfriendly demands. Howe 
stated that the Embassy recognized possibilities for short-­term financing, but “feels it both 
unfair and unwise force new government resort to makeshift interim measures first two 
weeks in office,” and was “especially reluctant see new government start meeting financial 
crises through demand advance copper tax payments.” He advised that the United States 
should demonstrate its confidence in the new government, and renewed the Embassy’s 
recommendation that the Department “urge IMF permit Chile make October drawings and 
send mission Chile for consultations new government.” (393.13/10-3158)
The Department responded to Howe in telegram 174 to Santiago, November 3, 
stating that it appreciated and concurred in the Ambassador’s view of the importance 
of demonstrating confidence in the new government, but could not and did not wish to 
attempt to dictate IMF decisions. The Department advised Howe that it was “best you 
limit observations to Vergara and McKenna to stressing importance Chile communicate 
directly with Fund with view to solving problem.” (393.13/11-358)
CH–13.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Chile (Howe) to the 
Department of State1
 
Santiago, November 24, 1958, 10 p.m.
199. Discussed financial and other problems facing new govern-
ment at luncheon meeting today with [illegible in the original], Foreign 
Relations, Defense, Banco Central [illegible in the original], and others. 
They view financial problems as time bomb certain explode by March 
next year unless they obtain substantial outside assistance to enable 
them meet obligations in both foreign exchange and pesos until mea-
sures which they are determined take begin having effect.
Feeling situation urgent GOC was planning send mission Washington 
next week to lay groundwork for negotiation necessary loan agreements. 
We have succeeded in dissuading GOC from this premature action but 
as alternative have agreed recommend that [illegible in the original] 
mission come here from Washington study situation on the ground. 
Vergara has promised have statistics and program available study such 
group within a week. Have continually stressed importance having such 
program designed cope with difficult situation faced through 1959 and 
even more importantly to show Chile’s real determination do what she 
can for herself. Vergara and others appreciate this and have repeatedly 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 398.13/11–2458. Confidential.
