430  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
restructuring on stability, however, depends in part on the capabilities 
of the remaining ballistic missile forces, and in part on the continuing 
inability of heavy bombers and ALCMs carry out short warning strikes. 
The U.S. position is based on a conclusion that, notwithstanding the 
deployment of stealth bombers and ALCMs, the warning time and 
attack coordination uncertainties in heavy bomber forces will remain 
high enough so that a START agreement that leads to increased reliance 
on “slow-­flying” systems will improve stability.
Range Limits. Flexibility for future U.S. forces has led us to propose a 
1500 km range threshold for long-­range ALCMs. All shorter-­range mis-
siles would be counted under the lenient “one per bomber” Reykjavik 
counting rule (The Soviets have proposed 600 km). In part this posi-
tion is designed to protect conventional ALCMs and give us additional 
negotiating room on the distinguishability issue (see below). In part this 
position is intended to protect theater and strategic options for extend-
ing the range of shorter-­range nuclear missiles at some future time to 
offset improving Soviet air defenses. The U.S. position concludes that 
these benefits outweigh the corresponding increase in the threat posed 
by potential Soviet air-­to-­surface missiles, a conclusion based in large 
part on the substantial asymmetries in air defenses.
As the range threshold in START is lowered from 1500 km, vari-
ous U.S. cruise missile options are affected differently. For air-launched 
cruise missiles carried by heavy bombers, the ALCM range threshold 
in START does not affect target coverage, since strategic ALCMs are 
designed to fly to greater ranges than 1500 km. The range threshold 
could, in principle, affect the maximum range of future shorter-­range 
stand-­off missiles carried by penetrating bombers. However, the cur-
rent SRAM has a maximum range of 60–180 km, depending on its pro-
file, and no currently planned missile of this type will have a range 
over 600 km.
For air-­launched cruise missiles carried by tactical aircraft not 
constrained by START, the START ALCM range threshold sets the 
upper boundary on the permitted range that can directly affect target 
coverage in the theater. Notional launch points in the North Sea, the 
Mediterranean, and the extreme northern flank suggest that with a 
1500 km threshold, over ten times as many potential targets in Europe 
could be covered as with a 600 km threshold, and with a 1000 km 
threshold, over five times as many as with a 600 km threshold. There 
are no U.S. plans at present for nuclear-­armed stand-­off missiles over 
600 km range. There are plans for future conventional stand-­off mis-
siles between 600 km and 1500 km range. One such cruise missile, Tacit 
Rainbow, currently exists, and therefore must be protected by a range 
threshold of at least 800 km (since all existing types of ALCMs over 
the range threshold will be treated as nuclear ALCMs). U.S. interest
