3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
108
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
At a special conference, decisions could be worked out by minorities as
well, including the major powers, and then converted into an interna-
tional agreement. Success at such a conference would be determined
simply by the wishes of the parties, and not by the number of votes in
favor. The procedure for taking decisions at a conference would be to-
tally different. Often people did not understand this difference, but the
difference was great indeed. It should not be precluded that at a confer-
ence a limited number of states could take a position to conclude an
agreement, and such an agreement would become an effective interna-
tional document, whether or not a majority of states signed. Gromyko
did not want to prejudge the special General Assembly session, but
would ask the Secretary to reflect on the possibility of convening a
World Disarmament Conference following the special General As-
sembly session. It could not possibly be detrimental to the United
States or the Soviet Union, since no one could impose anything on
anyone else by a majority of votes.
The Secretary quite agreed that a World Disarmament Conference
was a noble objective for the future. On the other hand, there were so
many pressing things now, that it was above all necessary to show the
world that we could make progress on such practical things as strategic
arms limitations and in the Vienna MBFR talks. We should deal with
things on the table before talking about a disarmament conference.
Both the Soviet Union and the United States had stated that they would
actively participate in the special General Assembly session, but it was
our view that we should give priority to the things already on the table
and before us.
Gromyko believed that efforts to convene a World Disarmament
Conference would not in the least degree interfere with efforts to re-
solve other disarmament problems. He also thought the world was en-
tering a phase where we had to take up many things in several arenas,
because now the world had become so complex that we had a good one
hundred years of work ahead of us. In any case, parallel efforts would
have to be applied. That was all he had to say on the World Disarma-
ment Conference.
CHEMICAL WEAPONS
Gromyko said that he would like to instruct his representatives in
Geneva to suggest that the CCD start drafting the text of an agreement
on chemical weapons, provided the United States agreed of course. In
the process of drafting, some problems might simply disappear. So far
the CCD had indulged in philosophical discussions. This is all he had
to say on the subject. (He remarked that this was the briefest statement
he had ever made on any issue.)
The Secretary agreed that some progress had been made through
discussions between technical people in this area. We were ready and
