September 18–December 16, 1978
429
126.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State1
Cairo, November 8, 1978, 1309Z
24571. Subject: Letter From President Sadat to President Carter.
1. PriMin Khalil telephoned this afternoon to say he was sending
over immediately a letter from President Sadat to President Carter on
the Washington negotiations. Khalil asked that I forward it to President
Carter as quickly as possible and before Boutros’ arrival in Washington
later this afternoon.
2. Text follows: Quote:
Dear President Carter:
I would like to express to you, once again, my profound apprecia-
tion of the role you have been playing relentlessly for the cause of
peace, which I have fully acknowledged in my recent speech in the
opening session of the Egyptian Peoples Assembly. As you know I am
following the Washington talks. It is obvious that certain problems re-
main to be solved. I am confident that you and your able assistants will
spare no effort to make the ends meet and promote agreement.
One of these problems which is of utmost importance and is cru-
cial to the ultimate success of our efforts is the Palestinian problem. I
firmly believe that we have to reach an unequivocal agreement on what
is to take place in the West Bank and Gaza in implementation of the
Camp David Framework. Thus, we should lay down the format for es-
tablishing the self-governing authority and the abolition of the Israeli
military government and its administration as provided for in the
“Framework.” This would be accompanied by withdrawal of Israeli
forces and redeployment of the remaining force in the specific security
locations. A target date should be set for all that if we expect all parties
to take the concept of transfer of authority seriously. This would re-
quire agreeing on the substantive aspects of the elections rather than
the procedural ones. Also, the transfer of authority requires a clear defi-
nition of the powers and authority of the self-governing authority. All
this requires a binding commitment from Israel to take these measures
in a specified time. The logical date for that is the completion of the in-
terim withdrawal in Sinai.
The implementation of these measures could proceed in the Gaza
Strip first, for a variety of reasons. First, we have a certain responsibility
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850067–2773. Se-
cret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. A signed copy of this letter is in the Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign
Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat, 1–12/78.
