302
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
hostages are not well. We will continue to focus on the fact that the
hostages have not been seen for nearly a month by any outside observ-
ers.7 (C)
7. Australia. Mr. Solomon noted that, in his view, the economic
steps which we have taken to date do not really bring effective pressure
to bear on Iran. The Iranians are making $1.5 billion per month on oil
sales above and beyond their import requirements, so they are well
equipped to find alternative sources.8 [12½ lines not declassified]
8. Meetings. The group agreed that no further meetings would be
scheduled until Wednesday, December 26, at 9:00 a.m. unless there
was some special need. (U)
7 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “good—try to prevent their becoming propaganda
tools for Khomeini.”
8 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Be firm with Australia on this.”
116.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
President Carter1
Washington, December 24, 1979
[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
4. Iran. The Swiss Ambassador in Tehran, who saw Ghotbzadeh
again Sunday,2 reported that Ghotbzadeh seemed not to know what
to do next. He felt we had to wait for a few days for further movement.
He confirmed arrangements for the pastoral visit to the hostages that
seem generally consistent with our other information. The Ambassa-
dor’s personal impression is that the Iranians are organizing a show
around the visiting clergymen.
The Italians have expressed on behalf of the other EC–9 countries
their concern for their communities in Iran when steps are taken in
the UN toward a sanctions resolution. They and the Japanese feel that
the Iranian Government and mobs in the street may react against any
embassies or communities that support us on the sanctions issue. We
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14. Secret. Carter initialed “C” in the top
right corner of the memorandum. Carter was at Camp David December 21–28.
2 Sunday, December 21.
