Yugoslavia
785
because it does not have enough range to reach the US and, therefore,
believes it should not be limited in SALT; Brown then pointed out the
inconsistency of Soviet arguments when attempting to limit US land-
based and sea-based cruise missiles and at the same time deploying
the SS–20 MRBM’s.
Brown indicated that the US and the Soviets were close to a SALT
II agreement; however, in this agreement, the resolution of some issues
would be postponed. Brown said at Vladivostok a strategic aggregate
of 2400 was agreed upon, but now both sides have reduced their
number and are negotiating at between 2160–2250. Brown emphasized
that this is not a concession because the agreed number would be equal
for both sides.
Brown mentioned other proposals under negotiation: (1) 1200–1250
ICBM/SCBM MIRV’s with a sub-limit of 800–850 land-based ICBM’s
with MIRV’s. (2) The agreement would extend until 1985. (3) There
would be a limit on the deployment of sea-based and land-based cruise
missiles beyond 600 kms. All tests beyond 600 kms would be air-
launched. (4) The limit on air-launched cruise missiles would be 2500
kms, but this would be for a three-year period. (5) The limits on the
mobile missiles would apply to deploying and testing the missile but
not to testing the launchers. (6) Some sort of assurance of limitation
on Backfire bombers, possibly involving production rate, refueling and
training. Ljubicic asked a question to clarify the 2500 kms limit. Brown
said that it would apply for three years to air-launched cruise missiles.
Ljubicic was satisfied with the explanation. Brown, continuing to com-
ment on SALT, said that the bombers and cruise missiles are less
destabilizing than ICBM’s as it takes longer for them to get on target;
i.e., about eight hours. Ljubicic commented that SALT II agreement
appears to protect the interests of the Soviet Union and the US; for
example, a 600 kms cruise missile from [less than 1 line not declassified]
would be militarily significant to Yugoslavia, so from the Yugoslav
standpoint there would be no difference in the 2500 or 600 kms limits.
Brown said that the 600 kms and the 2500 kms cruise missile limits
make a difference to the Soviet Union.
Ljubicic then asked if there was an attempt to reduce the stock of
[less than 1 line not declassified]. Brown replied that this issue is not
included in SALT and explained the omission of forward-based systems
as nonstrategic systems in SALT. Brown cited Soviet SS–4, SS–5, and SS–
20 missile systems and US aircraft that are forward-based as excluded
in all negotiations. He said that such systems could be included in a
separate forum or a SALT III agreement. Ljubicic told Brown that he
did not ask about systems that threaten Russia, but that he is talking
about stocks of nuclear weapons that threaten Yugoslavia. He said that
he would like to see detente enlarged to all countries, to make the
world more secure. Brown said that he understood.
