804 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Tab A Memorandum for President Carter4 Washington, undated SUBJECT Political Action Options in Iran [portion marking not declassified] 1. Political Situation. Despite the confusion in Teheran and the occasional outbursts of minority unrest in the provinces, Khomeini’s hold on power is relatively secure at this point. There is no opposition leader ready to challenge him directly, and he remains capable of mobilizing mass support to confront his opponents. [portion marking not declassified] 2. If Khomeini were to die in the near term (next 3–6 months), however, there are few functioning institutions capable of holding the Islamic Republic together. An intense power struggle among his lieutenants would be virtually inevitable. There is no mechanism for this succession. [portion marking not declassified] 3. Over the longer term (beyond six months), there is some possibility that the Islamic Republic will be institutionalized and its leaders will be able to consolidate their positions. If the Islamic right can impose some order, the left may avoid a direct challenge. If the right falters, however, the left will probably move quickly to exploit the situation. The Iranian left is too weak at this point to seize power, but it is aggressively trying to prepare for a showdown with the clergy sometime in the future. Leftist leaders hope that the country will become disillusioned with the failures and excesses of the mullahs and look for an alternative. As chaos continues, the stronger the left is likely to become. [portion marking not declassified] 4. Political Action Options. It is presumed that the political action options we are seeking are to help prevent the left from filling a vacuum created by the failure of the Islamic Republic experiment. At this time, at least, it is not planned to use political action deliberately to undermine or attempt to overthrow the Khomeini regime. In attempting to build a political base from which to be able to influence the course of events in Iran, we have several options: a. the so-called external option of dealing with expatriated Iranians living in Europe and the United States; 4 Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]
