Nicaragua  839
being correlated with those of the Honduran exiles and the plan of 
attack called for the two groups to move simultaneously against the 
Government of Nicaragua.
The Ambassador also stated he had information that three air-
planes would fly shortly from Mexico to Costa Rica with armaments for 
the Nicaraguan exiles. He said that two of the planes would leave from 
Miami proceeding first to Mexico to meet the third plane and then all 
three would fly to Costa Rica. Mr. Rubottom asked the Ambassador if 
he could give the Department any information concerning the reported 
two planes scheduled to leave from Miami in order that the Department 
could check into the matter. The Ambassador said he would give the 
information he had to Mr. Taylor.
The Ambassador said his Government was concerned over the 
threat of a movement of exiles against it. He said his Government had 
expected the exiles to move on February 21, but thought perhaps they 
had delayed knowing that President Somoza was on the alert for such 
a move. He deplored the bloodshed and difficulties which would ensue 
if the exiles were permitted to launch an attack against Nicaragua. He 
then asked Mr. Rubottom if our respective Ambassadors in Honduras 
and Costa Rica could draw the respective Presidents’ attention to 
the dangers of permitting the exiles to prepare for an attack against 
the Nicaraguan Government. Mr. Rubottom agreed to inform our 
two Ambassadors, but said he would leave the action taken to their 
discretion.
Mr. Rubottom informed the Ambassador that he appreciated the 
information he had given him. He said that we would continue to remain 
alert to such possibilities outlined by the Ambassador of an attack on 
his Government from Nicaraguan exiles. However, he pointed out to 
the Ambassador that the revolutionary exiles lived on such rumors and 
deliberately generated them without foundation in hopes of keeping 
Governments in a state of agitation. The Ambassador agreed that the 
Nicaraguan exiles had been generating like rumors for years.
In closing, the Ambassador said he had heard it was the intention of 
the new Honduran Foreign Minister to renounce the agreement to have 
the Nicaraguan-Honduran border dispute settled in the International 
Court of Justice. However, he did not believe this could be true.
