458 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —The Young Bill (H.R. 11098):4 On April 5 Congressman Bill Young of Florida, the ranking minority member of the Foreign Operations Subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee, introduced a bill requiring that the U.S. seek to modify the charter of the IFIs to require that each institution establish a human rights standard to be considered in connection with every application for assistance. The bill would also require the President to report to Congress within three months actions taken to gain acceptance of such amendments of the IFI charters. It is not clear how much support this proposal will receive in Congress. On the merits of the proposal, we believe any such effort to amend the IFI charters would arouse enormous controversy within the institutions and generate great bitterness towards the U.S. Under present arrangements, U.S. efforts to bring human rights considerations to bear in the IFIs, while resented by several IFI members, are not being actively opposed, and in some instances they are being actively supported by likeminded governments. If, however, the U.S. takes the major step of seeking an amendment in the IFI charters, what is now tacit opposition from some governments would likely become vigorous and sustained opposition that could have a deleterious effect on the functioning of the institutions. The fact that some IFI members would oppose any such effort is not dispositive. But since it is not apparent that such charter revisions are necessary in order to take human rights actions in the IFIs, there would appear to be no countervailing benefit in the course the Young bill requires. —Human Rights Reports: We have reason to believe that several conservative members of Congress will introduce legislation requiring that the Administration submit reports on human rights conditions in all countries that receive IFI loans (currently we are required to submit such reports on countries that receive bilateral U.S. economic and military assistance). Approximately 50 additional reports would be required. Some countries, especially Brazil, would be likely to react quite negatively to our submission of such a report. The Administration has opposed this legislation. —Harkin Amendment: Witteveen Facility. Over Administration opposition, the House passed on February 23 by a voice vote a Harkin amendment to the Bretton Woods Agreement Act.5 The amendment 4 The bill was referred to the House Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs. Young subsequently introduced identical versions of the bill—H.R. 12660 and H.R. 13161—on May 10 and June 15 respectively. Each bill, in turn, was referred to the House Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs. 5 H.R. 9214, introduced by Representative Stephen Neal on September 20, 1977, and reported to the House from the House Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs on January 27, 1978, authorized a $1.7 billion U.S. contribution to the IMF’s Witteveen Facility. The amended H.R. 9214 passed the House on February 23, 267 to 125.
