600.A4e/649 [Document 635] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State PEKING, July 8, 1926. [Received September 11.] SIR: For the convenience of the Department, and as a means of summarizing, as well as supplementing, the official Proceedings of the Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, a full set of which is enclosed herewith,84 and copies of which have been furnished to the Department as they were issued, we have the honor to submit the following report concerning the work of the Conference to date: The First Plenary Session, October 26, 1925. The First Plenary Session of the Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff was held at Peking on Monday, October 26, 1925, at 10:20 o’clock a.m., in the Chu Jen Tang, Chung Hai, Winter Palace. His Excellency, Shen Jui-lin, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of China, presided, and after formally opening the Conference, introduced the Chief Executive of the Chinese Republic, Tuan Chi-jui, who delivered an address of welcome. (See Minutes of First Plenary Session, October 26, 1925, for text of address). After the Chief Executive’s address the Conference was organized for work, His Excellency, Mr. Shen Jui-lin, Minister for Foreign Affairs, being elected Chairman of the Conference on motion of Mr. Oudendijk, the Netherlands Delegate. The Chairman thanked the Delegates for the honor they had conferred upon him, and after a brief address of welcome, introduced Dr. C. T. Wang, who laid before the Conference the proposals of the Chinese Government on the question of Tariff Autonomy. Dr. Wang referred to the fact that at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 the Chinese Delegation had presented the question of Tariff Autonomy, but that it was not discussed on the ground that it did not come within the scope of the Conference. He also stated that it was brought up at the Washington Conference and discussed but that it was not accepted in toto whereupon the Chinese Delegation at that Conference had declared,
