930  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Mr. Rubottom and members of his staff are prepared to meet with 
you at your convenience to discuss this proposed recommendation as 
well as procedures to be followed for our display of the Panamanian 
flag in the Canal Zone.
A copy of this letter is being sent to Assistant Secretary of Defense 
(ISA) John N. Irwin II.
Sincerely yours,
Lester D. Mallory
PM–29.	
Letter from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense 
for International Security Affairs (Knight) to the Deputy 
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1

Washington, January 14, 1960.
Dear Livie:
Confirming our conversation, the Department of Defense believes 
that it is unwise to accede to the Panamanian request to fly the 
Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone. A memorandum setting forth our 
reasoning is attached.2 Basically, we feel strongly on the basis of all of 
the information available to us that acceding to the Panamanian request 
will be interpreted as a sign of weakness on our part, and more impor-
tantly, as a symbol of the rightness of the position of those Panamanians 
who urge that the Canal and the Zone territory should be controlled by 
the Republic of Panama.
We are aware that there are both other and competing consider-
ations which you and your Colleagues are most competent to weigh, 
and therefore, we confidently leave the ultimate decision to the 
Department of State. If you find it necessary or desirable to state our 
views, however, we would appreciate your doing so essentially as set 
forth in this letter and the attached.
In the event that it is ultimately decided that the Panamanian 
flag should be displayed in the Canal Zone, we are also of the opinion 
that this should be done a suitable period of time after the forthcom-
ing Panamanian elections. Perhaps the next November Panamanian 
Independence Day would be most appropriate.
1. Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.19/1–1460. Confidential.
2 Not printed.
