January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1087
David and took another channel in the peace process and the rest of the
Arab world is not fast enough to follow him in that direction. If damage
is done to Egypt, the pendulum can swing just as fast. We have night-
mares about this. We hope that Egypt will remain an open society and
maintain its political direction away from the Soviets. We are far more
interested in this than the Americans are, so we are very careful. As far
as timing goes there is a need for Sadat to fulfill the expectations that he
has raised. As far as the exchange of Ambassadors is concerned, why
should it all be on one side. Why should the gestures always be some-
thing that Israel wants and not something that would satisfy Arab
public opinion. We certainly hope the Ambassador will not go to Jeru-
salem. If time is given to one aspect of the question, then time should be
given to all aspects of the question. The speeding up of this process
must not be at the expense of the trust of others. If so, it will react badly
on Egypt. Not all Egyptians are President Sadats. We hope that he will
regain the leadership of the Arab world. If we feel frustration, it is not
because we do not want cooperation with the United States but because
we see the dangers involved. The Israeli problem will be solved over
time that is certain but we see dangers of letting it go on for a very long
period of time with no progress. Right now the Syrians are preparing
for a war of attrition. Why is that? They see the acceleration of delivery
of F–16s to Israel. It is important that the United States pay a little atten-
tion to the psychology of the Arab world who will be your allies against
the Soviet Union. Israel is not a bulwark against the Soviets. They are
rather the way the Soviets enter the region. If Israel is interested in
maintaining a noncommunist Middle East, then they must cooperate.
They cannot provide military hegemony in the region as a way of
keeping the Soviets out. If I express my emotions, I can only say that
you listen to Sadat when he is emotional. (Dr. Brzezinski noted that
when Prince Saud was emotional he sounded like President Sadat
when he was calm.)
Dr. Brzezinski said the President feels very much as you do. You are
speaking to the converted. However, if we compare today as opposed
to two years ago there has been staggering progress made. The Israelis
have now given up the notion of retaining Sinai. They said that they
would never give up the settlements. In a walk with Begin he said that
his hand would fall off, his eyes would fall out, before giving up a
single Israeli settlement. Yet, he signed the paper giving up Israeli set-
tlements. This is not fast enough for you or for us. The problem is how
to keep the United States people, the Congress and the Israeli people on
our side. There has been a breakthrough in defining self-rule for the
Palestinians. No longer is the issue how to incorporate Judea and
Sumeria [Samaria] into Israel. This process is accelerated. Israeli public
opinion shows a genuine shift in recognizing the need to hand over the
West Bank for a true security settlement.
