Arms Control and Disarmament  1479
that what we know about their capabilities in the 10 to 20 kiloton range 
indicates that they have not highly developed abilities in this area. With 
respect to our requirements in the small weapons field, Dr. Bethe admit­
ted that there was much that would still be done to improve our position, 
but that we did have something of “every type in every yield.” For us it 
is not a question of having or not having, but rather a problem of further 
refinements. Dr. Killian pointed out that you could go on endlessly mak­
ing weapons refinements and that the Soviet Union could also. In view 
of our relative position in this field, the Soviet Union would have more to 
gain by continued testing.
Dr. Bethe said he wished to make two final points. The first was to 
emphasize that since the Soviet Union has not kept the privacy agree­
ment in the meeting, it would be to the advantage of our Delegation if 
the “right things” could be said in Washington, particularly in clarifica­
tion of our position on controls. If we could abandon disarmament link, 
we would be in a strong position from the propaganda stand-­point. 
Secondly, he wished to say that whereas the UK had been at pains 
to maintain a united front with the U.S. in the open meetings, their 
position essentially was quite different and sooner or later this would 
come out. The British believe that cessation of nuclear tests is inevitable 
under any circumstances and that any controls we could get from the 
Soviet Union would be “gravy”. Consequently, the UK will, in the last 
analysis, be willing to settle for substantially less than we will.
393.	 Telegram Supnu 77 From Geneva1
Geneva, November 21, 1958, 11 a.m.
Supnu 77. US delegation has been giving close study to problem 
of how to (A) move negotiations forward into actual discussion con­
trols, or (B) clearly establish Soviet unwillingness to deal seriously with 
controls and thereby place on Soviet onus for failure make progress 
towards treaty.
General Soviet position as reflected both inside and outside confer­
ence now seems clear. Soviets for present, and we believe for indefinite 
period, are willing stay on position that there must be some agreement, 
at least in principle, on QTE cessation UNQTE before Soviets will move 
1 Source: Proposes change in negotiating position in nuclear test conference. Secret; 
Niact; Limited Distribution. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/11–2158.
