Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 251 and poor nations, transcend ideological boundaries and the traditional great power rivalries.3 —The US identifies with these aspirations and will pursue policies to help shape the process in a constructive manner. —This is the context in which we view the question of human rights. —A major part of your UN speech4 will deal with the global agenda. A second element in your policy will be the continuing close relationship with our allies in Europe and Asia; we intend to give the alliances a new sense of purpose by cooperating not only in the traditional areas of military and political affairs, but increasingly in new areas. Third, the US will continue to maintain a strong defense posture. This is not said as a threat but reflects the realities of the present period.5 Finally, we want to work for a reduction in tensions—both in regional conflicts such as the Middle East and Africa, and in functional areas of arms control, arms transfer, and non-proliferation.6 2. US-Soviet Relations US-Soviet relations will occupy an important place in your policies and can contribute to the growth of a new international order.7 —We recognize that strong elements of competition and rivalry persist in that relationship. They have deep historical roots and reflect the differences in our two societies. —Recognizing these realities we nevertheless believe that stronger elements of a cooperative relationship can emerge if we accept the principles of restraint and reciprocity. These can be the foundations of a genuine detente; on this basis we can gain domestic support. Otherwise, relations will be erratic. The current task is how to give our common interests a new impetus, so that the cooperative elements will become the predominant feature of the relationship. 3 In the right-hand margin next to this point, the President listed: “Technology, Food, non-prolif, LAmer, Mid E, S Africa, NATO, PRC, V Nam, Cuba, Japan, S Korea.” 4 See Document 56. In the right-hand margin next to this point, the President wrote: “Hum Rts.” 5 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote: “strong defense.” 6 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote: “Arms Sales, MBFR, CTB, SALT, Indian Oc, Satellites.” 7 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote: “US/SU, Peace, Competition.”
