Romania
707
event. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800098–
0113) Mrs. Horodinca returned to the Romanian Embassy in Washing-
ton after her husband’s defection, where she was immediately recalled
to Bucharest. In telegram 56600 to Bucharest, March 2, the Department
informed the Embassy that after meeting with her, Department and
Immigration officials were satisfied that she was returning to Bucharest
on her own free will. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P870105–0275) On her way to the airport, however, Mrs. Horodinca
collapsed, was taken to a hospital, and subsequently decided to remain
in the United States.
On March 4, the Embassy in Bucharest reported in telegram 1749
that Acting Foreign Minister Constantin Oancea had called U.S. Ambas-
sador Rudolph Aggrey to the Foreign Ministry to deliver a démarche
decrying U.S. Government actions at the airport and accusing Washing-
ton of unduly pressuring Mrs. Horodinca to remain in the United
States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870105–
0256) In telegram 1750 from Bucharest, March 4, Aggrey reported that
during his conversation with Oancea, Romanian President Nicolae
Ceausescu had called the Foreign Ministry to transmit a personal mes-
sage to President Jimmy Carter. Ceausescu’s message issued a personal
request to Carter, asking him “to take steps to assure that the Romanian
Ambassador and/or another Romanian diplomat be given access to
[Mrs. Horodinca] and allowed to speak with her immediately. She
should leave the hospital and be brought to Romania immediately. If
what we request is accorded we will take no public notice of this
incident. If we do not receive a satisfactory reply today we will have
to make public all of the pressures that the US exerted upon Mrs.
Horodinca as well as other acts of a similar character taken by the
U.S.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870105–
0251) Romanian Ambassador Nicolae Ionescu met with Assistant to
the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski and
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance on March 5 to further protest what the
Romanian Government saw as U.S. Government actions to force Mrs.
Horodinca to change her mind. The Department reported in telegram
59850 to Bucharest, March 5, that both Brzezinski and Vance had
stressed to Ionescu that the recent developments were a surprise, that
the U.S. Government would respect Mrs. Horodinca’s decision what-
ever it may be, and that the Romaninan Government should not allow
the incident to cloud the otherwise improving relationship between
the two countries. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P870105–0291)
As a result of Horodinca’s defection, Romanian officials recalled all
officers from the United States. The defection also reinforced Romanian
perceptions of a diminishing special place in U.S. foreign policy and
