Yugoslavia foreign assistance bill contains a provision that will tighten leasing procedures. DoD is currently looking into ways to get around this problem and now feels that it can offer a 2–3 year lease for support equipment plus 5 TOW launchers that the Yugoslavs want. This would help to alleviate Yugoslav concerns somewhat—although probably not entirely. (S) A second problem is the question of crisis support. At the Joint Committee meeting in June there was an implicit assumption on the part of the Yugoslavs that we would supply them with the weapons they need in case of emergency. DoD is currently working on a paper which will outline what we would be willing to offer the Yugoslavs— and in what quantities—in case of an emergency. This paper will be coordinated with the NSC and State and will be presented for discussion and approval at an upcoming MBB. The paper should be ready sometime next week. Once the paper has been approved, DoD proposes that General Bowman, our military representative to the Quad, and Bill Perry go to Belgrade in October to discuss with the Yugoslavs their requirements. (TS) Personally, I think this strategy makes sense. It would give the Yugoslavs a sense of increased confidence that we are serious about our willingness to support them without formally committing us to anything. However, it would take us another step down the road in our military supply relationship, and before we agreed to commit ourselves to supplying the Yugoslavs with major quantities of weapons in an emergency we would have to consult with Congress.5 (S) 5 On July 29, Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum “Next concrete steps?” Larrabee replied on July 31, stating that the next concrete step was discussing the paper the Department of Defense was preparing on weapons systems the United States would be willing to provide to Yugoslavia in case of an emergency. Following approval of the paper, a U.S. delegation would be sent to Belgrade to discuss Yugoslav requirements. Larrabee also stated that the NSC would “continue to monitor Defense-State deliberations on the issue of long-term leases of US military items.” According to a notation on Larrabee’s memorandum, Brzezinski saw it on August 1. (Carter Library, National Secu-
