778
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
strates a serious interest in a political settlement.2 While the odds are
very high that this is simply a new tack in their effort to divide us from
the Allies, it is barely conceivable that the Soviets might be beginning
to look for a way out.3
The campaign to demonstrate the sincerity of their withdrawal is
going on in public and private in a way which is very reminiscent of
the anti-TNF campaign and the “unilateral troop withdrawal” from
the GDR designed to head off the December 12 NATO decision.
—The withdrawal has become a media event in the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe.
—Authoritative Soviet commentaries underline that the with-
drawal demonstrates the sincerity of Soviet interest in a political
settlement.4
—Soviet Press Counselor Kamenev gave John Wallach of the Hearst
chain a background interview stressing Soviet sincerity.
2 The Soviet statement on a partial withdrawal from Afghanistan, June 22, made
through the official news organ, TASS, was first reported in telegram 9988 from Moscow
the same day. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P900077–1709) An
article in the President’s Daily Brief, June 23, asserted that the statement “seems aimed
primarily at influencing the Venice Summit and preparing the ground for Schmidt’s
visit to Moscow. The announcement implied a reduction in the overall Soviet troop level
in Afghanistan, but was not explicit on this point and did not discuss the possibility of
further withdrawals.” The article further noted that the withdrawing troops, numbering
approximately 5,000, were “largely ineffective against the guerillas.” An article in the
July 7 President’s Daily Brief surmised that the announcement of the troop withdrawals
possibly suggested Brezhnev’s interest in assuaging domestic critics apprehensive of
Soviet Afghan policy. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central
Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for
DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—June 1980, PDBs; and Central Intelligence
Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of
the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—July
1980, PDBs, respectively)
3 Analysis in the Central Intelligence Agency concurred with this assessment. For
example, a memorandum, July 11, forwarded by Turner to Muskie, Brown, Brzezinski,
and General Jones, July 14, asserted that the Soviet troop withdrawals “were largely a
political ploy; they do not affect Soviet military capabilities in the country.” (National
Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–031, Apr–Aug 1980)
The Bureau of Intelligence and Research came to a similar conclusion. A research paper
on Afghanistan, July 18, observed: “Moscow’s June 22 announcement that it was with-
drawing some forces from Afghanistan appears to be part of a larger diplomatic strategy
aimed at giving the appearance of Soviet flexibility and willingness to talk while extract-
ing recognition of the regime in Kabul as the legitimate government of Afghanistan.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West,
Brement, Subject File, Box 46, Afghanistan: 7–12/80)
4 In telegram 10223 from Moscow, June 25, the Embassy characterized comments
on the Soviet troop withdrawal by USA Institute Director Arbatov as indicative that the
Soviet leadership “was anxious to find a way out of Afghanistan which would not
appear to be a Soviet capitulation to the U.S., but that they have no idea how to do it.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the
Secretary on Soviet Affairs, 1977–1981, Lot 81D109, Afghanistan)
