Czechoslovakia 351 competitive in both world and CEMA markets. The above-noted fear of policy innovation, unmotivated work force, and obsolete plant create almost unsuperable problems for economic policymakers, made no easier by traditional GOC reluctance to borrow heavily abroad. Problems are such that as of this date neither the 1981 economic plan nor the 1981–85 five-year plan has yet been completed. A set of measures to invigorate management of industry within the scope of a central plan is to be put into effect in January 1981, but no observer expects any revolutionary improvement to result. On the agricultural side, it has had to turn to the West for feed grains in fairly sizable amounts and must scrabble to fulfill demand for meat. 6. Czechoslovak trade, which accounts for over 30 percent of national income, is being sucked increasingly into the mire of the Comecon economies. The causes are Czechoslovak dependence on Soviet energy sources. Competitive inability to earn sufficient hard currency to diversify sources, and increasing Soviet success in promoting economic integration. Fifty percent of Czechoslovakia’s exports of machinery and equipment (traditional hard currency earners) are already going to the Soviet Union and an additional 30 percent to other Comecon countries. This trend is not contrary to the wishes of many Czechoslovak planners, who would rather see their country as an equal partner in a second-rate economic grouping than a second-rate country in world markets. The consequence is a decline in Czechoslovak opportunity for economic maneuver, just as the country has already lost its opportunity for political maneuver in the international arena. 7. The economic slowdown of the past two years has been accompanied by stiffened internal political controls. The current leadership is intensely aware of the potential social impacts of economic decline and its self-imposed policy limitations. It is putting the people, especially real or potential dissidents, on notice that it is prepared to ensure its survival over the difficult times ahead. 8. In foreign policy Czechoslovakia continues to be the most fervent supporter of Soviet policies and frequent mouthpiece for Soviet views, as it has been at the Madrid CSCE review. It pursues an activist policy, marked by many exchanges of visits, acts as a Soviet surrogate in certain Third World areas, and has some foreign aid responsibilities, most notably in Indo-China and Afghanistan. 9. Our bilateral relations with Czechoslovakia remain basically deadlocked pending resolution of the longstanding claims/gold issue. Our refusal to grant Czechoslovakia MFN rankles. Scientific exchanges continue but cultural exchanges are down to a trickle; across the board, lack of an exchange agreement leaves us with no means of enforcing reciprocity. Arranging normal contacts with officials remains extremely difficult. Heavy-handed anti-American propaganda fills the media
