Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 Greece and Turkey within six weeks. The issue, as Truman, Acheson and Marshall prophetically realized was not simply the question of aiding Greece and Turkey, although that was a startling enough idea at the time. They also were among the first in the post World War II period to recognize the importance of buttressing regional security and sending Moscow an unmistakable signal that the United States was determined to protect not only old vital interests but new ones as well, and to resist Soviet pressure. (U) Truman’s message was a turning point in U.S. foreign policy. Specifically he: —announced that it was the policy of the United States to support free peoples who were resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures; —requested Congress to provide authority for assistance to Greece and Turkey in the amount of $400 million; —asked Congress to authorize the detail of American civilian and military personnel to Greece and Turkey to assist in the task of reconstruction and to help supervise the use of U.S. financial and material support; —asked Congress for authority to provide for the instruction and training of select Greek and Turkish personnel; and —asked Congress to provide authority to permit the rapid and effective use in terms of needed commodities, supplies and equipment, of any funds that they authorized. (U) (The relevant excerpt from Truman’s speech is at Tab A.)4 This speech marked the beginning of one of the most creative periods of U.S. diplomacy. Most importantly, it signalled the intention of the U.S. to abandon its past hesitancy and to assume a more activist role internationally. Without this rapid and resolute action on our part, the Soviet Union would have continued to increase its pressure on Turkey and in Greece, and the evolution of Southern Europe and the Middle East would undoubtedly have been quite different. (U) Today we face a Soviet challenge in an area of the world which is only a little more unfamiliar to most Americans than were Greece and Turkey in 1947. As in 1947, the West looks to us because only we can provide the necessary leadership and resources to turn back the Soviet threat to our interests in the region and beyond. As in 1947, a U.S. public formerly weary of war and international responsibility is in- 4 Attached but not printed is an undated, typewritten page containing the relevant excerpts from Truman’s message.
