Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
657
situation under control, either on a multilateral or bilateral basis. The
United States would like to begin a serious dialogue on the question of
arms transfers. He would appreciate learning Gromyko’s thoughts on
how we could exchange views on this subject. We would emphasize
our interest in how one might reach a multilateral agreement among
arms suppliers, and how one might best proceed to organize such an
accord. We had already raised our concerns with the Federal Republic
of Germany, Great Britain and France.
Gromyko acknowledged that the problem did exist. No one could
deny that. Much weaponry was supplied to many countries. The big-
gest arms supplier, as President Carter has said on various occasions,
was the United States, and had been for some time. In this connection,
he would ask a specific question by way of example. Who was it that
forced the United States to supply billions of dollars worth of arma-
ments to Iran—was it any action on the part of the Soviet Union or
some other country? Was this really indicative of any desire to exercise
restraint? The Soviet leadership had been surprised and concerned
when it learned of these massive arms sales. In effect, these sales had
aggravated the problem. That was his first remark. Secondly, it was ob-
vious that this question should be posed within the context of the mili-
tary clashes that were taking place in the world. There were some coun-
tries that, whether we wanted it or not, were involved in military
conflicts, and this fact was greatly related to the question of arms
transfers. Only on paper could these two questions be separated. In any
case, very frequently this linkage was obvious. Thirdly, the Soviet
Union would be prepared to consider any concrete proposal the US
Government wanted to table with a view to resolving this problem.
Whenever the United States was ready, the USSR would be happy to
take a look at it. The more specific, the better. Before involving others, it
would perhaps be better to talk between our two countries; otherwise,
third parties might ask for our own joint views, which might not exist.
The Secretary said that one of the problems one faces in the area of
arms transfers was that it was often said that should we not sell arms to
some country or another, the Soviet Union, or France, or Germany,
would certainly jump in and do so. As a result, arms sales continued.
One simply had to find a way to cut the Gordian Knot.
Gromyko said he realized the problem did exist and it was neces-
sary to take a look at it.
The Secretary asked if it might be looked at in the context of the
Middle East, perhaps.
Gromyko said that if it were done in the context of a peaceful settle-
ment in that area, the Soviet Union would be in favor of it.
The Secretary asked: “Why not before?”
