Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
699
1. Former Iranian Prime Minister Shahpour Bakhtiar now plans to
return to Iran in the latter part of May 1980. He had hoped to return
to Iran by the end of April, but was forced to change his plans because
of several new developments. Notably, in reviewing the plans drawn
up by his staff, he noted some deficiencies which must be corrected
prior to launching his movement. He is also disappointed at the delays
that have occurred in getting his staff in Baghdad organized.
2. Bakhtiar went to Baghdad at Iraqi President Saddam Husayn’s
request the weekend of 12–13 April and had numerous discussions
with Barzan Ibrahim Al-Tikriti, Saddam’s half-brother, as well as a
two-hour meeting alone with Saddam on 13 April. Saddam told Bakh-
tiar that he was willing to support him despite Bakhtiar’s refusal to
cooperate with General Gholam Ali Oveisi who is also receiving Iraqi
aid. According to Bakhtiar, one of the primary reasons Saddam Husayn
wanted to talk to Bakhtiar was to try to obtain some form of cooperation
between Oveisi and Bakhtiar. Bakhtiar refused to even consider cooper-
ation with Oveisi for two basic reasons: One reason is Oveisi’s past
association with the Shah and the second is that Bakhtiar does not
accept Oveisi’s relying solely on a military solution to overthrow Aya-
tollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Bakhtiar told Saddam Husayn that Oveisi’s
plan will not work because it will unite the urban population behind
Khomeini. Bakhtiar warned Saddam Husayn about committing any
Iraqi soldiers in support of Oveisi as such a commitment would provide
the Soviets the option of moving into Iran. Saddam told Bakhtiar that
he did not think there was much chance of the Soviets actually invading
Iran, particularly because of the already heavy Soviet involvement in
Afghanistan.
3. What impressed Bakhtiar most about his discussion with Saddam
Husayn was Husayn’s almost irrational fear of Khomeini. He was
particularly concerned about what Khomeini might or might not be
able to do among the Iraqi Shia.
4. In discussing big power involvement in Iran, Saddam Husayn
said that one benefit of the revolution in Iran was that the Americans
had been forced to withdraw in toto. The Iraqi President thought this
was a positive development and he hopes the U.S. will not be able to
get back into Iran in strength. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment:
Saddam Husayn would look with disfavor on the evolvement of any
situation which provides the U.S. the opportunity of regaining a foot-
hold in Iran.) Bakhtiar disagreed with Saddam Husayn about the bene-
fits of keeping a U.S. presence out of Iran. Bakhtiar argued that a big
power presence is needed to counter the Soviet threat in the region,
pointing out that while Iraq has no common border with the USSR,
Iran has 2,000 kilometers of common border with the Soviets as well
as bordering on Afghanistan. Given this situation, Bakhtiar, said, Iran
