Czechoslovakia
305
Since the memo is being circulated in draft form at present, now is the
time to make our views known before Secretary Vance is asked to
approve these steps.2
With regard to the Claims/Gold issue, an agreement was initialled
in 1974 calling for 41% payment on the claims, after which the US
would return gold seized from Czechoslovakia by Nazi Germany and
subsequently taken by the US, Britain, and France in 1945. Senator Long
rejected the 1974 settlement as being too low. In talks with Ambassador
Byrne (our man in Prague who was here in early March for consulta-
tions), Long said the Czechoslovaks should pay 100% plus interest and
if they refuse, the US should vest the gold and pay the claims.3 This,
however, would cause problems with the British and French who are
members of the Triparte Commission for Restitution of Monetary Gold,
and it would also create difficulties under international law. The Trade
Act of 1974 requires any agreement on the Claims/Gold Issue to receive
Congressional approval. Since Long’s refusal to accept the 1974 agree-
ment, no movement has taken place on the question. State would like
to initiate discussions with the Czechoslovak government in an attempt
to secure an agreement on a higher settlement figure, which would
then be presented to Congress for approval.
There are several thousand US claimants. The longer the issue
remains unresolved, the lower the value of their claims. Both claimants
and Congress have been critical of inaction on the issue since 1974.
Although the Claims/Gold Question is an obstacle to better US-Czecho-
slovak relations, resolving it will not automatically lead to an improve-
ment in relations. In this case, there are valid domestic reasons for
attempting to solve it.
The decision to negotiate an exchanges agreement with Czechoslova-
kia was made by Kissinger in 1975 following the Helsinki conference.
(Agreements with Hungary and Bulgaria were negotiated and entered
into force in 1976.) Negotiations with Czechoslovakia were completed
in December 1976, but the accompanying implementing program docu-
ment was not completed because of criticism of the Czechoslovak
government’s actions against the Charter 77 group. State now proposes
that the implementing program be negotiated so that the exchanges
agreement can come into force. The justification is that such an agree-
ment will enhance our ability to establish contacts with Czechoslovak
citizens, which are currently very limited. It would require probably
two months to complete negotiations, and State would like to sign the
agreement by June in order to use funds in the fiscal 1978 budget set
2 Not found.
3 See Document 102.
