Venezuela  1221
a civil population united in its resistance. In any case, an all­out battle 
between the armed forces and the Junta Patriótica would be a sangui-
nary affair, not to be lightly undertaken. It is notable that the armed 
forces declined to fight to save Pérez Jiménez in January or to support 
Castro León in July, though the Army and Air Force officers were prob-
ably preponderantly sympathetic with the latter, and that nothing hap-
pened when Pérez Morales was relieved.
39. On 7 September there was an abortive coup attempt led by offi-
cers exiled in July and supported by elements of the Military Police. 
The attempt was broken up by the Army; the armed forces in general 
remained loyal to the government. Subsequently, however, there was 
a mob attack on the Military Police barracks which resulted in civil-
ian casualties. The ominous aspect of this affair is that Betancourt 
and Villalba were proved unable to control the mob, once it had been 
aroused. The general strike provoked by this coup attempt was main-
tained until the government undertook to take drastic action (such 
as it did not take in July) to prevent the recurrence of such attempts. 
Implementation of this undertaking in the existing tense situation 
could lead to an allout conflict between military and civilian elements, 
although the Junta will certainly seek to avoid that result.
POLITICAL PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS
40. The Communist Problem. Since the July crisis, Admiral Larrazábal 
and the leaders of the major parties have all taken occasion to declare 
their lack of sympathy with Communism, but they have also supported 
the right of the Communists to participate in Venezuelan politics as 
a legitimate political party. It is unlikely that they regard Communist 
activities as a serious danger in comparison with the possible resto-
ration of a military dictatorship. Admiral Larrazábal, in particular, has 
expressed a remarkable confidence in the patriotism of Venezuelan 
Communists, though perhaps only for domestic political effect. It is 
unlikely that the leaders of the major parties have any such illusions, 
but they regard the threat of a military coup as the real and immediate 
danger and, so long as that threat remains, they will be unwilling to 
forego the potential contribution of the effective Communist organi-
zation to a united civilian resistance. Consequently, there is no early 
prospect of effective action to limit Communist activity in Venezuela, 
at least not until a democratic constitutional government has been 
securely installed in office. On the other hand, the major parties will 
continue to compete with the Communists for influence in labor and 
student organizations and for popular political support.
41. The Possibility of an Early Military Coup. Since the Castro León crisis, 
the likelihood of a concerted effort on the part of the military to seize power 
has apparently receded, although the situation between military and civil-
ian elements is now especially tense as a result of the abortive coup attempt
