Arms Control and Disarmament  1239
President Chiang or Prime Minister Sihanouk. He suggested we should 
defer on these latter three. In this connection, I showed the President 
Mr. Herter’s memorandum to me of February 20, attached.
8. The President spoke again of his interest in making a proposal 
for bringing over a large number of Soviet young people to study here, 
and at our Government’s expense. I said we were having this staffed as 
there were many technical problems involved.
JFD
294.	 Press Release1
Washington, February 27, 1958
The Secretary of State has, with the approval of the President, des­
ignated Ambassador James J. Wadsworth to act, under the Secretary’s 
direction, as United States representative in future negotiations for an 
agreement on the limitation of armament. He will also participate in the 
preparation of positions which the United States will support in dis­
armament negotiations. Ambassador Wadsworth will, at least for the 
time being, retain his position as Deputy Representative of the United 
States to the United Nations.
In addition, the Secretary of State, with the approval of the Presi­
dent, has asked certain qualified private citizens to advise and consult 
with him informally, from time to time, on the broad policies which 
should govern the United States in seeking limitation of armament. 
Alfred M. Gruenther, Robert A. Lovett, John J. McCloy, and Walter 
Bedell Smith have accepted to serve in this way.
The United States continues to consider it urgent that an interna­
tional agreement be sought and reached which will effectively limit 
armaments. The Government of the Soviet Union has since last August, 
refused to discuss the constructive proposals advanced by the United 
States, United Kingdom, France and Canada, or to participate in the work 
of the subcommittee of the United Nations Disarmament Commission. It 
has also announced that it would not participate in any proceedings of 
the Disarmament Commission as reconstituted by the recent session of 
the United Nations General Assembly. It has reacted negatively to the 
statement by the NATO Heads of Government that they would welcome 
a meeting at the Foreign Ministers’ level to resolve the deadlock.
1 Source: Wadsworth appointment as disarmament negotiator; advisory panel. No 
classification marking. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone 
Conversations.
