1166 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II with a resolution just passed at the U.N. Mid-Decade Conference on Women, would require a concerted international effort supported by UNFPA, WHO, UNICEF, the World Bank, country donors, and the concerned LDCs. Other donors interested in increasing population assistance may wish to consider making or increasing contributions to the following institutions: —UNFPA The United Nations Fund for Population Activities, active in over 120 countries, has a current budget of about $150 million and a substantial backlog of projects needing support. It primarily funds government projects. As of August 31, 1980, the UNFPA had funded 2,863 projects of which 1,135 has been completed. —IPPF The International Planned Parenthood Federation, a private organization also active in many countries, has a budget of about $50 million annually and also a substantial backlog of projects. Like other private organizations, it specializes in innovative ways of initiating and extending family planning services, particularly where open government support is not yet appropriate. (But IPPF often works with government health programs.) —Other private organizations such as the Population Council active in this field. Of course several donors, e.g., the Scandinavians, Canada, and the UK, have bilateral programs they may wish to expand. FYI ONLY: Strategic Program Objectives for I.D.C.A. 1. Sharply increase A.I.D.’s level of funding from about $200 million in FY 1979–80 and continue pragmatically on a country-by-country basis, emphasizing its strongest areas: combining supply of family planning services with support of programs aimed at building demand for those services. Such efforts principally include policy work particularly to increase LDC national leadership commitment; training especially of outreach workers from local communities, and other methods of community involvement; provision of commodities; management support; and biomedical and operations or policy research which tests practical combinations of population, health, and other development measures affecting fertility. We will press other donors—bilateral and multilateral—to support other fields of population assistance. On that basis when AID proposes efforts in those other fields, it will obviously bear a stronger burden of persuasion. 2. Within the above framework, develop and emphasize AID’s capacity for innovation and evaluation activities. 3. Infuse population concerns into all AID health activities while maintaining AID’s health initiative focusing on primary health care.
