578 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Admiral Turner questioned whether the Soviet leadership was really a lot less vulnerable than the US. Secretary Brown judged that the US leadership was substantially more vulnerable; it would not have the kind of hardened C3 the Soviets have. He also noted that we rely much more heavily on airborne assets. Mr. Stoertz observed that we are continually discovering new aspects of Soviet leadership protection, and noted that the Soviets are giving increased attention to mobile, especially airborne, facilities. David Aaron asked if we are primarily discovering new facilities or rather newly discovering facilities that had existed for some time. Stoertz answered—­mostly the latter. General Jones commented that from a war management point of view, a key issue for US targeting against Soviet leadership was how the Soviets arranged for the devolution of top authority down the chain of command. Admiral Turner repeated his judgment that leadership and C3 would probably prove highly fragile in both countries. Secretary Brown agreed and observed that we needed more study to determine how to fix our vulnerabilities and exploit those of the Soviet Union. Director Seignious commented that attack timing was crucial; Soviet SLBMs could reach US leadership targets very quickly. Secretary Brown noted that US ICBMs could reach Soviet targets in [less than 1 line not declassified] Director Seignious repeated that the difference between SLBM flight times to US leadership targets and ICBM flight times to Soviet leadership targets could be extremely important. Secretary Brown commented that it was most important to reduce our vulnerabilities in this respect and to develop counter-C3-­leadership targeting options against the Soviet Union. Dr. Brzezinski asked what Presidential decisions were involved here: a separate leadership targeting package? Budgets for C3 improvements? Mr. Aaron asked what are the implications of targeting Soviet leadership and C3 assets. Would it be wise to destroy Soviet ability to withhold and control strategic forces from the center? Secretary Brown responded that this depended on how one viewed various conflict scenarios which he thought intrinsically implausible, for example, would an initial Soviet attack leave a large Soviet reserve force? A US counter-C3 strike could reduce Soviet ability to use that reserve efficiently. Mr. Aaron commented that the value of such strikes depends on whether you believe strikes by withheld Soviet forces would simply become automatic if the Soviets’ top leadership disappeared.
