711.5112France/257: Telegram [Document 19] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) WASHINGTON, April 12, 1928—10 a.m. 105. Your 90, April 11, 8 p.m. I have telegraphed London, Berlin, Rome and Tokyo,31 to deliver note, draft treaty and seven other enclosures consisting of Briand proposal of last June and the six notes subsequently exchanged between France and the United States, Friday, April 13 at 3 p.m. London time, 4 p.m. Berlin and Borne time, and 5 p.m. Tokyo time, respectively. I have also asked that the several Foreign Offices be informed that the texts of the note and draft treaty will be given out in Washington for publication in the afternoon papers Friday, April 13, and that the several Embassies have been instructed to make copies available to the foreign press for publication in Europe and Japan Saturday morning, April 14. In these circumstances please furnish French Foreign Office with advance copy of note and draft treaty as soon as possible after the receipt of this telegram with the understanding, of course, that they will regard it as confidential until published. At the same time inform the Foreign Office that the notes are to be delivered as above set forth and explain the arrangements as to publication. You should also make copies available to Paris press for publication Saturday morning, April 14, and telegraph text to Berne for informal communication to the Information Section of the League of Nations through Tuck. Please also express to the Foreign Office my warm appreciation of the cordial spirit of cooperation which M. Briand has manifested throughout the discussions leading up to the present submission, and say that I attach the very greatest importance to the negotiations which are thus being initiated among the six Powers and earnestly hope that our efforts may be crowned with success after a common exploration of the problem by the six Powers, all of whom are equally interested in agreeing upon a practicable method for the promotion of the cause of world peace.
