480  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
342.	 Letter from Sebald to Johnson1
Washington, November 4, 1955
Dear Alex:
I have been wanting to write to you for some considerable time, but 
as Walter McConaughy has been doing the corresponding, I thought it 
best to keep all the “official informals” in his hands. Furthermore, I feel 
sure that, as an old hand on this job, you have some idea of the harass­
ment under which the occupant of my seat usually operates.
However, I do wish to tell you that I feel you are doing a beautiful 
job in handling the negotiations with Wang. Having had some experi­
ence with the Soviets in Japan, I know what it means to face up to the 
difficult problems such as you have week after week, never knowing 
when the end will come or, in fact, just what the negotiations will lead 
up to. In any event, I hope you know that you have our complete con­
fidence and full support.
Now down to business. On the question of the Agreed Announce­
ment concerning renunciation of force, I have carefully gone over the 
proposed text which you sent along in your 1048 and the following are 
my preliminary remarks. We will send the Department’s comments by 
telegram.
As a matter of form, I believe that this draft too closely presents 
the two “governments” as determining or recognizing, jointly, certain 
policies or principles. It seems to me that this results in giving greater 
stature to the PRC than is desirable. It also brings the Announcement 
close to an agreement.
The draft also seems to place emphasis upon the divergence 
between the U.S. and PRC views as the source of tension. It would 
seem preferable to shift the emphasis simply to a desire to remove 
tensions. It also appears to accept the theory that the problem is inter­
national, thereby affording some leeway to the PRC to claim that the 
civil strife between them and the GRC is not comprehended within the 
Announcement.
I am also concerned with the apparent wordiness of the draft 
which I believe should be as brief and direct as possible. I agree that 
it might be preferable to have some bargaining points built into any 
draft which we present, but we should bear in mind that it will come 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; 
Official–­Informal.
