920
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
(4) Problems of disposing of significant quantities of oil by the
United States would be almost insurmountable.
(b) U.S. private companies to buy Iranian oil in the absence of a set-
tlement of the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute. There are serious obstacles:
(1) It is questionable whether the U.S. Government is in a position
to force private American oil companies to take such action.
(2) It can be expected that major American oil companies capable
of handling sufficient Iranian oil to provide significant revenues to the
Iranian Government would strenuously oppose the establishment of a
precedent making expropriation without payment of compensation a
profitable course of action for foreign countries.
(3) Although there have been certain indications of interest by
American “independent” oil companies in purchasing cheap Iranian
oil at distressed prices, in the absence of a settlement of the Anglo-
Iranian oil dispute, it is improbable that even a group of them could
market sufficient oil to provide early and substantial revenues to the
Iranian Government.
(4) Lack of clear title discourages any private purchase.
(5) The only markets presently available to independent oil com-
panies are in the U.S. and importations of large quantities of oil to this
market would seriously affect U.S. domestic oil producing industries.
(c) Subsidize the Iranian Government by grants of economic aid in
the absence of a settlement of the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute. There are
serious obstacles:
(1) Congress may object to covering the budget gap in Iran
($5,000,000 per month) for an indefinite period.
(2) Subsidization removes to some extent economic pressures
upon the Iranian Government to come to an early settlement of the oil
dispute.
(3) The psychological and political repercussions from Iran’s in-
ability to dispose of its oil and develop its own source of income will
certainly adversely affect maintenance of stability in that country.
(d) Use exceptional pressures to induce the British to offer a rea-
sonable proposal for an early settlement. In addition to such direct
pressures take psychological actions overt and/or covert to further im-
press the British with the seriousness with which the United States is
considering independent action in the Middle East.
The foregoing (d) course of action is recommended by the 5402
Working Group. Although it is recognized that the group is not compe-
tent to judge whether the dangers of such exceptional pressures to the
Anglo-American alliance are sufficient to out-weigh the dangers of
failing to achieve an early oil settlement in Iran.
It is recommended that the Chairman of the OCB consider sending
a telegram along the following lines to Mr. Hoover at London:
“Consideration is being given to psychological pressures on the
British Government. Request your advice regarding ways in which
