Chapter 6, June–December 1990  849
154.	 Memorandum From Arnold Kanter and Condoleezza Rice of 
the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant 
for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)1
Washington, September 14, 1990
SUBJECT
Arms Control Talks in Moscow
The four days of talks were a waste of time or worse. We made no 
progress on START and literally lost ground on CFE. If the U.S. side 
was not prepared to do end-­game hard bargaining, the Soviets were 
barely ready to meet. Karpov was not well prepared. The General Staff 
was represented by colonels. Aside from a last-­minute (if fascinating) 
appearance by Akhromeyev on CFE, there were no signs that anyone 
among the senior Soviet leadership was engaged or that the Soviet 
positions being articulated were serious.
In brief, neither side—­but particularly the Soviets—­behaved as 
though there was any intention of signing CFE on November 19 or 
START by the end of the year. Unless both sides change the way they 
do business rapidly and radically, there is no possibility that we will be 
able to achieve the goal that the President and Gorbachev reaffirmed in 
Helsinki: completion of both treaties this year. Even then, making the 
end-­of-­the-­year target will be a long shot.
We thus have two problems: engaging the top Soviet leadership—­
including Gorbachev—­and getting our own house in order.
To address the first, we have drafted a memo to the President 
(attached at Tab I)2 recommending that he send a letter to Gorbachev 
(which we believe would have greater impact than a phone call). 
To address the second, achieving rapid U.S. consensus on the major 
remaining issues, we propose that they be addressed next week at your 
level and decided by the President. In that way, the President could 
give Baker the authority to close the deal (if and when the Soviets are 
ready), while accepting the responsibility himself for the bottom-­line 
U.S. positions.
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft 
Collection, Special Separate USSR Notes Files, Gorbachev Files, OA/ID 91128–003, 
Gorbachev (Dobrynin) Sensitive 1989–June 1990 [3]. Secret; Limited Access. Sent for 
action.
2 Printed as Document 155.
