720 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III (6) The UAW, on June 12, filed a complaint with the USITC, under Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974, for import relief, a significant step for a traditionally “free trade” union which demonstrates how seriously it views the import situation. The USITC is expected to take its legally allotted six months to investigate the complaint, but is expected to vote publicly on injury about November 10. The Congress, the President, or the petitioner (UAW) may request an expedited determination by the USITC. The filing launches a domestic legal process which is fully consistent with our international GATT obligations. (7) Ford has announced a deferral of its investment plans ($1.8 billion until after 1984), along with substantial cuts in overhead (e.g., white collar staff) for its current operations. These cutbacks are thought by some to be the beginning of a Ford retrenchment in North America and greater concentration in overseas operations. GM has announced an increase in and acceleration of its investments. (8) The Congress passed a concurrent resolution which, among other things, calls on the Administration to review its import policies in order to assess their possible effect on the domestic industry’s effort to retool for lighter, fuel-efficient cars. (9) There have been a number of significant developments recently in Japan (which accounts for 80 percent of our auto imports), including: —The fall of the Ohira Government. The June 22 electoral victory of the Liberal Democratic Party was substantial, but it is considered unlikely that a new Prime Minister and Cabinet will be selected until the latter part of July. During this transition period, there is little that the Japanese Government can do substantively on the auto issue. —Growing irritation between the Japanese Government and Japanese auto companies. Major factors are the Treasury decision on cab chassis tariffs, which the companies feel should have been opposed more vigorously by the government, and the failure of the auto companies to respond to MITI’s pleas to restrain their auto exports. Such irritations complicate the domestic problems of the government in handling the auto issue. —At our urging, the Japanese Government has decided to eliminate most auto parts tariffs in 1981; simplify auto standards and licensing procedures; and send missions to the United States to promote imports by Japan of auto parts from America.9 This should create limited additional sales opportunities for U.S. auto producers, though these gains will not be realized for some time. (NOTE: The U.S. cab 9 See Document 242.
