1046
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
413.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 25, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Adherence to Additional Protocol I to the Treaty of Tlatelolco
In response to Mr. Hornblow’s memorandum of May 132 the De-
partments of State and Defense3 have agreed that when the President
submits Protocol I to the Senate for advice and consent, he should rec-
ommend that United States ratification be made subject to the fol-
lowing statements:
“That the understandings and declarations attached to its ratifica-
tion of Additional Protocol II apply also to its ratification of Additional
Protocol I;
“That the provisions of the Treaty made applicable by this Addi-
tional Protocol do not affect the exclusive power and legal competence
under international law of a state adhering to this Protocol to grant or
deny transit and transport privileges to its own or any other vessels or
aircraft;
“That the provisions of the Treaty made applicable by this Addi-
tional Protocol do not affect rights under international law of a state
adhering to this Protocol regarding the exercise of the freedoms of the
seas, or regarding passage through or over waters subject to the sover-
eignty of a state.”
The first of these statements has the effect of repeating our earlier
declarations and understandings, notably those stating that Treaty
parties retain unimpaired power to grant transit and transport rights to
other countries; that the United States recognizes national claims of
sovereignty over territorial waters only insofar as such claims are con-
sistent with international law; and that the United States considers that
the Treaty covers nuclear explosive devices which are ostensibly for
peaceful purposes as well as devices acknowledged to be nuclear
weapons. The second statement is designed to express our under-
standing that we retain our rights to transit our territories’ waters and
1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 74,
General Files, Tlatelolco, Treaty of. Limited Official Use.
2 Not found.
3 A more detailed description of the Defense Department’s position is contained in
a letter from Secretary Brown to Secretary Vance attached to this memorandum. [Foot-
note is in the original. Brown’s letter is attached but not printed.]
