Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I SENATOR BROOKE noted that the President’s proposal to limit arms transfers is a laudatory one, but he warned that we appear to be inferior in megatonnage and delivery vehicles to the Soviet Union.7 PRESIDENT CARTER said there had been some response in Germany and France during Vice President Mondale’s trip on limiting arms sales. “They were not effusive but they responded well,” said the President, “and we must see that France and Germany do not rush in to fill the gap when we limit sales. We are so far ahead that we have a great range of possibilities to moderate our arms sales.” SECRETARY VANCE. The simple step would be to change the procedures so that arms manufacturers must get advance permission from the Department before they proceed. Now they get people overseas steamed up in an early stage and then come back here and sell their systems. SENATOR CHURCH. Arms sales are out of real proportion to the needs of the countries that are buying them. Sometimes it seems that we are exporting only arms and wheat but there is a serious problem with the internal forces in our own country. We have to recognize that aircraft companies have spent millions under the table to stimulate sales. PRESIDENT CARTER stressed that consistency and frankness with Congress and the American people and a multinational approach are vital. THE PRESIDENT said he favored the idea of prior approval of American companies before they offer arms development to foreign countries. The PRESIDENT also made these points: (1) he wants to hold down the volume of nuclear weapons and the volume of nuclear capability. He said this goal was pursued with France and Germany and he was meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin later in the morning to discuss this problem.8 (2) “The African situation is explosive and we will follow the British lead in Rhodesia. Ambassador Young will be at two different conferences in Africa.9 He is not going to negotiate but he will let them know about our sincerity for majority rule. I want to see the Byrd amendment10 repealed and I will give my backing for the re- 7 An unknown hand underlined this sentence and placed a question mark in the right-hand margin next to it. 8 The Carter–Dobrynin memorandum of conversation is printed in Foreign Rela-
