82
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
SENATOR BROOKE noted that the President’s proposal to limit
arms transfers is a laudatory one, but he warned that we appear to be
inferior in megatonnage and delivery vehicles to the Soviet Union.7
PRESIDENT CARTER said there had been some response in Ger-
many and France during Vice President Mondale’s trip on limiting
arms sales. “They were not effusive but they responded well,” said the
President, “and we must see that France and Germany do not rush in to
fill the gap when we limit sales. We are so far ahead that we have a
great range of possibilities to moderate our arms sales.”
SECRETARY VANCE. The simple step would be to change the
procedures so that arms manufacturers must get advance permission
from the Department before they proceed. Now they get people
overseas steamed up in an early stage and then come back here and sell
their systems.
SENATOR CHURCH. Arms sales are out of real proportion to the
needs of the countries that are buying them. Sometimes it seems that
we are exporting only arms and wheat but there is a serious problem
with the internal forces in our own country. We have to recognize that
aircraft companies have spent millions under the table to stimulate
sales.
PRESIDENT CARTER stressed that consistency and frankness
with Congress and the American people and a multinational approach
are vital. THE PRESIDENT said he favored the idea of prior approval of
American companies before they offer arms development to foreign
countries. The PRESIDENT also made these points: (1) he wants to hold
down the volume of nuclear weapons and the volume of nuclear capa-
bility. He said this goal was pursued with France and Germany and he
was meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin later in the morning to
discuss this problem.8 (2) “The African situation is explosive and we
will follow the British lead in Rhodesia. Ambassador Young will be at
two different conferences in Africa.9 He is not going to negotiate but he
will let them know about our sincerity for majority rule. I want to see
the Byrd amendment10 repealed and I will give my backing for the re-
7 An unknown hand underlined this sentence and placed a question mark in the
right-hand margin next to it.
8 The Carter–Dobrynin memorandum of conversation is printed in Foreign Rela-
tions, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 3.
9 Reference is to Young’s 10-day visit to Nigeria and Tanzania. He departed the
United States on February 1. (Kathleen Teltsch, “Young, Taking Over U.N. Duties, Pre-
pares to Leave for Africa Today,” The New York Times, February 1, 1977, p. 2)
10 The Byrd Amendment, Section 503 of the 1971 Military Procurement Authoriza-
tion Act (H.R. 8687; P.L. 92–156; 85 Stat. 423–430), prohibited the President from refusing
to import strategic materials from non-Communist countries when there were no such
bans against buying similar items from a Communist state. The Amendment thus per-
mitted the United States to import Rhodesian chrome and other strategic materials, thus
