Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 421 category—­areas in which one or both sides do not have clear positions. In all honesty, most of the gaps in the existing treaty belong to us. The commitment to fill in the most important gaps in time for your meeting with Shevardnadze will provide strong stimulus to the bureaucracy. As noted above, it will also give you the high ground in the meeting itself. It’s not necessary for you to get involved in the details of most of these unresolved issues. You only need to know that they have been analyzed to death for years and are thus well understood. “We need further time to study the problem” is not an acceptable argument anymore. With this as a backdrop, I would like to see you arrive in Moscow with a fully-­defined U.S. position on the following: — perimeter-­portal continuous monitoring: What plants need U.S. monitors to check missile production? — suspect site inspections: What limits must we put on such inspections to protect our own sensitive facilities? — phasing of reductions: Within the agreed seven year reduction period, how many separate reduction steps and what intermediate limits do we want? — treaty duration: Will START be indefinite, last for a fixed number of years, or last until superseded? — treatment of “new kinds” of strategic offensive arms: How do we deal with exotic future systems like air to surface ballistic missiles or “space planes”? — definition of a new type: Our rules are different for existing and future types of ballistic missiles and bombers. How do we tell when something is a new type? — RV counting for future types of ballistic missiles: We negotiated the numbers of RVs we would attribute to existing ballistic missiles. What rule will we use to decide how many to attribute to new systems? — initial accountability: At what stage in their development should new systems come under the START restrictions? Bottom line: If you can get authority to offer some compromises and if we can push the system to flesh out our positions, Moscow will start us on the home stretch to a treaty in 1990.
