Eastern Europe Region
41
under certain conditions. Both options require at least some normaliza-
tion of particular aspects of our relations with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia
and the GDR before otherwise deepening bilateral relations or seeking
congressional authority for MFN/credits eligibility. In general, how-
ever, Option IV is disposed to more flexibility with these three countries
while Option III would require a showing of prior progress on human
rights or foreign policy autonomy. The GDR is a special case under
both options; resumption of diplomatic relations came so late that
things began at a very low level. Option IV is inclined toward a some-
what quicker deepening of relations with the GDR following conclusion
of an acceptable consular convention.
Effect on Romania, Poland and Hungary
Under either Option III or Option IV, a number of our policy lines
would be the same or similar for Romania, Poland and Hungary.
In particular:
Romania: We would continue to encourage Romania’s independent
posture by a responsive position on Exim credits, CCC credits, disaster
assistance, cooperation in space and nuclear matters, exchange of high-
level visits and close consultation bilaterally and in multilateral forums.
We would continue to use the need for annual Congressional
review of Romania’s MFN status—pending modification of the Jack-
son/Vanik amendment—to induce Romanian cooperation in allowing
emigration, especially of divided family members, to the US and Israel
and, because of our human rights policy, to encourage Romanian
restraint in domestic human rights matters.
Poland: We would continue to support Poland’s relatively moderate
position in its internal regime by extension of appropriate Exim and
CCC credits, general economic cooperation, political consultations and
exchange of high-level visits.
We would strengthen and heighten our insistence on better Polish
performance on divided family cases, and would continue to encourage
Poland to exercise the restraint it has generally shown in human
rights matters.
Hungary: We would give recognition to the creditable record which
Hungary has established in its treatment of its people and its domestic
differentiation from the Soviet Union (greater freedom for economic
enterprise, good performance on divided families, passable relations
with organized religion, lesser strictures on travel, access to information
and cultural pursuits).
Accordingly, after consultation with Congress and pertinent
domestic interest groups, we would recommend returning the Crown of
St. Stephen as a national treasure belonging to the Hungarian people.
If Hungary is prepared to provide appropriate assurances regarding
