1092  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
8. Mr. Gates agreed with this thoroughly.
9. He then said that one of the reasons and by no means the least 
reason why he wanted to get this done now was because of what he was 
afraid was coming in the next Administration regardless of who was 
elected. He said that this would permit the Joint Chiefs to get hold of 
SAC. He was going to speak to General Power in very harsh terms. He 
did not like what Power had done to date. He was going to tell Power 
exactly what he thought and exactly what Power would have to do in 
order to make this thing reasonable and to make it work. He also said 
that this procedure would permit the Navy and the other Services, but 
mostly the Navy because the Navy had the most to lose, to escape from 
a more radical reorganization later on. He thought that unless some­
thing were done now that we would surely be faced with a strategic 
command in which SAC or the Air Force would take command of the 
Naval delivery units sometime in the future. He thought this decision 
he had made would prevent that. He said that perhaps in two years 
from now the Navy would feel like giving him a Guggenheim Medal. 
I said that perhaps that was correct if it came out the way he expected 
it to come out which I was going to try to make it do, he should have a 
Guggenheim Medal. The thing that I was still afraid of was that there 
was a long road ahead, and a lot of turning-­off paths, a lot of slippery 
places and I was still fearful that SAC would get hold of a budget in 
such a way that nobody could reexamine it.
Arleigh Burke
262.	 Memorandum of Discussion at the 458th NSC Meeting1
Washington, September 7, 1960
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 458th Meeting of the National Security Council, Wednesday, 
­September 7, 1960
Present at the 458th NSC Meeting were the President of the United 
States, presiding; the Secretary of State; the Acting Secretary of Defense 
(Douglas); and the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. 
Also present at the meeting and participating in the Council actions 
1 Source: Agenda item 4: Civilian Readiness Base. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—
7 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
