546 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX over the extent of real gain for the consumer. More seriously, the proposed pension law changes, while increasing pension payments, contained provisions adversely affecting certain categories of pension recipients. In early August, Ceausescu was forced to interrupt a vacation to rush to the scene of a strike by coal miners angered by provisions of the new pension law. Reportedly, Ceausescu, who was greeted with open hostility by the miners, agreed to change some of its more onerous provisions, and the strike ended. The August strike was the second overt expression of popular discontent since the earthquake. On June 13 a mass riot at Bucharest stadium, triggered by public anger at the overselling of tickets to a pop concert and soccer match, had taken on a clearly anti-regime cast. These two unrelated incidents indicate that popular frustration has reached the point where traditional Romanian passivity toward political authority can no longer be taken for granted. Conclusion After 12 years of rule, Ceausescu’s élan appears undiminished. His handling of the earthquake crisis and its aftermath demonstrated anew the qualities of decisiveness, energy, and tactical skill which have long been hallmarks of his style. The initial period of confusion was very brief, and while some have questioned the emphasis placed on cosmetic aspects of the relief program, there is no denying the impressive results achieved. Offsetting these accomplishments was Ceausescu’s seeming unwillingness or inability to modify characteristics of his rule which threaten further erosion of his support within the party and among broad strata of the population. —The increasingly blatant cult of personality is viewed with cynicism or embarrassment by many Romanians. —Mistrust permeates the top ranks of the country leadership, while the circle of Ceausescu supporters constantly narrows. —Rigid adherence to unpopular economic policies, aggravated by ineptness in their implementation, continues. As yet, there is no immediate, visible threat to Ceausescu’s overwhelming dominance of the levers of power. His skill in maneuvering potential critics out of positions of influence appears to have prevented formation of alternative leadership clusters. A new confrontation with the Soviets, should one occur, could once again permit him to rally Romanians behind the banner of nationalism. Over the longer term, however, Ceausescu’s failure to reverse what looks like a gradual but steady erosion in his political backing could increasingly isolate him, making effective policy formulation and exe-
