more than any other, and indeed all others, was the desire of success
constantly expressed by the Brazilian Government through its sympathetic,
courteous and broadminded Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Octavio
Mangabeira, from the opening session to his farewell banquet to the
Delegates, with which it closed. The Commission was thus surrounded with
a congenial atmosphere proceeding from his evidently sincere desire and
ambition that the meeting should justify the Americas in choosing the
Capital of Brazil as the seat of the Commission’s deliberations. The
hospitalities, official and private, tendered to the members of the
Commission were many and varied. They brought the delegates together
and enabled them in an atmosphere of friendly informality to learn each
other’s views and to appreciate those qualities of grace and courtesy which
are sometimes missing from official discussions. The American Delegates
could not fail to notice, what they were pleased to consider an implied
compliment to their country, in having the Commission meet in the Monroe
Palace, the official seat of the Brazilian Senate, where everything tended to
the comfort and convenience of the Commission and its members.
The Delegates of the United States believe themselves justified in calling
attention to another element making for success. The careful and
satisfactory preparation in advance of the Commission, due in large part to
private initiative. The American Institute of International Law, composed of
five publicists of each of the twenty-one American Republics, and of which
the American Delegates are themselves members, prepared at the request of
the Pan American Union the series of Projects of Public International Law
and the projected Code on the Conflict of Laws, which were transmitted by
the Governing Board of the Pan American Union a year or more in advance
of the meeting to the governments of the Americas for their consideration.
This was made possible by the munificence and far-sighted generosity of
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, which enabled the
American Institute to hold its sessions and to prepare both the projects and
code, and which bore the entire expense of the printing and the distribution
of the preparatory work accomplished by the American Institute of
International Law and in the form in which it was laid before the
Commission by the Pan American Union.
