950
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
velopments in Pakistan),3 many nuclear nations view U.S. policy as an
effort to deny them autonomy (however unrealistic that possibility
may be in some cases). There is a widespread belief, and it is notable
that even Canada may be moving in this direction, that restrictions
on sensitive facilities are likely to become less effective or even coun-
terproductive where countries in which they are located or planned
agree to IAEA safeguards on all their civil nuclear facilities (full-scope
safeguards).
2. There is fairly wide acceptance, largely as a result of efforts in
INFCE and elsewhere, of the views that (a) the economic advantage of
recycling of plutonium in thermal reactors is marginal, at best; and
(b) reprocessing is not a necessary precondition for waste disposal.
3. There is substantial acceptance in Japan, France, the UK, the
FRG, other European nations, and the USSR, of the need to prevent
widespread construction of national enrichment and reprocessing
plants and the spread of plutonium and high enriched uranium. But
none of these countries is prepared to imitate the U.S. by foreswearing
reprocessing (although the FRG has been forced by domestic pressures
to accept deferral of their proposed major commercial facility). While
the first four agree that multinational approaches to sensitive facilities
and materials are of interest for nonproliferation reasons, they, like the
U.S., resist acceptance of dependence on multinational plants.
4. INFCE will not come up with either fuel cycle or hardware
“fixes” which will significantly reduce the potential for diversions to
weapons programs.
5. With demands for nuclear power much reduced and sources of
nuclear equipment and enrichment services increasing, U.S. ability to
influence the conditions of international nuclear trade has greatly di-
minished. It is likely to diminish further.
III.
In light of these observations and in order not to be further isolated
from influencing nuclear developments abroad, we need to develop
new approaches (reflecting the incentives and institutions foreshad-
owed in your 1977 speech and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act
(NNPA)) designed to achieve our basic nonproliferation objectives.
Our best hope lies in developing a consensus among the Summit 7, cer-
tain other important industrialized countries and some key LDC’s.
I propose, in both internal efforts and in exploratory talks with
other governments, to explore a range of possibilities building on NPT
and IAEA safeguards, while maintaining to the extent possible supplier
restraints. These possibilities would be based on the following:
3 On June 25, Smith informed IAEA Director General Eklund about “the seri-
ousness with which the United States viewed” the “evidence” that Pakistan “was pur-
suing a nuclear explosive program, mentioning activity in reprocessing, gas centrifuge
enrichment and nuclear explosive design.” (Telegram 178818 to Vienna, July 11; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840167–2015)
