Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
299
ever, encourage new investment and profitable exchange. If it fails and
falls victim to a new wave of international protectionism, we can be
sure that many of the “boats” will founder and some may sink.
I know that this is not an abstract, theoretical matter for the Amer-
ican worker or businessman or farmer who depends for his family’s
living on production of steel, CB radios, color television sets, micro-
wave ovens, textiles, footwear, automobiles, computers, sugar, and
many other items. The changing world economy has made other na-
tions competitive in production of these products, and we are feeling
the result of it.
The Carter Administration knows this and is doing its best to help
the American industries and people affected. The new steel program,
announced in December,3 is a part of that. So are our present discus-
sions with Japan on reducing its import barriers and increasing its rate
of growth.4
But we and others must help ourselves in ways that do not throw
the world back into the kind of disastrous protectionist spiral that we
all experienced in the Great Depression.
Under economic pressure, one country, and then another, in the
1930’s closed its borders to foreign goods. High tariffs increased the
price of everything to everyone, everywhere. Then we closed our banks
and our businesses and our farms as we fell into worldwide depres-
sion. The great ports of our country were, as you well know, empty and
forlorn places.
A new wave of protectionism would imperil the American profits
and 10 million jobs which depend on those exports. The hardest hit of
all would be the American farmer, who is having a hard time staying in
the black right now. California is an agricultural state.
I have just learned that there is more acreage under cultivation in
the United States to produce food which we sell to Japan than there is
total acreage under cultivation in Japan. If Japan, for instance, were to
close its borders to our food and fiber as part of a trade war, farms and
3 On December 6, 1977, the Carter administration announced its plan to revitalize
the U.S. steel industry. In addition to loan guarantees, tax breaks, and economic assist-
ance to communities impacted by steel layoffs, the plan also featured a “trigger” or refer-
ence price system designed to eliminate the importation of lower-priced steel into the
United States. Solomon, during a December 6 news conference, explained that the refer-
ence prices, pegged to the costs of production of the most efficient steel producers, would
“trigger” a government investigation if countries exported steel to the United States
below the set reference price. (James L. Rowe, Jr., “Administration Warns Against
Raising Prices,” The Washington Post, December 7, 1977, pp. D–8, 11) See also Foreign Rela-
tions, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy, Document 80.
4 For information on these discussions, which were held in Tokyo January 9–13, see
ibid., Documents 97 and 98.
