3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
900
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
8. The Secretary noted that PD–59 was an issue which had been
raised on the Soviet side; he had the impression that Gromyko had ex-
pressed greater feeling in discussing that issue than on any other
topic—to which Dobrynin responded, “that’s true.” Recognizing that it
was obviously of concern to Gromyko, the Secretary continued, he had
raised it at the highest level and wanted to reassure Gromyko. He rec-
ognized that that might not end the matter, but wanted to make the
point that even if Gromyko should repeat his views on the subject he
would not regard it as a “negative” approach, but rather as an indica-
tion that problems remained which must be ironed out, just as we suc-
ceeded in doing in the SALT process.
9. On human rights, the Secretary said he understood what Do-
brynin was saying but pointed out that the problem was not simply one
which was being raised by this administration. Rather, our position re-
flected concerns widely felt within this country, and we had an obliga-
tion to continue raising those concerns with the Soviets.
10. The Secretary reaffirmed the President’s and his own commit-
ment to the arms control process but noted that we were going to need
some assistance from the Soviets to get the job done. If we could make
progress in resolving Afghanistan, we ought to try; if we could make
progress in the other problem areas he had mentioned, we ought to try.
It was in that context that he had raised them—not because of a nega-
tive attitude. Progress in all these areas would improve prospects for
the arms control process, something which was important both in order
to reduce the risk of nuclear confrontation and in order to reduce the
cost of the arms burden on both sides.
11. The Iran-Iraq conflict, the Secretary said, drove home to both
sides the importance of developing policies of restraint. So long as the
fighting continued the threat of a broadening war became more evi-
dent. He had found concern over this possibility in his travels inside
the U.S., in his discussions with other foreign ministers in New York,
and in his meeting with Gromyko. He sensed that both the U.S. and the
USSR were at present following a policy of restraint toward that con-
flict, and he thought restraint was the best description of what our
policy should be. We should attempt to lessen irritants. He recognized
that this was not going to be easy and that this was a very difficult pe-
riod in our relationship.
12. Dobrynin then abruptly changed the subject by asking whether
the Secretary was going to attend the Madrid Conference, adding that
FRG Foreign Minister Genscher had told Gromyko he planned to do so.
The Secretary said that it was not his present intention to go to Madrid.
He then commented that he realized Madrid offered the possibility that
there would be much shouting at each other, but that it was not his de-
sire that the Conference develop in that manner. He thought there were
