3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
51
there was a vast number, hundreds of specific questions that would
have to be addressed subsequently. For now he would prefer to stop
here, and would ask for the views of the U.S. side. He also acknowl-
edged that he had received the last communication.
Secretary Vance first wanted to thank the General Secretary for the
frankness and openness with which he had addressed the various im-
portant questions before us. He, too, would try to speak frankly and
openly, because he believed this to be the best way of achieving results.
First, before beginning to set forth the views of the United States re-
garding the relations between our two countries, the Secretary wanted
to transmit to Mr. Brezhnev a letter from President Carter.5
(Brezhnev took a few minutes to read the translation of the Presi-
dent’s letter and passed it on to Minister Gromyko).
The Secretary said that all of us were heartened by Brezhnev’s for-
eign policy remarks in his recent speeches. Last winter, as Governor
Carter6 prepared to assume the presidency, he had been impressed and
gratified by Brezhnev’s public statement on the importance of good re-
lations between our two countries. In particular, he was encouraged by
Brezhnev’s statement at Tula that detente meant a willingness to re-
solve differences and disputes by peaceful means, at conference tables.
The President’s deep conviction, which the Secretary shared and, in his
judgment, was shared by a majority of the American people, was that
our two countries must do everything they could to reduce the danger
of war. The President, like Brezhnev, was a practical man and realized
that the overall state of our relations would be determined largely by
the specifics of the issues on our agenda. These were the “objective real-
ities” of detente which determined where we were going.
The President, like Brezhnev, had been an officer in the armed
forces of his country, and had a deep determination to do all he could to
work toward a reasonable and fair regulation of military competition.
The Secretary well knew that Brezhnev had lived through the
devastation of war, and knew the sorrow and suffering it would bring
to all of our people, the young and the old. The Secretary, too, had ex-
perienced the horrors of war, had seen his friends and comrades die,
and had lived with the responsibility for nuclear weapons for many
years. It was his fervent hope that our children and Brezhnev’s children
would be spared the incalculable horror of a nuclear holocaust. At this
point Brezhnev interrupted to tell a story in connection with alleged So-
viet intentions to attack or threaten the United States. An Oriental tale
related that at a bazaar a man had purposely started the rumor that at
5 See Document 15.
6 Carter served as Governor of Georgia from January 1971 until January 1975.
