918
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
will succeed.” With an almost mystical confidence, he said that at
Camp David “we jumped over obstacles to new horizons.” If the Pales-
tinians were to join the autonomy talks at this stage, Sadat said, we
would reach no agreement, just as we would have reached no agree-
ment at Camp David if Hussein had been there. It is important first to
complete the autonomy negotiations with Israel; then if the Pales-
tinians refuse what we have achieved for them, this will be their re-
sponsibility. Their entry now would “doom the peace process,” he
stated.
5. Recalling his report to us following his last talks with Begin in
Alexandria, Sadat expressed confidence that by the end of this year
there would be agreement on full autonomy and a solution to the Jeru-
salem problem. This agreement could then be carried out in Gaza and
Jerusalem, leaving the West Bank aside for the time being because of its
particular sensitivity to the Israelis and because this would provide an
opportunity for Israel and Hussein to come to an understanding with
respect to the West Bank. Sadat stated confidently that, when the
present phase of negotiations with Israel is completed by the end of this
year, Hussein would join the negotiating process and, by working with
Israel, could arrange a plebescite whereby the Palestinians would agree
to join Jordan rather than insist upon an independent state.
6. To make certain that I had understood precisely Sadat’s posi-
tion, I put certain questions to him towards the end of our meeting:
—I first asked how concerned Sadat would be if we vetoed an
Arab resolution in the Security Council, thereby undermining our cred-
ibility with the other Arabs and reinforcing the Baghdad front. Sadat
repeated that this would not harm Egypt or the autonomy talks but
would harm the United States with Saudi Arabia.
—I next asked what Sadat’s views were on a milder resolution
which would not call for a Palestinian state, which would basically
draw on language we have used in the past, and which would be sup-
ported by the U.S. I told Sadat that in my talks in Israel it was clear that
even such a resolution would be opposed by the Israelis. Sadat re-
peated that when Israel is frightened, this will harm the peace process.
—I then asked his reaction to a U.S. resolution which would be op-
posed by the Arab world but would, on the basis of my talks with Is-
rael, still be opposed by them. Sadat repeated that anything which
frightened the Israelis would be bad for the peace process.
7. When I described the Israeli position (characterizing it as unrea-
sonable and asking for his advice) that any new resolution was unnec-
essary since the peace process is being implemented and progressing
well on the basis of Resolution 242 and 338 plus the Camp David
Framework, and that any new resolution would unbalance the Camp
