North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 last, but (parochially?) not least, I could actually draft the new PRM and be centrally involved from the outset (as, of course, could Tom Thornton now that he’s on board as the permanent North-South “cluster leader”). Cons: 1. For various bureaucratic reasons you might prefer not to ask for back-to-back North-South PRMs. 2. There may be no way to assure that a more bureaucratically “disinterested” and analytically “interested” group would be put to work on the new PRM by Department Secretariats. No matter how the PRM is worded, Secretary Vance, for example, might end up sending it to the E Bureau. 3. Even with a completely recast and non-overlapping mandate, entrenched bureaucratic interests (mostly of an economic nature) might limit the capacity of the PRM system at its best to play the kind of conceptualizing role which you are after in the North-South arena. Option No. 3—Radical Surgery on PRM–8 This option presupposes that the papers, coming through the EPG process, will fall far short of what will be required to present the President with a cogent option (or policy) paper. The radical surgery would necessitate a sharp break in the process once the PRM–8 papers get through the EPG process and reach the NSC per se. Pros: 1. All good work could be salvaged; all bad work sent back for redrafting or scuttled. For example, the State paper on political aspects could simply be dropped as “not germane at this time.” 2. It would avoid a second North-South PRM. 3. Within the NSC a great deal of alternate drafting of the worst work might be undertaken and (hopefully) substituted for the Agency originals. Cons: 1. This approach might call for you to take harsh actions on papers cleared by Cabinet members. You might wish to avoid being put into this position. 2. The procedure will probably leave major gaps to be filled, and could raise the issue of “the proper role of the NSC” as a major drafter of sections of PRMs. 3. Even if the cracks could be papered over, it is very difficult to believe that the end product would not be a rather inferior product. Option No. 4—A Radical Alternative to PRM–8 The PRM–8 is off to such a bad start at State that two major bureaus within the Department now feel that they may end up carrying out-
