International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
423
138.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, June 23, 1978
SUBJECT
Our Summit Goals
1. The main purpose of US participation in the Summit is to strike a
three-way deal, which will involve:
a. the US pledging action to limit oil imports2 and control inflation;
b. the Germans and Japanese pledging additional measures to
stimulate domestic demand;3
c. all Summiteers agreeing to freer trade policies4—which will be
especially difficult for the British and the French.
Thus each head of government would pledge actions that are in his
country’s interest, but that would be politically difficult unless done as
part of a package that included concessions from other countries. I
won’t elaborate further on this concept, since you are familiar with the
steps that we are taking to try to give shape to it.
2. In addition to this package of immediate measures, our object at
the Summit is to tackle two longer-term structural problems: energy pro-
duction and conservation (other than US imports), and North-South
relations.5
3. On energy, I hope the Summit can agree on actions—coordinated
research and development, increased investment, etc.—to reduce en-
ergy consumption and increase energy production in the industrial
world. An international sub-group (on which DOE is represented) is
spelling out details, which we will submit to you shortly.6
4. On North-South relations, the two key issues are aid and trade. It
is through these means that the vast majority of resources move from
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 111, President’s Europe Trip: 6/23–30/78. Confiden-
tial. Sent for information. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page. Brzezinski wrote on
the memorandum: “Concur—this summarizes the strategy on which we are basing our
preparations. ZB.”
2 Carter underlined the phrase “to limit oil imports.”
3 Carter underlined the phrase “stimulate domestic demand.”
4 Carter underlined the phrase “freer trade policies.”
5 Carter underlined the phrases “energy production and conservation” and
“North-South relations.”
6 A July 7 memorandum from Vance, Blumenthal, Schultze, Brzezinski, and Owen
to Carter entitled “Energy and the Summit” is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol.
XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980, Document 156.
