592
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
172.
Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
Washington, February 1, 1979, 3–4:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
Secretary Brown’s Trip to the Middle East (U)
PARTICIPANTS
State
JCS
Warren Christopher, Deputy
Gen. David Jones
Secretary
LTG William Smith, Assistant to
Harold Saunders, Assistant
CJCS
Secretary of State (NEA)
CIA
Treasury
Adm. Stansfield Turner
Anthony Solomon, Under
Robert Bowie, Deputy Director for
Secretary for Monetary
National Foreign Assessment
Affairs
Robert Ames, NIO for Near East
Fred Bergsten, Assistant Secretary
and South Asia
for International Affairs
Vice President Mondale
Denis Clift, National Security
Defense
Affairs Adviser
Harold Brown
Charles Duncan, Deputy Secretary
White House
David McGiffert, Assistant
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Secretary for International
David Aaron
Security Affairs
NSC
Robert Murray, Deputy Assistant
Gary Sick
Secretary for International
Fritz Ermarth
Security Affairs
OMB
James McIntyre
John White, Deputy Director
Secretary Brown opened the meeting by noting that he had prom-
ised to make a visit to the Middle East when he had met with various
Middle East leaders a long time ago. Many things had happened in the
meantime. The Camp David meeting had occurred with its initial
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 73, PRC
090, 2/1/79, Secretary Brown’s Trip to Middle East. Secret. The meeting took place in the
White House Situation Room. The complete minutes of this meeting is scheduled for
publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Pen-
insula. Found attached to the minutes was a February 2 note from Sick to Aaron relaying
a telephone conversation that morning in which Barry Blechman of ACDA informed Sick
that ACDA Director George M. Seignious was “furious at being excluded from the PRC
yesterday on Harold Brown’s Middle East trip. They [ACDA] were under the impression
that the meeting had been cancelled.” Sick reported to Aaron that he “pleaded igno-
rance” and noted that perhaps “because of the fact that I see only one dimension of the
problem, I do not understand the circumstances when ACDA is invited and when they
are excluded.” (Ibid.)
