Covert and Overt Operations
801
proposal, although they will not have seen the final draft. Frank Carlucci
would very much like to get authoritative guidance on this proposal before
he leaves on Sunday [less than 1 line not declassified].
—Can we reach consensus on forwarding this to the President?
—Do we need to have a further meeting of principals?
Guidance for Use With Contacts
In my memo to you and ZB last week, I proposed an action strategy
which would give CIA specific guidance on the “message” they can
use with their various contacts. I was authorized to contact the various
participants of this meeting in advance to try out this idea. I have talked
with Frank Carlucci, Bob Komer, and John Pustay. I am scheduled to
see Newsom this afternoon prior to the meeting.
Komer and Pustay agreed wholeheartedly with the general
approach of focusing our efforts on countering Soviet penetration and
the growth of radical leftist forces in Iran. Carlucci thought my original
formulation was too negative—stressing what we did not want rather
than what we hoped to achieve. I have tried to incorporate their com-
ments in the draft guidance at Tab A.3 I hope to get a preliminary reaction
from Newsom prior to the meeting.
The proposed guidance would serve three purposes:
—It lays out a general overview of the situation from the U.S. point
of view. In the past, our “message” to the various Iranian groups has
tended to be imprecise and confusing, and this has hampered our
credibility. Hopefully, this guidance would help us speak with one
voice.
—It makes clear our opposition to premature and ill-guided mili-
tary operations launched from Iraq (the “White Russian” syndrome).
Oveissi and his supporters are presently very active in this country
and elsewhere (they saw Sadat last month)4 drumming up enthusiasm
for a military coup.
—It focuses the objective of our efforts on the internal situation in
Iran, by encouraging the development of a coalition of forces to actively
3 Tab A is attached but not printed. The final version is attached to Document 293.
4 At their May 24 meeting, Sadat expressed his confidence in Oveissi’s ability to
change events in Iran. He also acknowledged Oveissi’s monetary reliance on the Iraqis,
but warned him to “be wary of Iraqi intentions.” Sadat advised him to line up the
support of all the friendly Persian Gulf countries, to obtain U.S. acquiescence in this, to
build his strength inside Iran (particularly through his ongoing broadcasts), and to avoid
undue contact with the Shah. Sadat told Oveissi that, unlike the Soviet Union, the United
States did not fully understand the seriousness of the Iranian situation and had to be
“force fed like a baby.” (Memorandum of conversation, May 30; Central Intelligence
Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files,
Box 14, Folder 1)
