172
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Kamel insisted that the way the term is used elsewhere in the paper is
also different. There were frequent references to the “inhabitants”
rather than to the Palestinians. The Secretary thought that “Pales-
tinians” is used throughout the paper. Kamel said this is not the case.
D. Kamel then turned to another objection, namely the reference to
the refugees. This, he noted, departs from previous statements on the
subject. There is no reference to UN Resolution 1945 or to other UNGA
Resolutions having to do with the Palestinian refugees. Moreover, Pal-
estinian and Jewish refugees had been mentioned in the same context.
The Secretary commented that he was aware of the Egyptian views, but
that he thought they might be wrong. The Jewish refugees also have
rights. Ghorbal insisted that the equation distorts what had been
agreed upon unilaterally with respect to the Palestinian refugees for
many years. The Secretary noted that we have talked about the admis-
sion of displaced persons and refugees to the West Bank and also about
the need for an overall settlement of the refugee problem. Ahmed
Maher stated that the Jewish refugee matter is a totally different
problem. The doctrine of Israel, he recalled, is that Jews anywhere in
the world should go back to Israel. This is the essence of the “return
law.” How in such circumstances, he asked, can the Israelis argue that
people who are returning under this law can properly be considered as
refugees. The Secretary urged that the Egyptians read the appropriate
language again. He thought that if they consider it carefully, it should
not give them too much problem. Kamel commented that the Egyp-
tians have always taken it for granted that displaced persons should be
allowed to return to the West Bank and Gaza. Under our language the
Israelis have a veto on these people as well as the refugees. The require-
ment for unanimous agreement gives them this veto. The language of
our paper, he stressed, deeply troubles the Egyptians. The Secretary re-
sponded that part of the language on this subject comes directly from
Sadat. He would be happy to look at any other language that the Egyp-
tians might propose, but he wanted to stress that Sadat’s very words
were used in some of the language having to do with displaced persons
and refugees. Again, Kamel was nonplused. He recalled that when the
Secretary was in Alexandria, he had tried to explain to him that Sadat is
looking as an objective to a real peace, but that the President’s phrasing
is not always felicitous. The Secretary again noted that we will look at
any language the Egyptians care to suggest. We cannot guarantee to ac-
cept it, but they could be sure that we will carefully study it.
5 Reference is to UN General Assembly Resolution 194, passed on December 11,
1948. Article 11 of the Resolution addressed the status of Palestinian refugees displaced
by the 1948 Arab-Israeli war.
