1382 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement and radiation applications to the under-­developed areas of the world. Under the equipment program, emphasis is being placed on items such as teletherapy units, facilities for growing plants in gamma radiation fields to induce mutations, and isotope research and training labora­ tories. A special request has been received from the Chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission to provide training and practical experience to a number of qualified Indians in the radiation preserva­ tion of food. This request will be accommodated. 74. Controlled Thermonuclear Research. The United States and the United Kingdom continue to cooperate closely in pursuing a vigorous research program in the area of controlled thermonuclear reactions. In January, there was a major joint release which embraced practically all data declassified in the field on that date. Both countries are planning major demonstrations of this research at the Geneva Conference in September. 75. Information. A workshop for librarians in charge of the gift tech­ nical libraries distributed to European and Middle East nations under the Atoms-­for-­Peace program, held in Geneva in May, was well attended and favorably received. Additional libraries have been donated to the IAEA, Poland, and Honduras. The exchanges of classified information, classified discussions, and the dissemination of unclassified informa­ tion continued to increase. Visitors from other nations to U.S. instal­ lations and U.S. atomic energy industry were averaging about 70 per month. CONFERENCES, EXHIBITS AND MISSIONS 76. Geneva Conference. The United States, as in 1955, plans to make a significant contribution to the second United Nations Conference on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in Geneva, September 1–13, 1958. Approximately 900 abstracts were submitted to the UN Conference Secretary General. It is expected that the U.S. will be allocated about 150 oral presentations at the Conference sessions. 77. Through May 15, 1958, the United Nations reported accep­ tance of the following number of papers from the countries indicated: USSR—158; United Kingdom—199; France—163; West Germany—65; and India—63. 78. Construction is well advanced on the comprehensive technical exhibit which demonstrates the latest and most significant advances in nuclear science and technology in the United States. It will include the controlled thermonuclear section previously referred to, two operating research reactors, and detailed demonstrations of many other aspects of peaceful research and uses. The Commission also is coordinating and will participate in a trade-­fair-­type commercial exhibit in down-­town Geneva concurrently with the Conference. It is expected that about 45 U.S. firms will be represented at the latter exhibit.
