893.5045/97: Telegram
[Document 517]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 20, 1925—3 p.m.
[Received June 20—9:15 a.m.]
238. My 237, June 19, 6 p.m.
1. When Minister for Foreign Affairs informed by senior minister of proposal
as outlined in paragraph 2 of above, former expressed emphatic preference
that negotiations should take place in Shanghai; that Peking was not desirable
for that purpose, disturbances being likely in event of unsatisfactory course
of negotiation. Likewise difficult for witnesses to be questioned at Peking.
Senior minister enumerated distinct advantages of Peking over Shanghai in
our opinion. After 2-hour discussion Minister for Foreign Affairs maintained
attitude but said he would consult Tuan Chi-jui. Latter has now caused us to
be informed of his preference for Shanghai as place for negotiations. Quite
evident that one reason for this attitude is fear of Minister for Foreign Affairs
in particular and Chinese Government in general of taking responsibility of
direct negotiation at Peking.
2. At meeting of Heads of Legation this morning senior minister authorized
to reply to Minister for Foreign Affairs that we consider there are substantial
objections to satisfactory negotiation at Shanghai; that we trust Chinese
Government will modify their attitude; that we shall hear report of our
delegation arriving back today, and give final reply to Chinese Government’s
proposition thereafter. General opinion of Heads of Legation that, while
greatly preferable negotiations should take place in Peking, we could not in
the last analysis categorically refuse Chinese Government’s proposition and
would agree thereto even if same remained unchanged.
3. Argument by senior minister that much time would be saved if
negotiations at Peking, did not appear of especial importance to Minister for
Foreign Affairs who gave senior minister distinctly to understand that there
was no especial hurry for settlement; that if achieved in two or three weeks it
would be quite satisfactory. This is a distinct change in attitude of Chinese
Government who heretofore have in every way urged a speedy settlement.
4. I shall telegraph later in regard to this change in attitude.
