404  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
are taking steps to limit the distribution in the Department of O’Neill’s 
reports on his conversations with the PRC Foreign Office. There is great 
interest among the press in O’Neill’s efforts so our P and FE/P people 
are somewhat on the spot, as is the British Embassy here.
We are hoping that some additional pressure will be exerted on 
Peiping through U Nu. The Secretary sent him a good strong message 
in response to U Nu’s extraordinary appeal for a higher level Confer­
ence. We assume of course that U Nu will pass on to Chou En-­lai the 
text of the Secretary’s reply. We have endeavored to capitalize on this 
probability. There is a chance that U Nu will associate himself to some 
extent with our expression of dissatisfaction over the failure of the PRC 
to implement the Agreed Announcement. A copy of this exchange of 
messages will be sent to you.
Mr. Robertson is making a speech at Davidson College, North Car­
olina tomorrow which will have some pretty explicit things to say on 
the question of implementation of the Agreed Announcement, and on 
the need for a PRC renunciation of the use of force. We think that this 
speech will fit well into our strategy. Some very specific questions are 
posed in this speech. You will get a copy.
On the renunciation of force item, we may have unintentionally 
misled you somewhat in talking about a “study”. Nothing as elaborate 
as what that probably signifies to you is underway here. What is being 
worked on by Bill Sebald and Judge Phleger is a draft declaration pro­
claiming the renunciation of the use of force, except defensively, with 
specific reference to the Taiwan area. The form would be analogous 
to that of the Agreed Announcement of September 10: —­two parallel 
unilateral statements or declarations. The Secretary and Mr. Robert­
son had some reservations about the first draft and a new version is 
now in the works. It would be quite simple—­only a half a page or so. 
We hope a draft of this will be ready to send you some time next week 
for your comments. With the help of Doug Forman and Peter Colm 
you probably will be able to prepare all the material you will need for 
expanding on the subject in the course of discussions. Your men cer­
tainly have more time to work on this than anybody in CA. However, 
it is true that they may be somewhat handicapped by not having the 
feel of all the current thinking here. We hope that Ralph Clough or 
someone else who is well qualified can be given a few hours of free 
time in which he can work up some argumentation under informed 
guidance.
On the embargo question, you may have sensed that the Secre­
tary himself drafted numbered paragraph 5 of your instructions dated 
October 12, Deptel 870. There seems to be a good chance that we can 
get some negotiating value from drawing the Chinese Communists out
