Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II what is “politicization” or what is not, ours is a minority viewpoint.4 Voting for loans or abstaining from voting in IFI’s will be, and is, regarded as a political act. Our use of political criteria on IFI loans may come back to haunt us should the Egyptians move from expressing concern about our policy in the IFI’s to taking advantage of it in an effort to deny IFI loans to Israel on human rights grounds. The Egyptians have used international organizations in the past to further their foreign policy efforts vis-a`-vis Israel. Since most of the world community believes that Israel does violate human rights in the occupied territories, our effort to address human rights questions in the IFI’s may place us in an akward and embarrassing position in the future.5 If we do continue to use the IFI’s as an instrument of human rights policy we should concentrate our fire on gross offenders where we have substantial multilateral support, e.g. Uganda. We suggest a cold, hard look at the possible future consequences of this policy be taken before any recommendation is made to the President. In connection with the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination (page 56),6 it should be noted that the USG has, thus far, declined to take part in the Decade because of the equating of Zionism with racism. The draft PRM states that we should consult with key African delegations at the 1977 UNGA in an effort to reach advance understandings for the avoidance of the Zionism-racism issue at the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination to be in August 1978.7 Before even attempting this, it should be remembered that Africa also includes such radical states as Algeria and Libya and 4 At the ILO Conference in Geneva, the United States lost a vote on a 75-page committee report that contained unfavorable references to several third world countries. In a June 21 article, The Washington Post reported that some delegates indicated that the vote might compel the United States to withdraw from the ILO. (“U.S. Loses Critical Vote in
