204
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
what is “politicization” or what is not, ours is a minority viewpoint.4
Voting for loans or abstaining from voting in IFI’s will be, and is, re-
garded as a political act. Our use of political criteria on IFI loans may
come back to haunt us should the Egyptians move from expressing
concern about our policy in the IFI’s to taking advantage of it in an ef-
fort to deny IFI loans to Israel on human rights grounds. The Egyptians
have used international organizations in the past to further their for-
eign policy efforts vis-a`-vis Israel. Since most of the world community
believes that Israel does violate human rights in the occupied terri-
tories, our effort to address human rights questions in the IFI’s may
place us in an akward and embarrassing position in the future.5
If we do continue to use the IFI’s as an instrument of human rights
policy we should concentrate our fire on gross offenders where we
have substantial multilateral support, e.g. Uganda. We suggest a cold,
hard look at the possible future consequences of this policy be taken be-
fore any recommendation is made to the President.
In connection with the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination (page 56),6 it should be noted that the USG has, thus far,
declined to take part in the Decade because of the equating of Zionism
with racism. The draft PRM states that we should consult with key Af-
rican delegations at the 1977 UNGA in an effort to reach advance un-
derstandings for the avoidance of the Zionism-racism issue at the
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination to be
in August 1978.7 Before even attempting this, it should be remembered
that Africa also includes such radical states as Algeria and Libya and
4 At the ILO Conference in Geneva, the United States lost a vote on a 75-page com-
mittee report that contained unfavorable references to several third world countries. In a
June 21 article, The Washington Post reported that some delegates indicated that the vote
might compel the United States to withdraw from the ILO. (“U.S. Loses Critical Vote in
ILO, Raising Possibility of Pullout,” p. C–7) Previously, on November 6, 1975, the Ford
administration had submitted a letter to the ILO giving a 2-year notice of intent to with-
draw. In a January 21, 1976, letter to Ambassador to Yugoslavia Laurence Silberman, des-
ignated as Ford’s special representative to review U.S. relations with the ILO, Ford com-
mented that recent developments within the ILO, including increased politicization and
the denial of due process to member states, had resulted in this course of action. (Public
Papers: Ford, 1976–77, Book I, pp. 79–80) On May 27, 1977, the White House issued a state-
ment indicating that a Cabinet-level committee was reviewing the membership issue.
(Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, p. 1029) The White House announced on November 1,
1977, that the United States would terminate its ILO membership. (Department of State
Bulletin, December 26, 1977, p. 912)
5 An unknown hand bracketed and starred this paragraph.
6 During its 27th session in 1972, the UN General Assembly adopted Resolution
2919 on November 15, declaring that the Decade would commence on December 10,
1973, the 25th anniversary of the issuance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
7 Scheduled to take place in Geneva. UN General Assembly Resolution 3379(XXX),
adopted November 10, 1975, equated Zionism with racism. The United States voted
against the resolution.
