340
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
donesia in the PL–480 contracts the very week that the GOI supplied us
their plan for releasing 10,000 political prisoners on December 20.5 Our
decision can only be regarded by the Indonesians as an insult—evi-
dence that their concrete measures undertaken largely to accommodate
our concerns result merely in new, insensitive, bureaucratic intrusions
into their affairs. To date the Human Rights Committee has not devel-
oped much skill in developing longer term human rights objectives in
relation to particular countries, or in relating its activities to longer-
term trends. Our policy exhibits as a result a sporadic and punitive as-
pect which arouses resentment.
I understand—though I have not seen the draft—that an effort is
under way to define our human rights policy guidelines in a PD.6 It is
my own judgment that before issuing any further guidelines on the
subject, it would be very healthy to have a detached outside observer of
impeccable and unquestioned balance and judgment come in and un-
dertake a quiet survey of our human rights policy. With nearly a year
behind us, it is time for sober reflection and a systematic appraisal of
our performance to date by someone who has no axe to grind. We need
to consolidate those initiatives which have genuine promise; to weed
out those practices which are harmful and mischievous; and, above all,
to rationalize our procedures in ways which will assure that human
rights considerations are taken into account but do not overwhelm all
other aspects of our foreign policy.
I don’t have any candidates for such a review in mind, though Inis
Claude7 has always struck me as a man who manages to combine ide-
alism and hard-headedness. My point is not to identify the person. If
you agree with the merit of such a review, I’m sure the right person can
be found.
Recommendation:
That you and David meet with Jessica, Tom Thornton, Mike Ok-
senberg, myself, and any other interested parties on the Staff to con-
sider procedures for integrating human rights concerns with other for-
5 The NSC Global Issues Cluster’s December 21 evening report noted that the Indo-
nesian Government had “followed through on its pledge, and released 10,000 political
prisoners who have been held 12 years without trial. 20,000 remain in custody.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield
Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 11–12/77) On December 31, the Department of
State issued a press release that noted the release of political prisoners in Indone-
sia, South Korea, Pakistan, and Bangladesh. (Department of State Bulletin, January 1978,
p. 39)
6 See Documents 96 and 98.
7 Reference is to Dr. Inis L. Claude, Jr., Stettinius Professor of Government and For-
eign Affairs at the University of Virginia and author of Power and International Relations
(1962).
