568
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
His bottom line was and is that he is willing to perform the opera-
tion in Panama in partnership with the Panamanian doctors, but that
his medical advice to the Shah would have to be that the surgery could
be performed with less risk in some other country.
Options: As the Shah considers what to do, he has three basic
options: for the operation to be performed in Panama (either in Paitilla
or Gorgas), in Egypt, or in the United States. Each of the options carry
heavy costs for us.
Panama—The Shah is extremely hesitant to have the operation
performed in Panama and was traumatized by the events of last week-
end when the operation was scratched. He has said he will continue
following DeBakey’s advice, and DeBakey has told us that his medical
advice will be to operate in Egypt or in the United States, not in Panama.
We do not believe that any other Panama-related alternative, such as
the use of a French medical team, will now be acceptable to the Shah.
The second possibility in Panama is to operate at Gorgas Hospital. The
Shah would most probably find this acceptable. It would also mean
we are somewhat less exposed than we would be if he came to the
States for the operation. On the negative side, Ambassador Moss
believes there would be a very negative reaction from the Panamanians
with a real possibility of demonstration and possible violence at Gorgas.
Also, the Panamanians told us that they will not allow the Shah to
remain in Panama after the operation. This may be a bluff and, faced
with an embarrassing departure of the Shah from Panama, there is a
slight chance of developing a better Panamanian attitude at Gorgas.
Also, after three or four weeks, we would be faced with the strong
possibility of having to take the Shah into the States after the operation.
The main attraction of Gorgas is that it would buy us three or four
weeks delay, would be somewhat less disruptive to our continued
attempts to gain the release of the hostages, and there would be less
of a chance that the militants would take action against our hostages.
Egypt—Ambassador Moss and we believe that the Shah is ready
to contact Sadat this weekend and ask for permission to go to Egypt.
We all agree that this would be highly detrimental to Sadat’s domestic
and regional position and our own policy in the area. We assume that
Sadat will stick to his invitation. If we are to avoid having the operation
in Egypt, we should be prepared to hold out some alternatives to the
Shah as early as tomorrow.
United States—The disadvantages of having the Shah return to the
States for the operation are evident. Our overriding concern would
have to be what actions might be taken against the hostages as a result
of his entry. At a minimum, we have to accept the possibility of the
hostages being held indefinitely, and we would have to contemplate
the terrible thought of immediate violence being directed against them
