January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1181
Prime Minister Begin said that Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district
are different from the U.S. They have left the question of sovereignty
open for five years. Therefore, Israel has to carry out its obligations.
The President said that there is a difference between individuals’
living in Jericho, and their being financed by the government.
Minister Burg said that if someone went to an Arab village, and
buys a house, he does so as an individual. Many of his friends were
killed in 1948—including only 20 kilometers south of Jerusalem. There
are settlements there now. Surely these are under Israeli jurisdiction
and not under the Self-Governing Authority. Since they are there as a
group, surely this applies to Israeli settlements. There is a basic differ-
ence—Israel says that settlements are legal; he will not say what the
U.S. thinks! (laughter)
The President asked whether they intend, during the transition pe-
riod, to have military occupation and Israeli rule over the Palestinians
there.
Prime Minister Begin said that “military occupation” does not apply
to Judea and Samaria, although there is a military government. In prac-
tice, they have promised to withdraw the military government.
The President said: right.
Prime Minister Begin said that therefore there will not be a military
government. The Self-Governing Authority (Administrative Council)
will decide daily affairs.
The President said he did not want to talk semantics. He asked
whether the area of the West Bank and Gaza would be demilitarized.
Will Israel relinquish government control over them?
Prime Minister Begin said that one can’t say “demilitarized,” as at
Camp David, with the specified security locations.
The President asked: only those?
Prime Minister Begin said: yes. Israel must have them for security.
The President said that the government now for the West Bank is
the Israeli military government and civilian administration.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel will withdraw them.
The President asked whether it would be left to the Self-Governing
Authority.
Prime Minister Begin said: yes.
The President asked whether it would have authority and responsi-
bility adequate to replace the military government.
Prime Minister Begin said yes. What will be transferred should be a
solid completion (of the discussions). Other powers will be shared; and
others will be kept by Israel.
The President said therefore the issue is defining full “authority.”
