March 27–December 31, 1979 1047 The most recent, public and authoritative statement of Jordan’s policy was given by King Hussein in his speech to the United Nations on September 25, 1979. He said that Jordan “would continue to stand for a just, honorable, viable and durable peace.” This accords with private assurances received from King Hussein and is accepted as an accurate characterization of Jordan’s policy. Jordan’s cooperation remains essential to a stable West Bank settlement. Our military assistance relationship is a vital element in this cooperation and in Jordan’s ability to follow a political course independent of pressure. It is important that we continue to work with Jordan, as a friendly Arab state, in the search for a just and comprehensive final peace. Therefore, I have determined that Jordan is acting in good faith to achieve further progress toward a comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East and that the expenditure of funds for security assistance to Jordan in FY 1980 will serve the purpose of peace in the Middle East. 322. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 20, 1979 SUBJECT Longer-Term Security Assistance to Egypt (C) I have reviewed the memoranda of Jim McIntyre2 and Cy and Harold3 on security assistance to Egypt in the context of the stringent budget guidance you have given. I believe that you should approve a middle ground between their positions, one that provides Sadat with essential near-term support but that moderates the long-term budget impact. (C) At the outset, I wish to state my unequivocal support for a longerterm security assistance relationship with Egypt. Sadat’s courageous decision to join the U.S. and Israel in seeking a lasting peace was an 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 12, Egypt: 12/79. Secret. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig. J.” 2 Attached but not printed. 3 See the attachment to Document 307.
