172 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI the uncertainty about how many Soviet SS-24s exist.15 All also agree that continuous monitoring will improve our confidence. There is disagreement over what type of monitoring system we need in START, what facilities we must monitor, and how much uncertainty exists with a monitoring system in place. RECOMMENDATION That you scan the papers at Tabs A, B, C, and D and use the points outlined above in guiding discussions at the Deputies Meeting on START Mobiles and New Initiatives.16 John Gordon, Bob Blackwill and Condi Rice concur. Tab A Paper Prepared by the Policy Coordinating Committee17 Washington, June 1, 1989 START 06D NSR 14 START Review Paper Six—Mobile ICBMs Purpose. To review options for modifying the U.S. position on dealing with mobile ICBMs under START. Background. Because of verification and stability concerns, the previous administration sought to ban mobile ICBMs under START. The United States did indicate, however, that, if a satisfactory verification scheme could be devised, we could consider allowing a strictly limited number of mobile ICBMs. The United States has not formally established what is meant by “strictly limited number”; internally we have considered a mobile ICBM warhead sublimit in the range of 500–1,000 warheads. The Soviets have proposed limiting mobile ICBMs to no more than 1,600 warheads on no more than 800 missiles. Although maintaining its formal position in the Joint Draft Text that mobile ICBMs should be banned, the United States agreed in 1988 to work on verification provisions for mobile ICBMs. A joint working paper has been prepared. The basic U.S. proposal would confine mobile 15 Gates underlined “An additional measure, to install now INF-­like portal monitoring systems at mobile final assembly facilities, would address a problem all agencies agree exists.” In the left-­hand margin beside this sentence he drew a vertical line and an arrow pointing to the vertical line. He also underlined “SS-24s.” 16 Gates did not indicate his preference. 17 Secret.
