International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 947 tached at Tab A;3 the recommended transmittal letter to the Soviet Union is attached at Tab B for your review and approval.4 Summary of Department and Agency Views 1. State supports the proposal. They suggest that “the initial approach to the Soviets should be low key and of sufficient detail to make our intentions clear.” Further they recommend that “first contact be made through our embassy in Moscow at a high level and privately conveying a supporting statement of White House interest.” State also recommended that before a presentation is made to the Soviets that specific project outlines be developed and carefully analyzed from the following perspectives: —“U.S. political interest in the country or area concerned —“Interests of U.S. allies and other powers which are pertinent; and —“Implications of proposed activities for our involvement in WHO or other multilateral organizations.” They also recommend that an ad hoc interagency group be formed to develop a range of projects in adequate detail to assure technical and political feasibility. They further recommend that the overall effort be chaired by State, with my office and the National Security Council represented in all phases, and a technical sub-group co-chaired by HEW and AID to outline projects, specify candidate countries, and develop them for a steering group review. 2. AID supports the proposal. However, they express concern with respect to the commingling of U.S. AID funds with those of communist nations; inevitable congressional criticism of joint activities which AID is involved in that would potentially damage the bilateral assistance program in general; and also express concern about the emphasis on joint programs in the field rather than additional cooperative efforts in the research area. They also point out (as other agencies have) that it is important that there be technically sound projects that are offered so that we can assure that the program is successful. 3. DOD supports the proposal. They comment that the proposal may have the effect of “reducing competition in Third World countries” and 3 Attached but not printed are agency comments on the proposal. 4 Attached but not printed is a proposed letter of transmittal to Gromyko, dated June 17, and the joint health proposal. There is no indication that the letter was sent to Gromyko. In remarks made at the annual meeting of the Southern Legislative Conference in Charleston, South Carolina, on July 21, Carter announced that the United States and Soviet Union were “seeking ways to cooperate in improving world health and in relieving world hunger.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, August 1, 1977, p. 1066). In a September 27 memorandum to Christopher (see Document 298), Lake noted that the White House had approved the joint health initiative.
