different matter. This point was responsible for a discussion on the manner in which non-League Court members should take part in the changes of the Court Statute. The Uruguayan representative believed that the situation was badly in need of clarifying, and was not certain whether one member alone could veto or whether the modification required a simple majority. He believed that if League members can veto, there will be no question as to the right of the United States to do the same. In this opinion the Venezuelan representative concurred. Mr. Dinichert (Switzerland) expressed the opinion that the Protocol had the value of a treaty and cannot be modified without the consent of all signatories. In support of the Canadian thesis, Sir Cecil Hurst (Great Britain) endeavored to create the impression that the entire discussion would appear to center about the United States’ right of veto in the event she should leave the Court. He declared that in such a case, no country could undertake to have the slightest influence in decisions of Court members. Mr. Rollin (Belgium) who, incidentally, played one of the most important parts in the discussions and who was undoubtedly one of the most intelligent and indefatigable collaborators in the Conference, stated, with regard to the first part of the fourth amendment, that he understood that the United States was asking equal treatment. As regards the possibility of the United States leaving the Court when it wished, that unquestionably gave her favored treatment since States members of the League could not do the same thing; for, as League members, they continue to pay a share of the Court expenses, to elect judges, and on occasion to ask the Court for opinions. He believed, however, that the Conference of the Court signatories had everything to gain in giving the United States favorable treatment and nothing to lose. The representative of Uruguay believed that the Conference should consider the position of League members in procedure involved in amending the Protocol of the Court. He asked whether, in the opinion of the Conference,
