Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 643 B. Draft Message to Allies. Because of the technical nature of the message, it is more appropriate to send it as an Aide Mémoire rather than a Presidential message. The only item of controversy is the possible additional phrase in paragraph 14 indicating that we intend to go beyond the UN sanctions by embargoing food and medicine. (S) Additional Measures of a Military Nature Before turning to this subject, you may wish to reduce participation to the statutory membership of the NSC. (C) There are a number of limited military measures which could be taken simultaneously with the imposition of economic and diplomatic sanctions which would enhance the sense of uncertainty and risk in Tehran (and with the allies) without committing us to any specific additional actions. An illustrative list of such actions is at Tab D, with a paper prepared by JCS and CIA analyzing the possible effects of such measures on Iranian military alert and possible reaction.8 With the exception of overflights, none of these measures would intrude on Iranian air or sea space. None is intended to do more than build credibility that we may be prepared to follow through with more stringent military measures, and thereby add urgency to the decisionmaking process by Iran and our allies. (S) As we undertake a new program of pressure against Iran, we necessarily edge closer to the point where mining of Iranian harbors may be essential to demonstrate to Iran that continued holding of the hostages will severely damage Iran’s economy. You may wish to review the status of contingency planning at this point and consider the possible circumstances and timing for such a step. (S) Finally, you may wish to reconsider with the NSC the desirability of proceeding with a rescue operation. In view of the failure of diplomatic efforts to budge Khomeini, and the bleak prospect of any improvement in the internal power struggles inside Iran, this may be the only realistic means of freeing the hostages in the next six months. (S) 8 An undated list, “Possible Limited Military Measures,” at Tab D mentions increased surveillance, spot jamming, aircraft penetration of the Persian Gulf, naval demonstrations, sonic booms, and overflights.
