Costa Rica 459 Rican based United States aircraft to evacuate casualties and army field rations from the Embassy commissary were sent to the troops in the field.5 A friend of the President approached Embassy officers in his behalf about 1:30 a.m. of the twelfth with news of heavy fighting on the border and requested United States air and naval patrols and other assistance.6 However, when subsequent developments that day made it clear that the rebels were all Nicaraguans intent on only invading Nicaragua and that they did not constitute a threat against the Costa Rican Government, no formal request for military assistance was made of the United States Government. Our Army Mission Chief reported that the rebel group which numbered about forty men, all Nicaraguans, was now dispersed along the border by the patrol action of the Civil Guard.7 Although the Costa Rican Government instituted air search and has augmented the Civil Guard Patrols in the build-­up area, no rebels have been found since the ambush of November 11. Our Army Mission Chief has also reported that as of November 14, he has found no evidence of Cuban weapons used by the rebels or of Cuban involvement in this attempted invasion of Nicaraguans. President Echandi was informed by our Chargé on November 15 of the United States Government offer to help prevent the receipt by the rebels of supplies, especially from Cuba. President Echandi profoundly moved by this gesture, gratefully declined the offer since he believed that his Government had no need for air or sea patrols or other assistance at the present time. Estimate of the Situation The sensitivity of the Costa Rican Government to the possibility of a Cuban led attack against Costa Rica was made evident by the credence given at first to the unconfirmed reports of such an attack. These reports were subsequently proven unfounded. 5 The Costa Rican Government asked Bailey and Edwards to make the Inter- American Geodetic Survey “aircraft available for removal of wounded and for liaison with the Costa Rican force headquartered at the town of Liberia, south of the Nicaraguan border. The Army Attaché received permissions from the Caribbean Command to use the aircraft as required.” (Memorandum by Roy I. Kimmel, Counselor, Embassy in Costa Rica, to the Department of State, November 15, 1960; 818.49/11–1560) 6 Manual Campos made the initial request. Subsequently on November 12, 1960, Foreign Minister Vargas and First Vice President José Joaquín Peralta Esquivel called Chargé Kimmel to the Presidential Palace and urgently asked for U.S. arms and support by sea and air. (Desp. 301 from San José, November 18, 1960/718.00(W)/11–1860) 7 On November 12, Bailey flew to Liberia, capital of Guanacaste Province, to investigate the situation. He reported that the rebels, not more than 40 Nicaraguan revolutionaries, had been dispersed. Vargas called the Chargé to say that Bailey’s report was correct and that no U.S. help would be needed. (Ibid.) Telegram 253 from San José, November 14, 1960 reported that “Bailey found no evidence Cubans involved or Cuban weapon used.” (717.00/11–1460)
