Dominican Republic 473 the future requested technical aid and equipment, it was hoped that arrangements could be made for such assistance even though there was no military agreement. It was apparent from the context of this remark that the reference was to military aid and equipment, although this was not specifically stated by the Minister. The Secretary told the Minister that the Dominican Government’s request would be studied carefully and said that he appreciated the comments of the Minister regarding the attitude of his Government toward cooperation with the United States. He stated that it would be fruitless to deny that in the recent past there have been points of disagreement between our two governments. He said that some countries in the world take certain actions with which we agree to a greater or lesser degree, whereas others sometimes do things that we cannot approve. The United States Government’s attitude is that other countries, being sovereign nations, may do as they wish in conducting their internal affairs and that we will respect their sovereignty, but nevertheless we do have opinions on their actions. The Secretary alluded to the fact that some of the things the Dominicans have done in the past have had a poor public relations reaction here in the United States, mentioning specifically the letters of the former Minister of Commerce4 which were critical of certain Congressional figures in the United States. The Secretary stressed that the public reaction in the United States to acts of others was beyond our government’s control and was a fact of life which must be accepted. Nonetheless, the Secretary added, the United States Government believes that our two governments should work together to resolve our mutual problems. Mr. Rubottom commented at this point that, as Ambassador de Moya was fully aware, a number of problems affecting relations between our two countries have arisen in recent months and that our government’s effort has always been to deal with them in a way which would meet the objectives of both of our governments. Turning to another subject, the Foreign Minister said that he thought Ambassador Lodge’s meeting on China with the Latin American delegates to the UN General Assembly in New York was very timely and useful. In response, the Secretary briefly described his trip to Taiwan to see President Chiang and some of the issues raised by the division of China by communism.5 Before the Minister rose to leave, the Secretary said that he had one comment he would like to make. He wished to tell the Minister, and asked him to pass on his thought to his President and to the 4 Juan O. Velázquez, Minister of Industry and Commerce. 5 Dulles was in Taipai, October 21–23, 1958. For documentation on this visit, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XVI, East Asia-Pacific Region; Cambodia; Laos.
