December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 693 Subject: The President pressed for Begin’s commitments on the issues of oil and withdrawals. Begin would make no commitments but merely promised to bring this up at the Cabinet next Sunday12 or perhaps on Thursday.13 In general Begin insisted that these issues have to be negotiated out and one must not press for immediate resolution. March 13, 1979; 3:00 to 5:00 p.m., Cairo Airport14 American Side Egyptian Side President Carter President Sadat Secretary Vance Vice President Mubarak Dr. Brzezinski Prime Minister Khalil Tuesday, March 13—Meeting at Cairo Airport The President: I believe my assignment has been carried out satisfactorily. You will be pleased. Sadat: Marvellous. The President: First 2 days Begin himself—unpleasant, interrupting. Then moderates convinced Begin to be more accommodating. Begin will wait to hear your position. He will go to the Cabinet this Thursday or Sunday. I believe the Cabinet will approve but I have no guarantee. Then Knesset approval. Begin will pledge to resign. If approved, all invited to Washington for signing ceremony—then exchange of visits between Cairo and Jerusalem. Items: On commitments—unilateral steps—letter by U.S. to Egypt. Article 4—no change. Article 5—technical Egyptian change accepted. Article 6–V–2 contravene instead of derogate (discussion—Egyptians prefer “inconsistent with”) Oil—Israelis wanted 2.5 million tons. Finally agreed that in context of normal relations Egypt would sell oil—and U.S. would guarantee for 15 years the needed amount. They have not accepted yet. 12 March 18. 13 March 15. Vance recalled in his memoirs that Begin agreed to take the U.S. proposal assuring the Israeli oil supply discussed by Dayan and Vance, March 12–13 (see Document 207), to the Israeli Cabinet “immediately.” Moreover, Carter agreed to Israeli suggestions regarding Gaza, whereby references to elections in Gaza first would be deferred to the planned post-treaty autonomy talks and references to Egyptian liaison officers in Gaza would be dropped from the West Bank and Gaza letter attached to the final treaty text. Carter also asked Begin whether “unilateral steps” could be taken by Israel on the West Bank to “improve the atmosphere,” a request Begin said he would consider “sympathetically.” (Vance, Hard Choices, p. 251) 14 Carter’s handwritten notes from this meeting are in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 1, Egypt, 11/77–11/81.
