3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
20
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
omitting cruise missiles and Backfire was quite different from the pro-
posal put forward by President Ford in February because the overall
context was different.
Introducing a personal note, Vorontsov said why had I, as a hold-
over, not explained to the new Administration how close to an agree-
ment we had come in January. He reminded me that Brezhnev’s pro-
posal at that time was obviously a bargaining offer, and he stated
specifically that Brezhnev had a fallback already prepared.
I said that that had been my feeling at the time, but he understood
as well as I did why we had become diverted onto a different path. I
said if the Soviets had in fact a proposal along the lines of the January
negotiations, they should not simply sit back but should introduce it
into the dialogue while we were studying our own position. He was
careful not to agree to do so.
He asked who would accompany Vance to Moscow and specifi-
cally whether Warnke would come and whether they could expect to
get in advance of the meeting an outline of our SALT position. I said I
assumed Warnke would go, but that I was no longer in a position to say
who the Secretary of State would or would not bring, that I understood
the reasons why submitting a proposal in advance would be helpful to
Brezhnev in preparing for the meeting, but this would depend on the
President.
He said Vance had suggested to Dobrynin that he would give the
outline in advance, and I said in that case I assumed that would
happen.
Comment:
My conversations with Vorontsov and Dobrynin over the years
have been rather frank and straightforward. We have discussed some
extremely sensitive intelligence and political and strategic issues. I as-
sume that Vorontsov hoped I would convey the intensity of his appre-
hension about the effect of the human rights issue. Even though he is
skilled in agitprop I conclude that he has a genuine uneasiness that
Brezhnev will explode at some point. My guess is that both he and Do-
brynin will be counseling Moscow to be patient and not lose their cool.
On the strategic arms control issues, they are obviously discon-
certed by the fact that they have been outflanked for the first time in
history by an American President. They seem to be somewhat discon-
certed and unsure of how to respond. They do make a connection, how-
ever, between the new approach on human rights and a reversion to an
old, rejected approach on SALT. And I suspect their fear is that they
will be asked to make concessions on both accounts.
