300
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
We are considering, in some cases in conjuction with CIA, every
possible alternative on our part to save Iran. This includes the probable
position of the British and ourselves with the local tribes, which could
be a big factor in any coup d’e´tat type of action. Another thing still to
consider, and in this probably the British would not agree with us, is
whether the US and UK should take the initiative with Mosadeq in of-
fering him a much simplified settlement of the oil issue in return for our
immediate assistance.
I am leaving this afternoon for a much overdue appointment with
the Doctor (nothing serious). John Jernegan will clear such a cable with
Matthews, and if Doc thinks necessary with you. I have informed the
British that I will call them if such a cable meets with the approval here
in the Department.
102.
Minutes of Director of Central Intelligence Smith’s Meeting1
Washington, July 29, 1952.
PRESENT
General Smith, Messrs. Dulles, Wisner, Becker, Hedden, Col. White, Mr. Long
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Iran.]
[Mr. Dulles:] c. Raised the problem of developments in Iran. He
cited a memorandum prepared by Mr. Kermit Roosevelt on our efforts
to operate in the Qashqai region of Southern Iran, and noted that we
were encountering difficulties in getting under way in this area. The
Director mentioned the cable from Amb. Henderson which reported
recent conversations with Mossadeq and expressed the view that the
Communist threat was considerably enhanced by Mossadeq’s present
attitude and by the likelihood of a dramatic anti-western move and that
the disturbed mental condition of Mossadeq makes the situation virtu-
ally unpredictable.2 Reference was also made to a detailed situation
analysis by our station in Iran.3 The Director expressed the belief that,
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Intelligence, Job
80B01676R, Box 23, Folder 10, Minutes of Deputies’ Meetings. Top Secret; Security Infor-
mation. Drafted by Long.
2 An apparent reference to Henderson’s first conversation with Mosadeq following
the Qavam interlude, as reported in telegram 422 from Tehran, July 28. See Document
100.
3 Not found.
