National Security Policy  473
will keep pace with those of the West and may lead the US in some 
respects.
84. Medical Sciences. Soviet medical practice lags behind that of 
most major Western countries, but appears to meet standards adequate 
for current civil and military requirements. Clinical practice is of a 
fair standard in large urban areas but is still backward in rural areas. 
Medical research, on the other hand, is pursued with vigor and may 
reach a level which approximates or even surpasses that of the US in 
certain fields relative to military and civilian defense, notably neuro­
physiology, radiobiology, aeromedicine, and hematology.
85. Biological and Agricultural Sciences. Soviet biological and agri­
cultural research has hitherto been generally backward, but a trend 
toward improvement in the quality of research is becoming evident as 
ideological restrictions on research diminish. Heavy emphasis will be 
placed on increasing per-­acre crop yield and livestock productivity.
86. Industrial Technology. For the immediate future, we estimate that 
the over-­all level of Soviet industrial technology will remain below that 
of the US. However, the most modern Soviet plants are already on a par 
with those in the US, and we expect the general level of heavy indus­
trial technology to be improved. Striking progress has been made over 
the past few years in the theory and practice of automation. Additional 
semiautomatic and possibly fully automatic production lines will be 
established during the period of this estimate. There will probably be 
increased emphasis on engineering process research and on shorten­
ing the lead times necessary to bring developed items into production. 
However, research and technology in consumer goods fields will con­
tinue to lag far behind that in the US.
87. Military Technology.8 The USSR has the capability to develop 
weapons and military equipment generally equal to those of any other 
nation. Despite the increasing complexities of military equipment, the 
USSR will be capable of continuing the successful design and develop­
ment of modern, integrated weapon systems.
IV: TRENDS IN THE SOVIET MILITARY POSTURE
SOVIET MILITARY THINKING AND POLICY
88. In the years since World War II, Soviet military thinking and 
the Soviet military establishment have been in a process of transition, 
dictated by rapid advances in military technology and by the fact that 
the USSR’s chief potential enemy, the US, lies beyond the reach of tra­
ditional Soviet military power. This rethinking has been reflected in 
8 Specific Soviet capabilities in military fields are discussed below in Chapter IV. 
[Footnote is in the original.]
