34  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
—Limited nuclear war fighting procedures: How and from where does 
the President conduct such a war? From the White House? The NEACP? 
The Pentagon? The underground alternate National Command Center?
—Coordination of intelligence and operations: Does the DCI manage 
post-­strike assessment and other intelligence for the National Military 
Command Center’s conduct of limited nuclear operations? How? With 
whose assets? What command authority?
—Vulnerability of the National Command Authority: The Blue Ribbon 
Defense Panel of 19703 presented a disturbing evaluation of the surviv-
ability of our command and control. The National Command Authority 
and political succession were among the weaker links. The situation 
today is not appreciably different.
In view of these issues, I suggest that you ask the Secretary of 
Defense and the Chairman, JCS, to:
a. Explain what they understand as our present nuclear war doc-
trine. They should comment on the advisability of retaining or cancel-
ling NSDM 242 and limited nuclear options.
b. Explain the procedures they envisage for actually conducting a 
nuclear war, limited or total, beyond the initial attack phase.
c. Set forth the objectives we would hope to achieve through LNO’s 
and the system we have for thinking through the political and military 
implications for executing specific LNO’s.4
3 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. II, Organization and Management of U.S. 
Foreign Policy, 1969–1972, Document 211.
4 Beneath this point, Brzezinski wrote: “If approved, I will prepare an appropriate 
memorandum to SecDef. ZB.” Brzezinski then wrote three options: “Approve”; “Disap-
prove”; and “Comment.” Carter checked the “Approve” option and initialed the bottom 
of the memorandum. He also wrote “draft” after the word “appropriate” in Brzezinski’s 
handwritten sentence.
10.	
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, March 31, 1977
The President has directed me to ask you and, to the extent appro-
priate, the Chairman of the JCS, to provide:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 47, Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options (LNO) and Regional Nuclear 
Options (RNO): 3/77–1/80. Top Secret; Sensitive. Carter initialed the top of the memo-
randum and wrote “ok.”
