obtaining of recruits (for so far the policy of leniency appears to have been reasonably
well carried out) but with the result, if not the purpose, of driving young Peruvians
from the provinces. So far as this has been done, the Arbitrator holds it to be an abuse
of Chilean authority. However, while the record leaves it somewhat uncertain as to the
extent of this abuse, it is clear that there is no sufficient showing either as to time or
persons or places to establish such a serious situation as would discharge the
plebiscitary obligations of the treaty. The intermittent and sporadic infractions which
have occurred are however important in connection with the consideration of the
conditions of a plebiscite.
Expulsion of Peruvian Citizens. The Peruvian Case and Counter Case and the Peruvian
diplomatic correspondence submitted to the Arbitrator charge repeatedly that Chile has
expelled and is expelling the Peruvian population of Tacna and Arica both en masse
and as individuals. The Chilean Counter Case and the Chilean diplomatic documents
meet this charge with unqualified denials, except as to fifty-two persons whose
expulsion is admitted and justified on the ground of “repeated violations of the laws
and attempted conspiracies against the State.”
Peru has submitted in support of her contentions several hundred individual cases in
which she maintains that expulsion has taken place. As has been heretofore stated,
twenty-seven specific instances of direct or indirect expulsion are presented in the
Peruvian Case and controverted in the Chilean Counter Case. Three hundred and forty
additional cases are presented in as many affidavits in the Peruvian Counter Case and
there are certain other cases scattered through the documents. Each of these cases may
involve either one or more individuals. Most of the evidence on both sides is in the
form of ex parte affidavits of persons residing either in Tacna and Arica or lately
resident there and now resident in Peru, and therefore subject to a greater or less degree
to observation on account of their relation to the case and the environment under which
they give their evidence.
In the case of the affidavits presented in the Peruvian Counter Case Chile has had no
opportunity to present evidence in rebuttal, and of course in no case has there been
opportunity for the confrontation or cross examination of the witnesses. In these
circumstances the natural difficulties of arriving at the truth in a contested matter of
this sort are greatly increased. In view however of the number of these cases put
forward and the number of cases in which Chile has had an opportunity to produce
evidence in rebuttal, the Arbitrator believes that a general conclusion can be safely
formed from these cases in connection with the other evidence in the record. An
examination accordingly has been made of each individual case of expulsion put
forward in the record. To discuss these cases individually would expand this opinion far
beyond its proper limits and any other discussion beyond the statement of the
Arbitrator’s conclusions would be unsatisfactory if not useless. The Arbitrator is of the
opinion that as is usual in cases of this character, the truth lies between the extreme
