Chile  285
The President said that the United States supported the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Export-
Import Bank, and other lending institutions and that he did not think 
the IADB would replace or duplicate them. His objective was to com-
plement not to replace. President Eisenhower added that he felt the 
Latin American countries would feel a greater sense of responsibility 
because of the fact that their own monetary contributions formed part 
of the bank’s capital.
President Alessandri then referred to Communist propaganda 
to the effect that the United States provided aid to Latin America 
exclusively for selfish motives and suggested that our aid be coordi-
nated into a basic plan to overcome the charge that the United States 
neglects Latin America. A little later in the conversation President 
Alessandri repeated this suggestion and urged that a development 
plan to be carried out within a certain number of years be drawn up. 
He felt such coordination would make the plan better known, and 
recommended that the Department of State should answer charges 
made against the United States and conduct a vigorous campaign of 
counter-­propaganda. President Eisenhower said that he hoped the 
Chilean Foreign Office would do the same. President Alessandri said 
they would but that the Communists poured a great deal of money 
into Latin America. President Eisenhower said jokingly he assumed 
that President Alessandri was not suggesting that the United States 
buy a newspaper in Santiago and turn it into an official U.S. propa-
ganda organ. President Alessandri laughed and said that of course 
such was not his intention.
Copper
President Alessandri spoke briefly of the importance of copper to 
Chile as a source of employment and as a source of revenue for the 
government. He said there are two things connected with the U.S. 
policy which concerned him: the first was the United States excise tax 
on imported copper of 1.7 cents per pound, and the second was the 
possibility that our copper stockpile might be liquidated, thus causing 
a disastrous break in world copper prices. He said he hoped the tax 
would be removed and that we would not liquidate the stockpile.
President Eisenhower said he did not know about the copper tax 
and glanced at Secretary Herter and Mr. Rubottom who confirmed the 
existence of such a tax. The President said he did not know what the 
current situation was, that things were generally better and perhaps 
the tax was no longer needed. In any case, the President said he would 
have that matter looked into.
