58 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement and innovation than in the days of Stalin. They have sought, through a less hostile posture, to dispel the image of aggressive Soviet intentions. They no longer display Stalin’s tendency to regard as hostile everyone not subservient to the USSR, and they have seized upon the aspirations and needs of the emergent Asian and African countries to undermine Western influence and to expand their own. They appear to be acting on the assumption that it is more profitable to pursue a course of “peaceful competition” with the West, and particularly to exploit weak points in the free world by diplomatic, economic, and subversive methods, than to attempt to follow the dangerous course of territorial expansion by military means. 13. The Soviet leaders, after several years of this policy, proba­ bly look upon their present position as quite favorable. They proba­ bly attribute this in part to their improved military capabilities, but primarily to the developing world situation and to their own skill in manipulating existing opportunities and issues—­especially in extend­ ing economic aid to selected countries, exploiting world desires for disarmament, supporting nationalist causes in Asia and Africa, and expanding diplomatic, cultural, and commercial relations throughout the world. 14. In addition to its obvious bearing on their military capabili­ ties, recognition of continuing Soviet scientific and economic progress has greatly advanced the Soviet political position, both directly and through its psychological impact. In mathematics and the physical sci­ ences, including nuclear research and its applications, the USSR has amply demonstrated its high degree of skill; in other scientific fields it is making rapid progress. The output of scientifically-­trained personnel already exceeds that of the US and the gap appears to be widening. Moreover, because of extensive governmental control over the use of manpower and resources, the USSR is able to concentrate its scientific personnel on activities directly concerned with foreign and military policy objectives. 15. Soviet economic progress has been continuing at a rapid pace. Soviet gross national product has recently been growing nearly twice as fast as that of the US. Currently Soviet GNP is about 40 percent that of the US, but consumption in the USSR is only at about 25 percent of US levels. The USSR—­by restricting consumption and concentrating on priority objectives—­is already even with the US in one or two import­ ant areas of production and is rapidly approaching equality in some others. The USSR allocates its resources in such a way that, in terms of resources available for national policy, i.e., for research, defense, industrial investment, and foreign aid, its aggregate effort already approaches that of the US. Soviet defense expenditures in recent years, when converted into dollar values, appear to be of roughly the same
