Afghanistan gents, hence increasing the importance of control of the border. Would that sequence of events be likely to trigger a stronger Soviet reaction? Turner: Possibly. The issue seems to be more what the Soviets think is the flow of weapons to the insurgents from outside. They probably overestimate that considerably today. The bulk of the equipment being used is acquired within the country. In an escalating situation ammunition would be an increasing problem. Muskie: A substantial Soviet build-up would seem to be counter to the diplomatic initiatives they are taking with regard to claims of withdrawal, SALT, TNF, etc. How would this affect their thinking? Turner: We think they will probably take a middle course. The drain on their resources is not unbearable. They are very intent on playing the European card and are unlikely to risk this by a dramatic upswing in their activity. We think that they are following a long haul strategy. Muskie: If the Soviet small scale probes meet only soft Pakistani resistance, might this expand the Soviet probes? Turner: Perhaps, but these are raids, not an invasion. We have noted that the nationalists are using Pakistan increasingly as a base of operation rather than simply as a refuge. We expect that small Soviet incursions are a likely response. Muskie: Is there a possibility of an interplay arising out of this that would generate momentum towards an invasion? Should we not take this into account in our current activities? Turner: Certainly, but I still think that the Soviets will show a lot of patience. Jones: We agree that they will be ruthless internally and perpetrate some incursions. If that doesn’t work then they are likely to escalate their attacks. Turner: Also notice that there is an air option available. It is a less clear-cut kind of aggression and the Pakistanis have less capability to meet it. Muskie: There probably will be a need for increased help to the insurgency. Does this mean that we should help the Pakistanis more? Are they likely to ask for substantial increase of that assistance? Komer: If the Saudis come through, we will be able to supply quite a bit of equipment in sales. So far we have only had tentative probes from them asking what sort of equipment might be available. Turner: We do not think the Paks have any expectation of military aid from the United States unless things get much worse for them. Komer: There is a modest flow of material now in sales and a fairly big pipeline.
