654 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX on various international issues, the Secretary said, this had been extremely helpful to us. We appreciated these efforts and we would like to continue the beneficial exchange of views through our Embassies on such issues as the PRC and the Middle East. 6. Divided families—Andrei referred to emigration and said Romania had strived to solve emigration problems in a humanitarian spirit and would continue to do so in the future. The Secretary said he appreciated the Foreign Minister’s initiative in mentioning this issue. As we had made clear in the past, it was very important to us that humanitarian problems be addressed and solved in a satisfactory way. 7. Trade—Andrei said he had recently discussed with Nimetz Romania’s interest in resolving export license problems. Some progress had been achieved but Romania would still like to accelerate the process for license approvals. Also, Romania would like to see more liberal treatment of its exports to the United States. The Secretary said we had worked hard to move forward in export licensing. We recognize the importance of joint ventures and our recent decision concerning another license for the Control Data Corporation joint venture was a good example of our efforts in this regard. 8. Visit by the Secretary—Andrei said President Ceausescu wished to renew his invitation to the Secretary to make at least a brief visit to Romania. Such a visit would have a positive impact on our relations by helping to clear away issues which have arisen. It would also be a visible sign that we were overcoming them. No less important, Andrei said, a visit would provide an opportunity for a full discussion of international issues. Ceausescu would like to discuss with the Secretary issues concerning the Middle East, Europe, and elsewhere. The Secretary said he was pleased to accept the invitation in principle. He would have to leave the question of timing to later, however, since at the moment he was very occupied with follow-up to the Camp David Summit and other matters. 9. International issues—Andrei expressed appreciation for President Carter’s message following the Camp David Summit and asked about the current situation. The Secretary said the follow-up steps were moving as expected. Negotiations on the Sinai Agreement, chaired by the US, would begin in Washington on October 12. He was confident negotiations would move rapidly; there could be an agreement between Israel and Egypt as early as mid-November. Responding to Andrei’s questions, the Secretary said King Hussein was torn between joining in the negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza or staying out to see what would develop. Hussein would have to be careful but, the Secretary said, he believed he would begin to participate in a careful and measured way. Regarding Palestinian refugees, the Secretary said the US believes a meeting of all the concerned parties should be convened
