1955 419 success, there must be present an atmosphere of mutual confidence and assurance that agreements reached will be carried out. C. This atmosphere of mutual confidence is rapidly and seriously being jeopardized by your government’s failure to implement agreed announcement with respect to remaining imprisoned Americans, as well as by continued inability of UK Charge in Peking to carry out func­ tions envisaged in announcement. When agreed announcement was released, people of United States and world promptly took it to mean simply what it said. They believed that Americans in your country who wanted to return would be permitted expeditiously to exercise their right to do so, this encouraged American people and my government and me to believe that we could promptly go on to fruitful discussion of other matters at issue between our two countries. We hoped and expected that in this atmosphere it would be possible to move ahead on these other important and difficult matters. D. I must in interest of our talks frankly tell you that favorable atmosphere created by issuance of the announcement is being rapidly dissipated. Up to now no action whatever has been taken to permit return of remaining 19 Americans. Furthermore, you told me that your government would promptly consider suggestions with regard details of implementation submitted by British Charge in Peking. Although more than five weeks have now passed since I first raised these ques­ tions here with you and several weeks have passed since British Charge raised these same questions with your government, he still has not even received reply. Nor has any imprisoned American been permitted by your government even to communicate with him. This is causing seri­ ous doubt in my country concerning willingness of your government faithfully and promptly to carry out this, our first common public act. Feeling is gaining ground that cases of these Americans are not being handled in light of agreed announcement, but rather that these individ­ uals are being held as hostages for political purposes. I would not be honest if I did not tell you that continuation of this situation cannot fail to have an unfavorabe effect on other aspects of these talk. E. If this is to be result of our issuing an agreed announcement, it would have, perhaps, been better if it had never been issued. However, I am very reluctant to come to this conclusion. I want to believe that your government will take action to complete carrying out of its com­ mitment and thereby restore an atmosphere in which it will be possible to make further progress in these talks. F. Before turning to any other matters this morning, I would like to hear what you have to say with regard to this situation. 2. Wang replied that he regarded my again raising question of implementation regrettable. He could not accept my statement that his government had neglected implementation of agreed announcement.
