since the rendition of the Award. These charges should be brought to the attention of the Plebiscitary Commission when it shall have been constituted. The Arbitrator notes with satisfaction that the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission, although expressing the opinion that conditions of Tacna and Arica as described by him “would justify Peru in refusing to accept the decision,” gives formal assurance that “as it is the invariable policy of our (his) country to comply with international responsibilities” Peru “will not fail to carry out the Award rendered.” Third: With regard to the various guarantees with respect to the conditions of the plebiscite requested by the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission, the Arbitrator, so far as his formal ruling is concerned, contents himself with the reply already made to the views submitted on behalf of the Peruvian Government, namely, that the conditions of the plebiscite constituted one of the questions submitted to the Arbitrator; that the Award was made after careful consideration of the record submitted by the parties, and that both by the agreement of the parties and under the principles of International Law the Award is final and without appeal. However, the Arbitrator makes the following general observations: As already stated, the conditions under which the plebiscite was to be held constituted one of the questions submitted to the Arbitrator. The parties agreed upon a procedure which was approved by the Arbitrator and which gave to both ample opportunity to be heard. Peru, with full knowledge, made no requests even in the alternative for findings in regard to the conditions of the plebiscite while these conditions were sub judice—neither the requests she now makes nor any others. Of course, orderly procedure and the agreement under which this Arbitration was held forbid that a party to the arbitration should wait until after the Award is rendered before making requests for findings. Nevertheless, the Arbitrator did not permit the interests of Peru to be prejudiced through her failure to make requests for findings in regard to the conditions of the plebiscite. He considered the whole question carefully and fixed the conditions under which the plebiscite was to be held so as to afford the most ample protection to the rights of both parties to the arbitration.

The Arbitrator furthermore makes the following observations responsive to each of the several requests submitted by the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission: “First: the evacuation of the territories of Tacna and Arica by the Chilean civil authorities, army, gendarmerie and police force, who should be replaced by American authorities and forces not only during the plebiscite, but immediately,” etc.
