188 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 67. Interagency Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 NI IIM 79–10022J Washington, September 28, 1979 [Omitted here are a cover page and a security warning page.] SOVIET OPTIONS IN AFGHANISTAN KEY JUDGMENTS Moscow probably views the situation in Afghanistan as even more unstable after the fall of Taraki. While the Soviets may have previously decided to implement new military measures to support Taraki against the rebels, the uncertain tenure of Prime Minister Amin’s regime makes it likely that Moscow is deferring major new initiatives to expand the counterinsurgency effort pending a decision as to whether Amin can consolidate his position. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) The Soviets, however, have imposed an increased readiness posture on airborne forces in the Turkestan Military District, evidently as a result of concern over regime stability in the wake of the Amin coup. They may fear that this coup might fragment the Afghan Army and lead to a breakdown of control in Kabul. In this event, they would be likely to deploy one or more Soviet airborne divisions to the Kabul vicinity to protect Soviet citizens already there as well as to ensure continuance of some pro-Soviet regime in the capital. Although we might not receive prior warning, we believe it likely that we would promptly detect a deployment of Soviet forces on this scale once it began. We do not believe that Moscow would intend such a deployment for use in fighting against the Muslim insurgency, although, once in Afghanistan, such Soviet airborne forces could eventually be drawn into such fighting. We have not seen indications that the Soviets are at the moment preparing ground forces for large-scale military intervention in Afghanistan. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, History Staff Files. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. A typed statement on the first page reads: “This memorandum was prepared under the auspices of the National Intelligence Officer for USSR and Eastern Europe, National Foreign Assessment Center. It was coordinated within the Central Intelligence Agency; with the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State; [less than 1 line not declassified] with the National Security Agency; and with the intelligence organizations of the Departments of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force. Information available through 27 September 1979 was used in the preparation of this memorandum.”
