666 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement other Bloc nations could maintain a non-­belligerent status in a general war. Therefore, the qualifying phrases as applied to subparagraphs 2 b, c and d are misleading. Furthermore, these phrases are inconsistent with the Heading of Section A of the paper. 2. Reference Paragraph 6—Page 2. Support Defense, Treasury and Joint Chiefs of Staff views. REASON: The phrases recommended for deletion are unnecessary and in the context of the paragraph weaken the guidance the paper is developed to provide. It is almost a certainty that the USSR and Communist China will be in a war together; therefore, the phrase is unnecessary in 6 b. In c and d the phrase is redundant in view of the limiting words “requisite”, “selected” and “as necessary” already in the paragraph. 3. Reference Paragraph 7—Page 2. Support Defense, Treasury and Joint Chiefs of Staff views, and delete. REASON: The paragraph is inappropriate in the present paper. It might be proper and desirable in a paper dealing with pre-­war prepa­ rations. The subject paper (NSC 5904) deals with war situations. Under war conditions, an attempt by Government departments and agencies to carry out the policy stated in this paragraph would divert effort and resources from the vital active military role. While the United States must be able to absorb and recover from a nuclear onslaught, to adopt this paragraph as a wartime philosophy would in effect channel U.S. resources and efforts to activities that cannot win the war. The first two words of the first U.S. general war objectives are “to prevail.” This is defined as “to win mastery,” “to triumph,” “to succeed,” and “to pre­ dominate.” This objective cannot be attained by the policy stated in paragraph 7. 4. Reference subject, Section “B”—Page 4. Suport the JCS view. REASON: The majority view would restrict limited war policy to Soviet satellite states. Neither the recent U.S. action in Lebanon nor the British, French, Israeli venture into Egypt involved a satellite state. Therefore, it would appear that if the United States is to have a policy for limited war, it should permit policy guidance for any limited war situation and not be restricted to Soviet satellites. 5. Reference paragraph 13, page 4. Delete. REASON: While this is a valid statement, it does not materially contribute to the policy statement. Moreover, it does not properly belong under “Objectives.” 6. Reference paragraph 15, pages 4 and 5. a. Delete the JCS proposed wording in lines 1 and 2 of paragraph 15. b. Support the position of the JCS Alternative.
