4
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
national trading system. While avoiding detailed discussion of specific
contentious trade issues, I will note that we are troubled by the trend
toward bilateral solutions to trade problems, that such arrangements
feed pressures in the U.S. for unilateral action and weaken the multi-
lateral trading framework, and that the U.S., Europe, Japan and Canada
must find ways to manage trade issues in a cooperative multilateral
fashion, rather than further strengthen the dangerous precedent of bi-
lateral solutions.
I will state your view that the next several months provide the U.S.,
Europe and Japan with an excellent opportunity to regenerate political
commitment to a successful MTN. There is a new EC Commission and
new Administration in Japan and the U.S. 1977 thus presents a chance,
which we cannot afford to let slip by, to make significant progress on
those issues which are central to a successful MTN—agriculture, a sub-
sidies code, a tariff negotiating plan, and North-South trade issues.
I will state your intention to name a top-flight U.S. trade negoti-
ator, adding that the U.S. will be prepared to consult actively with the
EC and Japan to break any logjams which occur in the MTN. I will say
that we suggest that four or five representatives get together at a high
level to see how we might break existing deadlocks and avoid what we
see as a dangerous precedent of bilateral deals.
In my meeting with EC Commissioner Jenkins, I will say we would
like to begin informal discussions with a representative of the Commu-
nity as soon as possible, and invite him to suggest an individual.
With your agreement, I will emphasize that the United States wants to
get the MTN moving. I will recommend that we agree on intensive gov-
ernmental consultations as soon as feasible with our key negotiating partners
to develop realistic proposals for MTN progress, and I will seek their agree-
ment on having these consultations announced by you at the conclusion of my
trip.10
[Omitted here is discussion of NATO, East-West Relations, Berlin,
Communism in Italy, U.S.–Vatican Relations, Non-Proliferation, and
Arms Sales.]
Japan: In Japan, as in Europe, I will review planning for the trilat-
eral summit and I will encourage early MTN consultations and cooper-
ation on other stops on the trip, I will avoid detailed discussion of con-
tentious issues.11 I will plan to reaffirm your message to Prime Minister
10 Carter indicated his approval of this position.
11 At a January 22 NSC meeting, during a discussion of Mondale’s forthcoming visit
to Japan, Blumenthal, noting that Carter would “be confronted with some very important
trade issues in the near future,” suggested that if Mondale did not explicitly refer to such
issues, “the Japanese will consider the omission to be significant. The Japanese need con-
stant pressure.” Carter instructed Mondale to tell the Japanese “that unless they are re-
ceptive to voluntary agreements this will put us under great political pressure.” Blumen-
thal expressed his “doubt that we should raise the specific question of voluntary
