1576  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
of the agreement, our people put some ideas to your people in Wash­
ington last week. They were designed to build into the agreement an 
automatic right for us (and the Russians) to have inspections. But as 
clearly neither of us will be physically able to inspect every unidenti­
fied event, we felt it would be necessary to agree on some annual upper 
limit of inspections.
I am sorry to say your people have expressed a good many reser­
vations about this plan. They seem to have thought of it as a concession 
to the Russians. I regard it as just the opposite, because its purpose 
is, while protecting all our essential requirements, to nail them down 
on the veto, and to make their position in asking for a veto still more 
untenable.
I have no doubt this conference will be mentioned while I am in 
Moscow. You can rely on me to press Khrushchev hard about the veto.
With warm regards,
As ever,
Harold
427.	 Memorandum From Eisenhower to Herter1
Washington, February 21, 1959
I attach a copy of a message have just received from Harold Mac­
millan. Since he is now in Moscow, I am uncertain as to whether or not 
he expects an answer, particularly in view of the closing sentence of his 
message.
The message seems to be ambiguous. Mr. Macmillan speaks of his 
readiness to accept something less than “perfect control.” Both Foster 
and I have already indicated that we do not press for an elaboration 
of the mechanics of an inspectional system so that we could be sure 
that any nuclear explosion, no matter how small its size nor where 
exploded, could be detected. But we are insistent that such stations 
as are agreed upon be allowed to function without interference from 
the government in those territory the stations are set up. In any agree­
ment to which we would be a party, we cannot countenance a veto 
1 Source: Comments on Macmillan message on nuclear test suspension negotia­
tions. No classification marking. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Diary Series.
