Chinese resolution. He emphasized the need for completing the
construction of certain railways and conservancy projects, for entering upon
certain judicial reforms, for placing the diplomatic service on a sound
financial basis and for disbursements for educational purposes. He
suggested that Yin 70 and Yin 71 should be combined into one resolution
and he took occasion to say that the reason the Chinese Delegation did not
accept the American proposal to put immediately into force the 2½ per cent
and 5 per cent surtaxes was because that at the time the proposal was first
made there was a general outcry by the Chinese people against the
convening of the Special Conference for fear that it would do nothing
further than to carry out the terms of the Washington Treaty which would be
quite inadequate for the abolition of likin, or for the consolidation of the
inadequately secured debts. This fear, however, had now been overcome as
the foreign Delegations, by their sympathetic attitude, had won over the
opinion of the Chinese people. He cited particularly letters which he had
received from leaders of Chinese political thought, such as Mr. Tang Shao
Yi, and persons holding responsible positions in the Canton Government,
who had expressed satisfaction with the work of the Conference. After
proposing an Amendment to Count de Martel’s resolution by which, in the
second paragraph he would insert the so-called ninety or one hundred
million dollars provision, Dr. Wang endorsed Dr. Yen’s suggestion that the
matter be referred to a small subcommittee. After further discussion,
participated in by Sir Ronald Macleay and Mr. Strawn, it was agreed to
refer the matter to a special subcommittee of six to be appointed by the
chairman on which the Chinese Delegation should be represented. The
chairman thereupon appointed a subcommittee composed of members from
the American, British, Japanese, French, Netherlands and Chinese
Delegations, and it was agreed that the subcommittee should meet on
Saturday morning, February 20.
Sub-Committee to Draft a Resolution on the Levying of the Interim
Surtaxes, First Meeting, February 20, 1926.
The Subcommittee to Draft a Resolution on the Levying of the Interim
Surtaxes met on February 20 and two resolutions, one by the Chinese
Delegation and one by the American Delegation—designed to effectuate the
Washington Treaty, were introduced (see pages 1 and 2 of the Minutes of
