893.74/612: Telegram
[Document 767]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 18, 1925—noon.
[Received 2:50 p.m.]
404. Your telegram number 255, September 15, 7 p.m.
1. I have arranged for a further interview Monday morning with the Chief
Executive with a view to urging not so much a decision favorable to the
Federal project as a prompt answer in either sense that will enable you to
judge whether in the forthcoming Special Conference we have to deal with a
China that is with us or against us on the fundamental question of the open-
door policy. This is become necessary because, although the pressure upon
the Chief Executive and his advisers had apparently induced them to decide
that the Federal contract must be carried out, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
has been able to persuade his colleagues of his belief that insistence of our
Government is a mere bluff, and that the issue may be indefinitely evaded.
2. The Chinese are prone to discount, out of the abundance of their
experience with various foreign diplomatic representatives, the reality of
representations made to them in the name of the several governments. I feel
the present matter is too vital to be left to chance of such misapprehension …
3. [Paraphrase.] I should like to suggest, if I may, that a message from
President Coolidge to Chief Executive Tuan be drafted and cabled to me for
delivery September 21 asking whether it is not the intention of the
Government of China to fulfill the obligations of its contracts with American
interests and to give loyal cooperation to the American Government in
realizing in practice the open-door policy for which purpose the Chinese
Government sought our cooperation in 1921, and that the Chinese Minister at
Washington be handed a copy of the message for communication to his
Government. [End paraphrase.]
4. There is a tendency on the part of the Chinese to make it appear that we
are trying to profit by the Special Conference to extort from them particular
advantages. I have taken occasion to explain to such officials as have hinted
this to me that we are not seeking any concession but merely applying a test
of the good faith of the Chinese Government in carrying out obligations to
American commercial interests and to our Government assumed more than
