Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI (TS) [5 lines not declassified] Cooperative measures such as on-site inspection and other collateral constraints might reduce ambiguities. [3 lines not declassified] (TS) Galosh. Presumably, the Soviets would be permitted under an ASAT treaty to retain the Galosh interceptors of their ABM systems. This ABM has nuclear ASAT capability against low-altitude satellites and could have a secondary ASAT mission. However, its use as such, if not very precisely planned, could damage their own satellites as well as the target satellite. (TS) [1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified] 3. Particular Soviet Concerns The Soviets may be concerned that the U.S. could test and deploy ground-based ASAT systems covertly. They may not believe that the former U.S. ASAT system cannot now be launched from Vandenberg or Johnston Island. They may have the same concerns as the U.S. about the inherent capabilities of both military and civilian ground-, ship-, or air-based lasers that exist or might be developed for other purposes. The Soviets may also have parallel concerns to ours about the use of radar equipment for EW. They have already evidenced concern about the space shuttle and may believe it could be used for satellite inspection, capture, and interference. 4. Breakout (S) Even if the Soviets complied with terms of an ASAT agreement, we would have to be concerned about breakout, including breakout simultaneous with ASAT attack. Since the lead time for U.S. ASAT and satellite programs is long, U.S. R&D hedges would still require 2 to 4 more years to achieve compensating operational capabilities. D. Other Considerations (S) The following are some other considerations which could affect policy judgments regarding ASAT arms control. —[1 line not declassified] —[2½ lines not declassified] —[1½ lines not declassified] —[1 line not declassified] —[1 line not declassified] IV. RELATIONSHIP OF ASATS TO OTHER SPACE POLICY ISSUES A. Survivability (TS) The survivability issue is being considered separately in the response to PRM–23. Some conclusions are:
