Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1093
to take that risk to get the treaty done. Now we need to make every 
effort to make this meeting a success.
 Propose we proceed as follows:
— Want to address with you now four issues—data denial, a 
bomber issue, new types, and downloading.
— When we are finished with this session, we can meet with the 
larger group, report to them where we stand, and give them some 
guidance.
— Then for the rest of today Bartholomew and Moiseyev can take 
over. They can reserve some subjects to themselves, and delegate others 
to subgroups, an approach that worked well at the meetings last week 
in Geneva.
— If you have brought with you good responses to the proposals 
Bartholomew gave you last week in Geneva, many of the secondary 
issues could be brought to a quick conclusion.
— Tomorrow morning Reg would report to me and Gen. Moiseyev 
would report to you on where we stand.
— I propose that we meet again tomorrow morning at 10:00 in a 
small group. I will have Bartholomew and Brooks with me, and you 
would have Moiseyev and Obukhov. We would take up any issues that 
still remain. Let’s do everything we can to keep that list short.
 We can set a good example for the others by doing our part on the 
4 issues reserved for us.
Data Denial
 What I need from you on data denial is your agreement to 
exchange telemetry tapes on a routine basis.
 The data denial provisions have to be resolved now, not put off 
to subsequent negotiations after signature. So we will know—and be 
able to demonstrate to our legislatures—how we will verify the treaty.
 We are encouraged by the statement in President Gorbachev’s 
letter that he shares our view of the importance of this issue, and the 
need for substantive and mutually acceptable solutions by the time of 
signature of the treaty.
 The only way we can see to get the data denial provisions done so 
START can be signed this month is to agree to use exchange of teleme-
try tapes on a routine basis.
 If you and I can agree on this one point, we can set aside our 
complex data denial proposal, and set aside your complex data denial 
proposal, and quickly work out a much simpler approach.
 Amb. Obukhov asked for, and Amb. Bartholomew provided, a 
radical simplification of the US proposal showing how much of the 
complexity would fall away if we can agree to use tape exchange.
 If we can go out and tell our experts that you and I have agreed 
on the principle of tape exchange on a routine basis, so they can get to
