494 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV havoc it would wreak in the defense program, I believe that what I have described above is realistic, and that though alternative kinds of reductions in R&D, procurement, or forces could be taken, they would be equally destructive of our military capability. The decremented level illustrates the sensitivity of the defense program to its funding. However, I do not consider it a serious alternative. In my judgment, it would clearly mark a degree of military retrenchment by the United States which, in the face of the Soviet buildup, would prevent us from countering the forces of the Soviet Union and its allies. II. Impact on Allied Perceptions—­and Performance In launching the Carter initiatives to strengthen NATO’s defense posture, we had two aims. One was to improve efficiency through rationalization. The other, and chief immediate aim, was to generate greater Allied contributions—­ without which U.S. defense budget increases alone would not do the job. But this required the United States, as the price of leadership, to commit itself as well to the same 3% real annual growth. So far this has worked. Nine countries—­ which together account for over 90% of Allied defense outlays—­have pledged that they will achieve the 3% increase on average during 1979–83. By the same token, if the United States again falls below 3% only eight months after the Washington Summit blessed the Long Term Defense Plan, it will inevitably invite—­and in my judgment ensure—Allied cuts as well. We have no way of estimating the magnitude of such cuts: they will depend on each country’s political and economic situation. A conservative estimate is that the reduction would on the average amount to a cumulative decrease over five years in defense effort among our allies of $10–20 billion in 1977 dollars. Nor can we specify the particular Allied programs that would be cut, except that most would necessarily be from readiness and defense investment, i.e., modernization rather than force size or people costs. Thus the cuts would inevitably delay, if not undermine, implementation of key LTDP measures, adversely affecting the long-­term goal of rationalization, standardization and interoperability. The impact on Allied perceptions of U.S. determination, while even less quantifiable, is likely to be still more serious. Having just taken the initiative in NATO and demonstrated vigorous leadership, we would again be seen as all too quickly changing course. Though our anti-­inflationary rationale would be understandable to—­and quickly adopted by—European elites, our move would also be interpreted, given our necessary attention to strategic forces and SALT II, as a lower level of concern and commitment about the NATO/ WP balance than over the superpower strategic balance—­whatever the cost to Europe. A corresponding perception would arise among the Japanese. It is doubtful that we could rebuild this momentum; even if we could, years would be required.
