National Security Policy  851
was a thaw and that he immediately saw no basis for contemplating 
serious changes in our overall policies.
I then said to the President that he many times had indicated his 
impatience with too many papers and too much fussing with language. 
He replied that General Cutler had never been able to bring himself to 
present matters to the Council for discussion but preferred the academic 
approach of wrestling with language. He said that what he would like to 
do in the next 15 months would be to spend the time of the Council in 
discussing the major problems facing the Government. I then said that I 
would like to make three points: First, there would continue to be some 
policy papers, which the President acknowledged. Second, that it was 
important that the discussion topics be dealt with in some sort of frame­
work or the meetings would be incoherent and range over too wide a 
variety of problems without being productive. I reminded the President 
of the meeting following his stag dinner on September 10 in which the 
discussion was disorganized and diffuse. He agreed, saying that unless 
there were some guidelines the Council would find itself discussing the 
World Series. Finally, I pointed out to him that in some important mat­
ters there had been what I called “exclusions” that is to say, that he had 
expressly not wished the Council to deal with certain matters.
I referred first to disarmament and said that I acknowledged 
that the Council should probably not discuss disarmament until the 
Coolidge Report is completed but at that time I thought the Council 
should get into this field. Second, I pointed to discussions for prepara­
tion for Summit meetings which had not really been discussed in the 
Council. I reminded him of the old Summit Committee which had not 
really ever been active. Third, I pointed out that the Council had really 
never gotten into serious consideration of all the problems relating to 
NATO. With respect to the latter the President said that this would be a 
very real problem for us in the months ahead because of the necessity 
of U.S. troop reduction.
At this point the President said that he was still thinking about the 
Berlin and German situation. He said that if we make the assumption 
that East and West Germany are not to be reunited in a decade, which 
appeared to him to be the only assumption that can be made, then what 
is our solution for Berlin? He felt that we might get something which 
Chancellor Adenauer could live with. The President felt that we should 
continue to maintain such forces in Berlin as an indication that our 
position has not changed at all. In any event, he felt that this might be a 
topic of fruitful discussion.
The President then said he did not wish to think in terms of any 
exclusions in the months ahead and that the Council should discuss 
every problem of consequence which was in its field of interest.
