934  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
administration to keep both SALT and the MX deployment. He added 
that he would never forgive General Haig for coming back from NATO 
and stabbing us in the back by testifying against SALT. Haig admitted 
in testimony that he had not even read the treaty. (S)
The President said he would like to leave arms control as a pol-
icy for the next administration. We simply cannot go on with arms 
expenditures. We cannot manage them economically. Jim McIntyre will 
agree. With minimum social security, housing, and other social pro-
grams growing to unsupportable levels, I do not see how we will meet 
more defense. For us to slough over the arms control alternative for the 
coming decade is a mistake. We must try to contain the defense costs 
through arms control. (S)
The Vice President noted that the United States has been humili-
ated several times in the past four years by third rate powers because the 
President has so little discretionary resources for military and economic 
assistance. He needs at least one half billion dollars for this purpose. It 
will give him the latitude necessary to handle emergencies rapidly. (S)
Brown returned to the President’s comments about arms control 
and emphasized that the paper assumes SALT II limits. The President 
admitted that he had missed that point. He then reemphasized the two 
points: our relationship with China and arms control. We have so many 
advantages with SALT. If we could establish strategic equality with the 
Soviet Union, we could whip them badly economically, politically, and 
culturally. They have so many problems which we need to exploit. (S)
Brown said yes, this is true, but as long as they pursue an arms 
buildup we must keep up with them. The President said that point 
must be put in the Presidential Directive. (S)
The next administration must understand, the President contin-
ued, that the Soviet Union will meet great threats to its own power. The 
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan is a demonstration of the failure of the 
Soviet system. As Dr. Brzezinski has pointed out, over a 150 countries 
in the world have favored our human rights policy. Human rights has 
placed great strains on the Soviet system. After four, five, or ten years, 
I don’t know what they will do. They don’t even equal human rights 
achievements of Egypt.10 If we can get by the next five years without 
war, we will win the peaceful competition. This is my view after four 
years in this office. Governor Reagan needs to understand this. (S)
Brown said that the United States public also needs to understand 
this. The President went on to say that to compete with the Soviet mil-
itarily11 is to get into the brier patch with them. That competition is not 
10 Carter wrote a question mark in the left margin next to this sentence.
11 Carter inserted the word “only” before “militarily.”
