78 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 19. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, February 1, 1977, 9:45–11 a.m. SUBJECT Foreign Policy and National Security Issues for the 95th Congress PARTICIPANTS President Carter Secretary of State Vance Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Senator Edward Brooke, Massachusetts Senator Frank Church, Idaho Senator Clifford Case, New Jersey Senator John Sparkman, Alabama Representative Clement Zablocki, Wisconsin Representative Clarence Long, Maryland Representative Dante Fascell, Florida Representative Lee Hamilton, Indiana Representative William Broomfield, Michigan Representative C.W. “Bill” Young, Florida Douglas Bennett, Congressional Relations, State Department Jerrold Schecter, Associate Press Secretary, National Security Council/ Congressional Liaison The PRESIDENT opened the meeting by saying he needed the advice of the Congressmen, and “I want to work closely with you.” Over the past few months the President said he has been an active student of foreign policy and he wants to conduct “an aggressive foreign policy.” The President noted the unique quality of Dr. Kissinger who did a lot of things on his own. However, the President said his administration will have a different “team” style. He mentioned Secretary Vance, Vice President Mondale, Dr. Brzezinski and others as team members. The President told the Congressmen that Paul Warnke would be the head of ACDA and chief SALT negotiator because “he is the best man to do this.”2 Reporting on Vice President Mondale’s trip, PRESIDENT CAR- TER said the meetings were “substantive” and the “agenda was iden- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 50, Presidential Memos for the Record: 2–6/77. Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. Drafted on February 2, presumably by Schecter. 2 Carter formally submitted Warnke’s nomination to the Senate on February 4. The Senate confirmed Warnke as chief U.S delegate to the SALT II talks and as Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency on March 9. (Congress and the Nation, vol. V, 1977–1980, p. 137)
