488
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
185.
Memorandum From Jasper Welch of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 19, 1980
SUBJECT
Soviet Union Moves into Iran
Last Friday Bill Odom asked me to meet with him, Marshall, and
Fritz to review our thoughts on U.S. responses to Soviet moves into
Iran.2 Our conversation reached two conclusions with regard to current
intelligence:
(1) Soviet readiness activities that we see are consistent with the
Soviet policy of taking the maximum prudent steps that would not be
so inflamatory as to trigger any additional U.S. response. (TS)
(2) That the Soviets do not see U.S. military activities in the Greater
Persian Gulf as sufficiently hostile to warrant any Soviet reaction. (TS)
With regard to possible U.S. actions in the near term in reaction
to a Soviet move upon Iran, our conclusions parallel quite closely those
reached in a prior memo of January 16 (attached at Tab A).3 All felt
that it would be appropriate for you to review that memo at this
time. (TS)
There was one additional consideration not prominent in our prior
memo, that is, the central role of inserting U.S. ground forces into
Saudi Arabia. This is undoubtedly necessary either as an alternative
to insertion into Khuzistan in the event that was tactically infeasible
or as an adjunct to a Khuzistan operation to forestall Soviet airborne
operations or an Iraqi move into Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. (TS)
We were divided on the wisdom of U.S. air attacks on invading
Soviet forces, both as to its efficacy and the desirability of initiating
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files (H–Files),
Box 154. Top Secret; Outside the System. Sent for information. A stamped notation in
the upper right corner of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
2 Friday, February 15. A CIA speculation on what motives and calculations “from
the Soviet point of view” would lead the Soviet Union to cross into Iran concluded that,
on balance, the decision to intervene would be more political in nature and that the
Soviets would seek for lower-risk options of political influence than overt military inter-
vention. (Paper prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, “A Soviet ‘Best Case’ for
Military Intervention in Iran, NFAC #1227–80,” February 19; Central Intelligence Agency,
Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 14,
Folder 1)
3 Tab A, a January 16 memorandum from Welch, Brement, and Utgoff to Brzezinski,
is attached but not printed. See footnote 2, Document 156.
