202
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
backing for the European Community, more open and substantive consul-
tations, and policies which help close the economic gap among OECD na-
tions; (2) doing our part to assure a stronger and more effective NATO
through such efforts as serious consideration of standardization and ra-
tionalization of equipment; and (3) encouraging those European nations,
that face the possibility of Communist participation in their gov-
ernments, to remain Western-oriented democracies.
On more specific matters, we should try to defuse tension with the
West Europeans and, where relevant, the Japanese on such issues as
trade, nuclear proliferation, arms sales, human rights. Here, as in more
general concerns, the key will be substantive prior consultations, sensi-
tivity to real divergences in national interest and the realization that the
US may have to modify some domestic and other diplomatic goals to
retain good relations with our allies.
PROVISION FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND WELL-BEING
We will concentrate increased attention on economic issues—both
involving the global economy and specific regions and problems.
That implies:
—More and Better Management of Global Concerns. We will give
higher priority to a range of transnational issues and revive momentum
for international cooperation.
Projections for a food gap four or eight years hence persist, despite
bumper crops this year. We are acting now to help assure increased
food production (especially in developing nations), improved distribu-
tion of available food, and better nutrition, (both for the malnourished
“Pepsi generation” of the affluent West and the undernourished needy
of the Third World). We will hope specifically to have an international
food reserve program3 in operation and to have set in motion major inter-
national efforts to increase agricultural production in South Asia and Africa
within the next four years. A substantial increase in bilateral and multi-
lateral aid is necessary to achieve these and other basic human need
programs.
You have mapped out a National Energy Plan;4 organizations like
the International Energy Agency are at work to assure cooperation
3 In a statement submitted to the Subcommittee on International Trade of the Senate
Committee on Finance on July 13, Katz indicated that the U.S. delegation to the June 1977
International Wheat Council (IWC) meeting in London had proposed a “coordinated
system” of grain reserves. For Katz’s complete statement, see Department of State Bul-
letin, August 22, 1977, pp. 265–267.
4 On April 18 at 8 p.m., the President, in an address to the nation broadcast live on
radio and television, discussed the energy crisis facing the United States. He noted that
the response to the energy problem constituted the “moral equivalent of war,” and went
on to describe the “fundamental principles” informing the administration’s national en-
ergy plan. For the text of the President’s address, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I,
