344 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Admiral Sides presented the evaluation with the use of charts. (Copy of Admiral Sides’ notes for the presentation and of the charts used, filed in the minutes of the meeting.) The President remarked that he would like to say one positive thing about the presentation. He thought that it was as dispassionate, low-­key and thorough an exposition as he had ever heard. The President went on to say that this evaluation opens doors for additional investigation. It alerts us to what we must do if anyone stud­ ies the fiscal situation. There must be some substitution in these pro­ grams. Otherwise we will no longer be able to say that we are defending freedom. The President said he did not believe that we could keep these expenditures going up indefinitely without some kind of controls on the financial situation. He pointed out that interest on bonds is going up at a time when we are not yet out of the recession. The President concluded by congratulating the Group on its report, but expressing the view that it gives us more anxiety than he had imagined it would. Mr. Gray said that he would like to point out one serious statement. This was that some of the interim systems examined were designed as defense against manned aircraft, but would not be completed and installed in time to deal with advanced types of weapons. Mr. Gray pointed out that Admiral Sides had raised a question for decision as to whether some of these systems should be completed. The President said that he thought we should identify what systems are obsolete. Perhaps some of them should be “bought out” at an ear­ lier date than now planned. He believed that more evaluation should be made of our present and future plans, to determine what the rule of rea­ son requires. He thought that we should identify those, such as the sec­ ond generation of BOMARCs, which by the time they were completed would be outmoded by other systems, such as the NIKE-ZEUS. In answer to the President’s question, General Twining and General White indicated that the cost of a B–58 was about $20 million and the cost of a B–70 about $23 million. The President said that he had the impression we were some­ what pessimistic about really developing a defense against ICBMs. He repeated that we should carefully review programs to see where they are antithetical or overlapping. General Twining assured the President that the Joint Chiefs were all taking a soul-­searching look at this sub­ ject. Secretary Quarles said that such a review was beginning with the preparation of the FY 1960 budget. The President commented that we were now seeing a new phenom­ enon in weapons development. It used to be that changes in weapons systems were made slowly and obsolescent models replaced gradually. Now, because of the urgent time element, we are trying to develop rap­ idly whole weapons systems to replace other systems. What he was
