1955  75
Wang replied ways should be found beneficial to both sides 
in joint effort solve problem our nationals. That is why they had 
accepted arrangement I suggested last meeting. If we proceed on basis 
this arrangement future progress on question of nationals would be 
expedited. He welcomed spirit in which I had spoken this morning 
concerning talks. In interest of reaching agreement, willingness for 
conciliation and compromise must exist both sides. We two ambassa­
dors were sitting face to face but if we did not make effort reach one 
another could not accomplish anything. If each would hold out his 
hand problems could be solved. Each side must approach other and 
as he had stated so long as both sides displayed sincerity he would 
be able to advise me regarding cases of Americans now under review.
I responded that I supposed each thought his side had gone far­
ther than other. I felt that we had gone farthest. Representation pro­
posal did not originate with us but with him. I had proposed my 
arrangement at last meeting in effort meet his point of view. However 
did not see how it helped solve problem faced by American nation­
als. Their problems could only be solved by action his government. 
Wang replied that in course of talks important thing not what each 
side claimed it had done but for each side to see what other had done. 
So long as both sides showed sincerity would not be difficult over­
come our problems.
I said I hoped that he could help. So far I had nothing to show my 
government regarding problem my nationals and asked if he would 
have something by Saturday. Wang replied there were two separate 
problems. One was arrangement regarding return of nationals of both 
sides and the other was measures to be taken by his government. 
Agreement on detailed arrangement would be test of sincerity each 
side regarding this question. So long as both sides showed spirit of sin­
cerity he believed it would not be difficult to find solution.
I proposed next meeting Saturday, 10 am.
Gowen
