926 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement and press and radio have been calling for calm and non-violence on November 28. De la Guardia made a statesman-­like radio address last night and we anticipate that violent demonstrations are now less likely to occur than at any time since November 3. The Zone Government and CINCARIB are prepared for any eventuality. If violence does occur, there would be casualties, and we could anticipate strong charges in public forums, particularly in view of UNGA’s vote to consider the Hungarian case.8 With regard to flying the Panamanian national flag in the Canal Zone, we are not willing to accede to such a request from Panama at the present time. We can look forward to continued Panamanian pressure for ever greater benefits from our presence in the Canal Zone. 8. On November 25, 1959, the United Nations General Assembly adopted by a vote of 51 to 0, with 18 abstentions, the recommendation of Sir Leslie Munro, the United Nations’ Special Representative on the Question of Hungary, to consider “The Question of Hungary” during the plenary meetings of the fourteenth regular session of the General Assembly. For documentation concerning the United States’ response to the Special Representatives’ request, see the Eastern European regional compilation in Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. X, part 1, Eastern Europe Region; Soviet Union; Cyprus, Chapter 1. PM–26. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1  Washington, November 27, 1959. SUBJECT Situation in Panama PARTICIPANTS The President Mr. Livingston Merchant, Deputy Under Secretary At the request of the President I reported briefly on my trip to Panama November 20–24. I said at the outset that the risk of serious trouble tomorrow exists and I felt that the Ambassador, Governor Potter and General Gaither were prepared to deal with it firmly and wisely. To send an emissary from Washington I said I thought had been well worth while. It had provided a cooling off period of a few days 1. Source: Department of State, Central Files, 719.00/11–2759. Secret. Merchant’s conversation with the President occurred at 10 a.m.
