It has been argued that debt consolidation would also be a permanent
benefit to China because it would restore China’s credit. This argument
would doubtless be valid if there were a Government in effective control of
the whole country, but in China to-day debt consolidation could only enable
the faction which happened to be in power in Peking to resort to fresh
ruinous and unproductive borrowing. His Majesty’s Government were
therefore opposed to making the consolidation of the unsecured debt one of
the purposes to be attained by the Tariff Conference, although their own
nationals were directly interested in the funding of some of these debts.
A further objection to the inclusion of the unsecured debt among the
subjects to be dealt with at the Tariff Conference was brought into relief by
the grant in principle of tariff autonomy. That raised at once in acute form
the question of control over customs revenues. His Majesty’s Government
viewed with grave misgiving the proposal that foreign control should be
extended over additional revenues which might be increased by tariff
autonomy. In 1921 it was natural that the Powers should demand guarantees
for the due fulfilment of the benevolent purposes which the Washington
Conference aimed at achieving. But what might have been practicable in
1921 was no longer possible in 1926. It was obvious that China would not
now submit to any extension of foreign control either for debt consolidation
or for the abolition of li-kin, and it seemed to His Majesty’s Government
that for the Powers to unite in an attempt to impose control upon an
unwilling China would be entirely opposed to the spirit of the Washington
treaties, and to the policy which His Majesty’s Government had consistently
advocated. At the same time His Majesty’s Government felt that it was
essential that the Washington promises, so long overdue, should be
implemented. Accordingly, on the 28th May last, in reply to an enquiry
from the United States Government as to the attitude of His Majesty’s
Government towards the Tariff Conference, they proposed in a
memorandum, copy of which is annexed hereto,96f that the Powers should
abstain from any attempt to exact guarantees or conditions, but should
forthwith authorise the levy of the surtaxes.
Owing to the collapse of the conference no action on this proposal was
possible. The situation, however, suddenly developed in the very direction
which was anticipated when the proposal was made. The Cantonese did, in
