Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII —after Puzanov and his entourage left the meeting, Watanjar ordered the army to move against Amin in order to protect Taraki, but unit commanders refused to obey such orders; —on the morning of September 14, Taraki and Amin engaged in another shouting match, this one by phone, over who controlled the military, Taraki as Commander-in-Chief, or Amin as Minister of Defense. Taraki ordered Amin to come to the President’s office, but Amin’s closest advisors (the “martyred” Seyed Daoud Taroon, then police commandant, and Lt. Col. Yaqoub, now Chief of the General Staff) warned Amin it was not safe for him to go to Taraki’s office; —on the fateful afternoon of September 14, Puzanov and his three advisors arrived in Taraki’s office and Taraki told Amin by phone that our “Soviet comrades” wanted Amin to come to the Palace for talks. Taroon advised Amin that the presence of the Soviets in Taraki’s office precluded Taraki and his men from opening fire on Amin; —shortly thereafter, Amin, accompanied by his own guards, arrived at the Palace, was met by Taroon, and they proceeded up a staircase toward Taraki’s office. Taraki’s guards immediately opened fire killing Taroon, who was in front of Amin, instantly, while Amin rolled out of the line of fire leading Taraki’s men to think he had been hit. Amin and some of his guards successfully made their escape; —on September 15th, Amin convened meetings of the party’s Politburo and the Cabinet, and on the 16th meetings of the party Central Committee and the Revolutionary Council. These meetings took the “necessary decisions” expelling Taraki from the party for hatching the plot to kill Amin and for other “unprincipled acts.” Watanjar, et al., were also expelled and Amin was elected to Taraki’s posts; —the above decisions ended the era of “one-man rule and personality cult,” and opened a new chapter in the development of the party and the revolution. 6. Comment: Aside from giving some fascinating insights into the bloody ways “democracy” operates in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, this party document possesses other nuggets of potential political value. The fact that it is being circulated among party leaders with instructions to brief their cadre about its contents, indicates clearly that this version is the officially-sanctioned Amin version of what happened on September 14, and why. In this regard, the allegations that Puzanov and his senior advisors indirectly summoned Amin to Taraki’s lair in order to be gunned down, that the Soviets were unable or unwilling to prevent Taraki’s men from opening fire, and that the Soviet Embassy sheltered the men who were leading the plot aimed at Amin, tend to substantiate widespread post-September 14 rumors here that definite strains exist in Amin’s relations with the USSR, and that these strains will not be easily dispelled. Amin’s willingness to
