National Security Policy  369
The Director of Central Intelligence, reverting to the fact that the 
President had earlier indicated that he favored item (c), above, as 
the topic for the next evaluation study, stated that at the moment the 
Soviets are converting to and starting to build a new class of subma­
rine. He said that we do not have much data as yet concerning this 
new class of submarine, and while the new sub will not be coming in 
for a year or two, it might be desirable to put off the selection of this 
subject for evaluation study until additional information is available.
The President again inquired as to what we know about Soviet 
computer systems, and Dr. Killian indicated that we have mixed infor­
mation on that score. Dr. Killian commented there is reason to believe 
that the Soviets have misled the West concerning their computer tech­
nology capabilities. He said it appears that the Soviets may have devel­
oped much theory with respect to computer technology, but not too 
much technical apparatus in areas involving practical application of 
computer technology theories.
The Secretary of Defense noted that although the Soviets have 
embarked on the development of a new generation of submarines, the 
new subs will not actually be coming in for a year or two. He said in 
the meantime there is a present threat from existing Soviet submarines 
which threat will be with us for at least two or three years. It was his 
thought, therefore, that it would be desirable to make an evaluation 
study of this existing threat.
The President concluded that the next topic to be undertaken by the 
CEG as the subject of a comparative evaluation study should be subma­
rine weapons systems and anti-­submarine warfare capabilities. It was the 
President’s thought that when the submarine evaluation is completed, it 
should be followed by an evaluation of computer technology.
The National Security Council:
Noted and discussed the first report of the Comparative Evalua­
tions Group, pursuant to NSC 5815, as presented orally at the meeting 
by the Director, Weapons Systems Evaluation Group.
J. Patrick Coyne
NSC Representative on 
Internal Security
