1624 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Even though an agreement for limited nuclear test cessation remains our first goal, we should look beyond this. We might well direct our studies and planning toward a possible reduction in the advanced means or delivery of nuclear weapons. This may be a more practical objective than control of nuclear weapons stockpiles and production. A small but important beginning was made in this direction by the Geneva Conference on Surprise Attack. The failure of this confer­ ence should not deter further efforts. It seems especially urgent that we proceed with further studies of ways to reduce the hazards of surprise attack. We must also undertake studies and experiments to improve our capacity to detect tests other than in the atmosphere (as, for example, in outer space), even if we achieve no agreements. The research and experiments recommended by the Panel on Seismic Improvement and the Panel on High Altitude Detection should be carefully consid­ ered and followed up as a part of our long-­term effort to advance the technology of detection. Summary The trends in military technology, together with the threat of cat­ astrophic war, in the continuing development of nuclear weapons sys­ tems emphasize the overwhelming importance of seeking sound ways of limiting armaments. The possibilities of uncertainties in scientific estimates of biological effects of radiation hazards should be kept in mind in formulating policy. Since any kind of arms limitation will probably have to be accom­ panied by a monitoring system, it is important to establish the princi­ ple of monitoring and inspection and to achieve an agreement which will give us experience in monitoring. The monitoring of nuclear tests has received more study and is more thoroughly understood than any other arms limitation monitoring. This is an added reason for seeking an agreement for the limitation of atomic tests. It would seem technically feasible to achieve a sound agreement that would involve the stoppage of tests in the atmosphere, this stop­ page to be subject to monitoring through an agreement. Such an agree­ ment might provide for the evolutionary development of improved detection systems for underground and outer-­space testing. If we are to seek this kind of modified test limitation agreement, we should at once clarify the technical premises for such an agreement. We also need to organize and pursue on a sustained basis creative efforts to understand the technical, military, and political aspects of arms limitation of other kinds than nuclear tests cessation. D.E.
