Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII he first used the term on February 22. The Soviet position which emerged from their talks with the British and the French is still vague: —The Soviets see the notion of guarantees as the result of some sort of negotiation in which the US and Afghanistan’s neighbors would “guarantee” its security. The participants in any such negotiation would be the US, Pakistan, China, possibly Iran, and Afghanistan. The USSR would not be required to give guarantees since—by Soviet lights—it is not interfering. —When asked about international or UN mediation, the Soviets told the French that the Afghan government alone was the judge of what its security needs were, and that “no international mechanism was needed.” Nyet to Neutralization Given the Soviet position on negotiations and withdrawal, it is not surprising that Moscow has rejected the notion of the “neutralization” of Afghanistan raised by the British. On the most basic level, the Soviets simply refuse to draw a distinction between neutral and non-aligned or accept the argument that pro-Soviet is not non-aligned. More specifically, the Soviets have termed the British concept of neutralization “unacceptable” on the grounds that it is intended to undermine the legitimacy of the current Kabul regime and thus constitutes interference in internal Afghan affairs. As the British were told on March 3, questions on the international status and social system of Afghanistan, as well as the composition of its government, cannot be a matter for political settlement. In the Soviet view, the pro-Soviet international alignment and socialist political orientation of Kabul were fixed by the April 1978 revolution and cannot be the topics of negotiations since this would “constitute inadmissible interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign state.” This latter point perhaps reflects the most dramatic shift in the Soviet position since late 1979. Moscow has now committed itself more than ever before to the preservation of the pro-Soviet Marxist regime and not just the maintenance of a friendly regime in Kabul. This point was underscored by Gromyko during Dost’s visit to Moscow on March
