112 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement prevent departure Chinese students. All Americans in China applying to depart granted exit permits promptly. Where such application involved procedural questions they granted permission promptly on completion procedural question. Even in case American civilians violating Chinese law they dealt with in lenient spirit and in accordance legal procedure. Therefore he must point out allegation that Chinese Government had detained American nationals was quite contrary to fact. 3. In August 11 draft he had proposed government of each side might on behalf its nationals request intervention of entrusted power in order solve difficulties in connection their departure or conduct inves­ tigation so as to make representations on basis investigation. He con­ sidered this proposal reasonable and necessary. After implementation of third party arrangement it goes without saying that nationals could request without restriction intervention by third party. However among those desiring return might be some who wanted to let their govern­ ment know their difficulties. In past there were number of Chinese nationals who appealed his government assist their return. Dr. Tsien was one such case. Under such circumstances government concerned obligated to request third party take necessary action. Furthermore since outset of discussion first agenda item he and I had been making representation on behalf nationals each side desiring return. Obviously we could not make such direct representations regularly as there were no diplomatic relations between the two countries. After implemen­ tation third party representation arrangement questions of nationals desiring return could always be referred to third country. Hence it was necessary provide for action of national’s country on his behalf. 4. Wang added he objected to one minor point of wording, the ref­ erence to “Chinese mainland”. He did not think this term appropriate and suggested replace with “China”. Wang concluded these were pre­ liminary comments and could be regarded as amendments to my draft. He was ready listen my comments and if I agreed his few amendments he hoped agreement could be reached today. I replied major difficulty between us seemed paragraph one. We both agreed we were here to deal with practical situation—­that of our nationals in other country. I had tried in paragraph one to avoid theoret­ ical concepts and issues and tried to keep to practical situation. I didn’t think anything in paragraph one infringed on or raised question of sov­ ereignty or jurisdiction. This was one reason it contained two parts. It simply a statement each government would make in its own right and in full recognition its sovereignty. It was not intended to establish any theoretical concept for future. Intent was to deal with practical situa­ tion now facing us under conditions of complete reciprocity and equal­ ity. I had carefully tried avoid any attempt dictate to or demand of his
