386 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II some” countries when no formal determination has been made that they have engaged in a consistent and gross pattern of human rights violations? How can we manage our legal obligations in this respect without forfeiting a reasonable degree of flexibility? 5. How can we manage the tactics of implementing human rights objectives in a way which assures greater sensitivity to local conditions? That is, what should be the role of the regional bureaus and embassies in designing tactics? 111. Telegram From the Department of State to All African Diplomatic Posts1 Washington, February 7, 1978, 0241Z 31692. Inform Consuls, for principal officers from Moose. Subject: Human Rights Reporting. 1. With the completion of the annual human rights reports for Congress, we in AF want to express our appreciation for the patience and responsiveness of posts in providing the detailed inputs to make this process meaningful and useful. On the basis of your contribution, we hope that the reporting cycle for next year’s reports will consist essentially of collecting new data, up-dating and strengthening this year’s reports, and identifying any new human rights trends. 2. This is also a good time to reflect on the reporting and information gathering process itself and to draw some tentative conclusions which might contribute to improving our end performance in fulfilling this major legal requirement. 3. The first and most obvious lesson we have learned is that the principal prerequisite for an objective report defensible to both the host government and to Congress is better information on the objective human rights situation in each African country. This calls for conscious 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780056–0946. Confidential. Drafted by William Swing (AF/C) and Shurtleff; cleared by Lewis, Derian, Lannon Walker, Lewis Junior (AF/C), Thomas Smith (AF/W), Richard St. F. Post (AF/E), and Donald Petterson (AF/S); approved by Moose. On February 6, Moose sent a version of the cable, dated February 4, to Christopher and Derian, commenting that it “represents what I think is a very commendable initiative on the part of two of our officers to build on our recent experience with human rights reporting.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 15, Human Rights—Country Evaluation Papers)
