Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks 21 require the Soviets to give up this existing capability. —Reduces likelihood of peacetime misunderstandings. D. Approach Four: Relatively Comprehensive ASAT Arms Limitations (S) Approach Four would attempt to preclude a significant arms competition in ASAT systems. It would prohibit testing or deployment of any ASAT for physical attack upon satellites, e.g., direct ascent interceptors and any ASAT laser weapons. [1 line not declassified] It would include rules of the road and a ban on [less than 1 line not declassified] with satellites. Testing of ASATs would be prohibited. (TS) The Agreement would not include the Galosh ABM system (although “tests in ASAT mode” would be prohibited), and electronic warfare capability such as jamming and interference (although [less than 1 line not declassified] would be prohibited). [4½ lines not declassified] (S) This approach would seek strict limits on ASAT capabilities, tight definitions, collateral constraints, and a mechanism for cooperation such as the Standing Consultative Commission. We would continue ASAT R&D, and develop hedges against Soviet noncompliance or breakout. The treaty would be subject to review and amendment at five-year intervals. (S) Some believe that a comprehensive approach (Approach Four-A) should also include a ban on [4 lines not declassified] Therefore Approach Four-A [less than 1 line not declassified] Pros and Cons for Approach Four Pros Cons —Closes off a potential realm of —Precludes a U.S. ASAT arms competition. interceptor for defense. —May improve satellite —[3½ lines not declassified] survivability against long-term threats by making advanced —The Soviets would retain the threats less likely. advantage of the nuclear-armed Galosh [1½ lines not declassified] —Assuming compliance, probably works to U.S. advantage —[3 lines not declassified] in the use of space since the U.S. will be more dependent on —Satellites would have space than the Soviets. sanctuary even when they
