Chapter 4, February–April 1990 463 equipped. The new elements in the U.S. proposal—­namely, that each TU–95 with ALCMs and each TU–160 equipped with ALCMs be attributed with 8 warheads and that future heavy bombers be attributed with 10—­appeared to be a major step forward. The same applied to the U.S. proposal for access to declared storage facilities at heavy bomber bases for non-ALCM equipped heavy bombers; this would enable the sides to verify that ALCMs stored there were not nuclear-­armed. This was a very fundamental provision in the U.S. paper. Regarding the range threshold, Shevardnadze said the U.S. proposals displayed some movement but there was still a difference. The U.S. proposed 1000 km whereas the Soviet position was 600 km. Therefore, we would need additional effort before we could arrive at a generally acceptable solution. Nevertheless, he did take note of the major steps to accommodate the Soviet position. Another important provision was that there would be no limits on non-­deployed ALCMs and that heavy bombers could be equipped with no more than two times the number of ALCMs for which they were attributed. This was a provision on which movement had been made. We should identify other areas with a view toward making further progress. On the factor of distinguishability, Shevardnadze said, the proposal that externally distinguishable features be included that would be detectable by national technical means was interesting. Those ALCMs that were not distinguishable would have to be treated as nuclear arms. This was an important step. Regarding nuclear ALCMs, the proposal for an exchange of information regarding the external distinguishing features was another common point. On the proposal to ban MIRVed ALCMs, Shevardnadze did not believe there was any problem with that. We could also finalize agreement on inspections of heavy bombers as well as the provision on bombers that were originally built as ALCM carriers. To sum up, Shevardnadze said that the points the Secretary had presented the previous evening and repeated on this occasion indicated that very good movement had been made and we did seem within reach of an agreement, as long as some additional efforts were made. He suggested the experts today give an additional push. If not all issues were resolved, we would have to work on them in Washington. Nevertheless, there was a lot of common ground and this warranted optimism. Shevardnadze said that on non-­deployed missiles, there did not seem to be very many differences. We could just leave the question as it was without going into all the details. This seemed to be another major step to accommodate one another’s concerns. On telemetry encryption, Shevardnadze joked that he needed some help in deciphering his encrypted notes. He believed the Soviets
