908 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 9. I said situation regarding aliens departing my country was just as clear, straightforward and simple as it is with regard aliens here in Switzerland, with which we both familiar. Or for that matter in any other country here in Western Europe, with which I sure he also famil­ iar. He and I both knew that ourselves or any other foreigner here in Switzerland if he wants leave gets in his auto and drives to Annemasse or anywhere else without any exit permit, exit visa or any other proce­ dures. Or he goes down to airport, buys ticket, gets on plane and goes anywhere he wants go. Situation very similar in U.S. 10. I said these people did not apply anybody to leave. They free go any time they desire. I just could not be any clearer or any more categorical in saying that they certainly not been obstructed by any authority in U.S. 11. I said it incredible that, in more than six months that had now passed since we made agreed announcement, if in fact any them being obstructed that at least one case would not have been brought our attention by third power arrangement established for just this purpose. To say that just because somebody does not return his country he being obstructed by my government simply does not bear light of facts. 12. I said in only one of cases he mentioned me here was there spe­ cific allegation of obstruction—that was case Yuan Jui-­hsiang. I went into that case but information he gave me was not sufficient, as I told him sometime ago, enable me identify him. Some weeks ago I asked him for further information that would enable me go into case further. But I not yet received such information. 13. I said I might also mention that some weeks ago he asked me for medical records on Mr. Liu and I was pleased be able very promptly reply his request. I had also asked him for similar informa­ tion and records regarding Mrs. Bradshaw and Kanady but had not received his reply. 14. I said facts were clearly that Chinese desiring return his country free do so. They steadily arriving his country from U.S. 15. I said situation regarding Americans still remains vastly dif­ ferent. It now approaching four months since last American released from his country to return U.S. I had pointed out many times here and would not go into details this morning that my people and my govern­ ment increasingly feel these specific Americans who were clearly sub­ ject our agreed announcement were being held in expectation and hope of extracting political concessions from my government in exchange their return. 16. I said I had said over and over again and I again said this morn­ ing that no policy could be more mistaken. I found it very difficult understand why his government did not even in its own interest carry
