3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
223
8. Geneva conference—Of late, Brezhnev noted, there had been
considerable movement toward reconvening a Geneva Middle East
conference thanks in large part to joint efforts by the USSR and US as
Geneva co-chairmen. “We proceed from the assumption that, as
agreed, it should be reconvened before the end of this year.” Of course
in seeking agreement on practical matters related to the preparation
and conduct of the conference “we act so as to assure the legitimate
rights and interests of all, I emphasize all, parties without exception.
No one has the right to dictate conditions to others and this applies to
Israel as well.” Only on this basis could the Geneva conference attain its
objective—the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. Our two countries should continue to coordinate their efforts in
this direction.
9. Microwave radiation—Regarding certain other matters in the
President’s message, Brezhnev declared he’d merely like to say the fol-
lowing: Concerning the allegations of certain “ill-disposed” people
about supposed unfavorable working conditions of U.S. Embassy per-
sonnel, “you live here and it’s for you to judge” Embassy working con-
ditions. For some reason this matter had been raised four or five times
(Aleksandrov intervened to claim that each time the Soviet side had
given an answer). “Let me just say that we have set forth our position
exhaustively and there’s no need to return to this.” The question was
being used, claimed Brezhnev by “certain agencies for unseemly pur-
poses” which are very remote from improvement of relations.
10. Amnesty for dissidents—Lastly, remarked Brezhnev, he
wanted to refer to one question in the President’s letter the very posing
of which was incomprehensible and unfounded. “I must emphasize
that if we want our relations to develop normally there must be no at-
tempts to interfere in each other’s internal affairs. As experience shows,
only when both sides really follow this principle can we avoid needless
friction and find solutions to questions, including those which are most
important to the U.S. and U.S.S.R.
11. Repeating that he would give President Carter’s message addi-
tional consideration and communicate a reply, Brezhnev requested that
I transmit greetings and best wishes to the President from him and his
colleagues.
12. After a brief exchange of quips on the toasts we both had con-
sumed at his Nov. 7 reception, I thanked Brezhnev for receiving me and
for giving me the opportunity to hear his views. These and his best
wishes I would transmit to the President promptly. With his permis-
sion I then said I wanted to comment briefly on a few of his remarks
and to ask a few questions:
(A) Gromyko talks—Recalling that I had attended Gromyko’s
talks in Washington, I said I thought they were very useful and I knew
that the President did as well;
