Bulgaria visa applications. He stated that the meeting between Foreign Minister Mladenov and Ambassador Garthoff in May was an important indication of Bulgarian’s interest in improving relations with the United States.4 Assistant Secretary Vest’s visit this week had also contributed to the improvement of relations.5 Bulgaria wanted to see this process strengthened, but it often had the impression that the United States was not really interested in such a development. (C) Gotsev then made a strong pitch for MFN, arguing that with the recent resolution of many family reunification cases there were no longer any meaningful obstacles to Bulgaria receiving MFN. He asked how we saw the prospects for Bulgaria receiving MFN. (C) Gotsev also pointed to the current visit to the US of Lyudmila Zhivkova, daughter of Bulgarian President Todor Zhivkov and a member of the Politburo, as an indication of Bulgaria’s interest in improving relations. Mme. Zhivkova had met with Secretary Vance at the UNGA in New York and had met with Secretary Harris, Mrs. Mondale, and John Reinhardt in Washington.6 He regretted, however, that Mme. Zhivkova had been unable to be received by the President despite the many attempts by the Bulgarian Government to get an appointment. (C) In response, Messrs. Brement and Larrabee stated that Foreign Minister Mladenov’s meeting with Ambassador Garthoff and the progress in the resolution of family reunification cases had been duly noted in Washington. We were encouraged by this trend and hoped it would continue. As to a meeting between Zhivkova and the President, we pointed out that the President was extremely busy; that he normally met only Heads of State, even of our closest allies; that October was the busiest month of the year for him; and that the request had come at the last moment. Under such conditions, it was hardly realistic to expect that it would be granted. Moreover, there had only recently been a slight improvement in relations. Before a meeting with the President could be realistically considered, relations would have to develop further. We stressed that the US would like to see a positive development of relations, but that this would depend upon concrete 4 For Garthoff’s meeting with Mladenov, and his subsequent discussion with Gotsev, see Document 91.
