Chapter 5, May–June 1990  709
G—Then say in dec. We will seek way to verify.
JB—­repeat Wash. statement?
G—At least, if polit state, notif. Sides should say will cont. to seek 
ways to verify SLCMs. Then argue for Sup. Sov. If can’t record progress. 
at least restate old pos—­or retrogressive—Barth.—­hidden agenda Find 
way to combine Ak + B views. If add to polit. declar old lang—­helps us 
get treaty. Think about this.
128.	 Letter From Secretary of State Baker to Soviet Foreign 
Minister Eduard Shevardnadze1
Washington, May 19, 1990
Dear Eduard,
I have just finished meeting with my arms control experts,2 who 
tell me that we are still some distance from completing an overall agree-
ment on the question of air-­launched cruise missiles because of con-
tinuing differences over the issue of Tacit Rainbow. In particular, my 
experts have reported your concerns and the three elements of your 
proposal.
I have had an opportunity to study your ideas, and am persuaded 
that Tacit Rainbow need not be an obstacle to resolving the ALCM 
issue. In this message, I would like to give you a response that I believe 
offers a constructive means of resolving this matter. Let me make the 
following points:
First, the December 31, 1988 cutoff date to distinguish between cur-
rent and future ALCMs is of course acceptable to me. This makes clear 
(as President Gorbachev agreed) that Tacit Rainbow will be treated as 
a future non-­nuclear ALCM—­which it is—­and will thus be subject to 
the provisions in the treaty that will enable both sides to distinguish 
between nuclear and non-­nuclear ALCMs.
Second, I am able to confirm that Tacit Rainbow is a non-­nuclear 
ALCM, and as such would be covered by our proposals of May 12, 1990 
on how the START Treaty would identify non-­nuclear ALCMs and dis-
tinguish them from nuclear ALCMs. In particular, I want to draw your 
1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross Files, 
US/Soviet Ministerial May 1990. No classification marking.
2 No minutes were found.
