448
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
program. When necessary, individual reliability problems were inves-
tigated and resolved by specific nuclear tests. The adequacy of fixes or
design modifications occasionally had to be verified by nuclear testing.
Finally, the weapon was replaced in the inventory well before the end
of its nominal service life by a new design which was perfected through
its own development test series.
(S/RD/N) The yield levels of the above test programs varied, of
course, from a few pounds to full weapon yield. [5 lines not declassified]
(S/FRD) Potential Problems Under a CTB. Under a CTB—whatever
its terms—we will not be able to continue maintaining the stockpile as
before. The outlook for stockpile reliability depends upon the type of
CTB we aim for and achieve.
(S/FRD) If a CTB allowed no weapons testing having any nuclear
yield, our confidence in the reliability of the stockpile would remain
high initially, and would then decline at an accelerating rate, possibly
reaching quite low values. Methods to quantify this degradation are
not now known. The reasons for its occurrence are complex. In the
worst cases, a specific problem could require retirement of entire major
systems. As warheads reach the end of their service life—and some in
the stockpile will reach that point relatively soon—we are not certain
that we can replace them with exact copies in which we have high con-
fidence. There are a number of reasons for this, including our inability
to reproduce materials or duplicate manufacturing processes exactly;
some of these may be prohibited because of present day environmental
and safety regulations. Finally, as delivery systems are necessarily
changed with advancing technology or new missions and threats, we
are not certain we can adapt existing warheads with high confidence.
The possibility of such situations arising under a CTB prompts consid-
eration of alternative CTB concepts.
(S) The central question to be asked with regard to all alternatives
to an ideal “zero-yield” treaty is: Which alternatives would maintain
the highest stockpile reliability over the long term without jeopardizing
the potential benefits, particularly the non-proliferation benefits, of a
CTB?
(S/FRD) Alternative Approaches. Three alternative approaches ap-
pear worthy of consideration, either singly or in combination. We
would argue that each could be made compatible with the concept of a
CTB because of the special requirements of nuclear weapon states
(NWS) to ensure the reliability of their stockpiles. In brief form, these
alternatives are:
—(S/FRD) Permitted Experiments. Allow low-yield (kiloton or sub-
kiloton) experiments below some designated threshold with the pur-
pose of contributing to stockpile maintenance.
