North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979 1051 policy. You should try to minimize any such discussion. If the PRC appears unlikely to agree on this matter you should oppose any moves to recommit the policy issues for another interagency study by noting that the policy directions contained in the ISTC legislative mandate (pages 26–27, Tab L),8 and in the President’s S&T message provides adequate guidance. Agenda Item #1.2 The second PRC action is to endorse and direct the plan for followon actions from the PRM (page 3–6, Tab C, and Tab J) which could produce proposals for the FY 82 budget cycle. The possible follow-on actions are: Item #1.2.a. Instruct AID missions to assist host governments in building indigenous S&T capacity. This would be a new program authority for AID, which would overlap with the ISTC mandate. Consideration should be given to whether new AID involvement in capacity building will require new legislative authority. Discussions are being held regarding the delineation of the AID role versus the ISTC role in capacity building and in other program mandate areas. AID will probably oppose this recommendation because of the uncertainty regarding the availability of budget resources. We should be careful not to load ISTC with all responsibility for capacity building also. ISTC will, particularly in the early years, have a limited budgetary capability for undertaking bilateral capacity building programs. Recommended Action. Disapprove the PRM recommendation and leave this decision for the IDCA Administrator. Item #1.2.b. Direct interagency preparation of specific proposals consistent with U.S. interests, for facilitating LDC access to private technology. The PRM did not undertake a definitive analysis of the issue, a study would be useful. Recommended Action. Approve and ensure that the terms of reference for the study should be linked to UNCSTD and UNCTAD issues. Item #1.2.c. Review of U.S. R&D activities to ascertain where developing country needs can be given greater weight in the areas of energy, which was not included in the PRM recommendation—but deserves attention, world population, international health, and world food and nutrition. 8 Tab L, attached but not printed, is the text of the legislation establishing the Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation.
