976 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 194. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, January 24, 1991, 8 a.m. PARTICIPANTS Secretary Baker Alexander Bessmertnykh Baker: Thanks for taking my call. I got the message from Chetverikov yesterday that you would be coming to Washington and I am very glad that you decided, notwithstanding the difficulties of your schedule, to come. While I am very glad that you are coming, I do want you to know that we have concluded here that it probably makes sense to postpone the Summit by mutual agreement. In doing so, we would emphasize two points: The President’s preoccupation with the Gulf and the START Treaty is not yet ready to be concluded. I would be happy to work out an agreed statement with you. You have probably seen what’s going on here on the Baltics. There was a vote yesterday in the House that was 417–0. In any case, I think we should agree mutually to postpone the Summit and cite the Gulf and START as the reasons for the postponement. I think it is better for us to do so sooner rather than later. I don’t want us to be in a position where Congress has passed a resolution urging a postponement of the Summit and then we look like we had to respond to that. So, I would ask you to think about that. Before you respond, I would also like to make a few other points. My own view is that we have a very important relationship to preserve and to protect. If we postpone the Summit now I think your coming to Washington anyway can only send a positive signal. Indeed, it would show that we are doing business and we have a lot to talk about. The fact is we do have a lot to talk about. First, I think we need to try to finalize START and resolve the problems on CFE. But, more than this, I would like to propose that we have a serious discussion on the new arms control agenda and that is dealing with the problems of proliferation. And I mean on proliferation of nuclear, chemical, biological and missile capabilities. We have some ideas and I want to get into that with you. In addition to that, I want to talk to you about how we might gradually work together on the Middle East after the war is over. 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Executive Secretariat, Lot 96D277, Baker Subject Files 1990–1994, No Folder Title. Secret; Sensitive.
