Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I the Soviet Union in 1963—halting poisonous nuclear-weapons testing in the atmosphere.6 Later we reached agreements that banned nuclear weapons from the ocean floor and from outer space. The 1968 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty now binds more than 100 nations.7 It has not yet removed the specter of nuclear proliferation, but it has advanced that objective significantly. Since first proposed by President Johnson, we have been engaged in broader Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. During the Nixon Administration, these negotiations severely restricted both sides from building new antiballistic missile systems. These systems would have cost billions of dollars and added new dangers to the arms race. Under President Nixon, SALT I placed the first limits on the number of strategic offensive missiles. It prevented the Soviets from continuing to increase the number of their missiles by several hundred each year.8 For the past 6 years, three Presidents of both parties have been negotiating the next step in arms control—the SALT II agreement. The negotiations have been intense. We have proceeded carefully and deliberately. And we are near agreement. What SALT II Will Accomplish Let me explain what this agreement will accomplish. First, it will establish equal limits on the number of missiles and bombers capable of delivering nuclear weapons to the other side. The first SALT agreement in 1972 froze the number of strategic missiles, leaving the Soviets with a numerical advantage which was then offset by U.S. technological superiority. The new agreement firmly establishes the principle of equal numbers. Second, these limits will be lower and more encompassing than those in the first SALT agreement. The new overall limits would force the Soviets to eliminate over 250 strategic missiles and bombers. This is a 10% reduction and about 750 fewer than they are likely to have in the absence of SALT. On the other hand, because we are below the new limits, we would actually be able, if we chose, to increase the overall number of our strategic weapons in operation. Third, the agreement will place lower limits on specific weapons, including those with more than a single warhead. Fourth, for the first time, we will curb the number of new systems and begin to limit the race to make existing systems more deadly. Only
