210  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
to the President, it never took place. A script of the briefing was submit-
ted to the President in mid-November.
—The President accepted Harold Brown’s invitation to visit SAC 
Headquarters. His trip there on November 19,7 is the first such Presi-
dential attention to the command and control of our strategic forces on 
recent record.
—Most important, IVORY ITEM drills were initiated.
Although the initiative came from Defense, it seems that our 
activity with the WHEP, our interest in LNOs, and the doctrinal ques-
tions raised by the memorandum of March 31 gave Defense a sense 
of urgency about both WHEP and doctrine. In fact, several people in 
Defense were surprised to discover that NSDM 242 calls for frequent 
and repeated interaction between the military planners and the NCA 
to ensure that military planning does indeed support the preferences of 
the NCA. Apparently, such interaction never occurred under the previ-
ous Administrations although they authored and endorsed the NSDM.
4. Difficulties encountered.
The WHEP. The organization of the White House makes it very 
difficult for the NSC staff to control or check the WHEP. All the oper-
ational control of the assets, which are key to the WHEP, belong to the 
Military Office: helicopters, communications, cars, etc. The administra-
tive demands on these assets have, at times, caused serious neglect of 
WHEP criteria, especially in Presidential travel. The President’s empha-
sis on emergency procedures, however, allowed us to work rather effec-
tively in a “staff supervisory” role with Hugh Carter whose Military 
Office has “operational control.” Hugh and I developed a “job descrip-
tion” for an “emergency procedures officer” last spring in an effort to 
clarify who has what responsibilities. It granted the NSC only a peri-
odic “staff review” of the WHEP. The major part of the job is reserved 
for the Director of the Military Office. Marty Beaman, a lawyer from 
Florida, now occupies that post as Bill Gulley’s successor. The JCS, you 
recall, was extremely nervous about having no one with military and 
command experience in that job. Their fears are not without justifica-
tion, but I have moderated them by acting as an informal go-­between 
and by getting Hugh Carter involved and concerned with the WHEP. 
In other words, we have a make-­shift arrangement that operates on 
good will between the NSC and the Military Office. Speaking candidly, 
there is a residue of ill-­feeling over there as a result of our pushing and 
shoving on WHEP reform.
7 Carter visited Strategic Air Command Headquarters in Omaha on October 22. 
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
