1186  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
ALTERNATIVE 2: TREASURY
20. Civil Defense. Adequate protection of the civilian population 
would, if it were achievable, both facilitate survival of the nation 
in the event of general war and contribute to the deterrence of war. 
Means to provide adequate protection are, however, not now foreseen. 
Nevertheless, the United States should constantly strive to improve the 
degree of protection which could be afforded the civilian population in 
the event of nuclear war. In the light of the limited prospects for effec­
tive active defense against ballistic missile attacks, such efforts must 
rest on an improved and strengthened civil defense program. Increased 
attention, therefore, should be given to such realistic measures for 
improving the passive defense of the U.S. population as would offer 
some contribution to the deterrence of general war without prejudicing 
the implementation of other measures likely to reduce the risks of war.
21. Fallout shelters constitute the best—although still inadequate—
means presently available for reducing the number of casualties in the 
event of nuclear war. The Federal Government should, therefore, pro­
mote construction of such shelters by measures based firmly upon the 
following fundamental principles:
a. It should be the obligation of each property owner to provide 
protection on his own premises.
b. The role of the Federal Government should be to provide lead­
ership and example.
c. There should be no elements of compulsion, penalty, or subsidy 
in Federal programs.
d. Actions must avoid creating alarm, causing Congressional and 
public reaction prejudicial to higher priority national security programs, 
presenting the posture of the United States as that of a nation preoccu­
pied with preparations for war, or losing the support of our allies.
ALTERNATIVE 3: BUDGET
20. Civil Defense. An essential ingredient of continental defense is 
improved and strengthened civil defense which seeks, by both pre­
ventive and ameliorative measures, to minimize damage from nuclear 
attack and to contribute to deterring such attack.
21. Measures to carry out the concept of fallout shelter for protec­
tion of the civil population against radiation hazard represent a key 
element in an effective civil defense program. Specific guidance is con­
tained in a separate NSC policy document.
* * * * * * * *
22. In order that Federal, State and local governments may carry 
out their essential responsibilities during and after nuclear attack or 
other grave emergency, the capability of State and local governments 
to function effectively should be strengthened by Federal assistance in 
the form of guidance, direction and resources. Such assistance should
