Human Rights 205 anti-Israeli states such as Egypt and Tunisia. Therefore, the USG should not participate in the World Conference or the UNESCO Conference to draft a Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice scheduled to be held in Lusaka, Zambia in late 19778 until the connection between Zionism and racism is officially broken by a UN resolution. It should also be noted that it is conceivable that the issue of Israeli-South African relations will be brought up at the Anti-Apartheid Conference scheduled to be held in Lagos in August 1977. A reversal of previous USG policy not to participate in the Decade or in any of its activities because of the equating of Zionism with racism could have serious domestic and international consequences.9 Our recent experience of prior consultations with African states in connection with the just completed International Labor Conference, Geneva, June 1–21, would indicate that the Africans would more than likely back away from any promises made to the USG before the conference in the face of heavy radical Arab pressure and/or monetary inducements. 8 UNESCO adopted the Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice at its 20th session in Paris in November 1978. 9 An unknown hand bracketed and starred this paragraph. 64. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, June 30, 1977 SUBJECT PRM 28 on Human Rights I understand that Steve Oxman now has the dubious privilege of producing a coherent draft PRM on human rights. My staff tells me that 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 6/16–30/77. Confidential. Lake did not initial the memorandum. A notation on the first page of the memorandum reads: “cy also given PHK [Paul Kreisberg]. PG [Peter Grose].” In a handwritten note to Lake, July 1, Oxman commented that he had found Lake’s memorandum helpful. He added: “Please note that the draft you were commenting on was a D/HA product neither Matt [Nimetz] nor Chris [Warren Christopher] nor I had passed upon in any way. That draft about to be completed answers many of your substantive concerns—I think.” (Ibid.)
