630 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 186. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 RP M 79–10104X Washington, February 27, 1979 SUBJECT Possible Arab Acceptance of an Egyptian-Israeli Treaty [handling restriction not declassified] The White House suggestion that the Arabs would accept a treaty if presented with a fait accompli may have been prompted by two statements made during Secretary Brown’s recent visit to the Middle East.2 [handling restriction not declassified] —The Secretary told Sadat that he had found the Saudis less critical of the Camp David Accords in private than in public, and that King Husayn was “less intent” on pursuing the issue at the UN or Geneva. [handling restriction not declassified] —Sadat, during his conversation with Brown, said that all Arabs but the “rejectionists” (presumably Syria, Iraq, Algeria, Libya, and South Yemen) and Kuwait (because of its large Palestinian population) would accept a treaty. [handling restriction not declassified] We do not believe that either statement should be interpreted as indicating that Syria, Jordan or Saudi Arabia would “accept” a treaty based on the Camp David Accords. Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia would “accept” the “present draft” treaty only in the sense that there is little they could do to prevent it. Our reporting [less than 1 line not declassified] is nearly unanimous in its rejection of the CDA as not sufficient from the Arab point of view. That view, if anything, has hardened. [handling restriction not declassified] It is, of course, theoretically possible to devise terms and linkages that would satisfy most Arabs. Broad Arab support could be secured by a treaty that provides for specific time-tables making performance 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services, Directorate of Intelligence, Job 82T00150R: Production Case Files, Box 6, Folder 84, Possible Arab Acceptance of an Egyptian-Israeli Treaty. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. The memorandum was found attached to a February 26 note from the Director of the CIA’s National Foreign Assessment Center, Robert R. Bowie to the NIO/NESA, reporting that Turner informed the attendees at that morning’s DCI Staff Meeting that “the White House had suggested that the other Arabs would accept an Israeli-Egyptian accord if it was actually signed. Specifically, the Saudis, Syria and Jordan were mentioned.” On this, Bowie asked: “What do we think of this, assuming that the linkage positions are no better than in the present draft? How much further linkage would make the difference?” (Ibid.) Also attached is a February 27 note from Director of the Office of Regional and Political Analysis Helene Boatner to Bowie stating that the intelligence memorandum was drafted in response to Bowie’s memorandum. (Ibid.) 2 See Document 178 for a report of Brown’s visit.
