Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
639
243.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 5, 1980, 4:15 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
Hector Villalon
Henry Precht
SUBJECT
Iran Hostage Crisis
Villalon said that the meeting between the Revolutionary Council
and Khomeini had been postponed by Bani Sadr because the conditions
were not right (presumably he was referring to the attack on the idea
of transfer by the religious hardliners).
Villalon said that a committee had been formed, composed of
Capucci, the Swiss Ambasador, Bourguet, Villalon, and the Papal Nun-
cio (presumably Noland). These men had met all afternoon and evening
to try to find a solution to the crisis. They had worked with Ghotbzadeh
and developed the proposition which Capucci planned to put to the
students at 10 a.m. Sunday.2
Capucci had met for three hours with the students today and found
that a large number of them seem to be willing to end the crisis. There
was only a small element of hardliners who wanted to hold out. Villalon
did not wish to discuss the committee’s proposition in detail. It seemed
to involve the release of all the hostages to the Revolutionary Council,
while the students remained on the compound. This would be a student
initiative designed to preserve face rather than eventually have them-
selves forced to give in by the government.
At 1500 Capucci and the other clergy would conduct their religious
visit to the compound. At the same time, the Revolutionary Council
would meet and would consider the work of the Capucci Committee
and any communication they had from the students. Villalon assumed
that the Council would end at about 1730 and a delegation would then
go to see the Imam for his blessing of the final proposal. One way
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 31, Iran 4/1/80–4/18/80. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Precht. Villalon and
Precht talked by phone. According to an attached April 5 covering memorandum from
the White House Situation Room to Brzezinski, the memorandum of conversation was
sent to Carter on the evening of April 5 at Aaron’s request.
2 April 6.
