Hioki who suggested that at the end of the paragraph a reference should be made to the question of custodian banks. He submitted a revised form (see page 26, Minutes of March 8, 1926) and said that the “custodian banks” mentioned in his draft would be different from the so-called custodian banks at present, and that as to the manner of deposit of the money, it was intended to propose a different basis from that in effect at the present. The chairman objected to taking up the question of custodian banks on the ground that he did not wish to complicate the question under consideration. Mr. Hioki replied that the 2½ and 5 per cent surtaxes could not be levied unless the Conference fixed the purposes and the conditions and the date, and that in his opinion the fixing of the custodian banks was one of the conditions which was meant in the Treaty. Colonel Peel remarked that he was quite content to leave the matter of the deposit of the surplus funds to the Chinese Government and the Customs Administration. Mr. Strawn said that he thought the revenues ought to be divided among the different banks of the several countries. The chairman continued vigorously to oppose the inclusion in the agreement of any provision relating to custodian banks, preferring, as he said, to defer the matter until the question of levying the interim surtaxes should be taken up. Mr. Strawn said that his solicitude about deferring the proposition to a later date arose from the fact that he desired to safeguard these revenues in such a way as to put them beyond the power of anyone to put any lien on them. Since the sub-committee was unable to agree upon this point, Mr. Hioki made a reservation on the question and proceeded to read a proviso which he deemed prudent to add to the paragraph which had just been under discussion. (See page 30 of Minutes of March 8, 1926.) The purpose of this proviso was to guard against the contingency of an inability to agree upon the distribution of the money collected from the surtaxes in which event the money already accumulated was to be disposed of by the Conference. Mr. Strawn said that he did not believe that the situation justified Mr. Hioki’s apprehension that the Conference might possibly not agree upon the purposes to which the funds would be applied. Since it was not possible for the sub-committee to agree on this paragraph, adjournment was taken with the understanding that at the next meeting the questions of shipping and landing and of custody of funds would be taken up.
