Human Rights tradeoff.36 On the one hand, we want to comply with current legislation, thus giving it a chance to affect observance of human rights and demonstrating our willingness to work with the Congress in this regard. On the other hand, we want to avoid turning our advocacy of human rights into a point of useless political contention within the IFI’s—thus feeding confrontation along North-South lines, fostering even more politicization of the IFI’s, and undermining the legitimate role of these institutions. Our present approach is to make a good faith effort to fulfill the spirit and letter of Harkin. At the same time, we remain open to Congressional initiatives which might allow more flexibility for Executive Branch use of the IFI’s as one of several means to promote human rights. To facilitate adequate implementation of this approach: —EB must provide all relevant members of the HRCG (D/HA, E, ARA, H, L, and S/P) with prior notice of US decisions on Harkin Amendment votes. —In addition, EB should draw on previous analysis of human rights and the IFI’s to provide a policy paper for HRCG review by April 15. That paper should include evaluation of such approaches as using US votes to register disapproval of human rights violations, encouraging the institutions themselves to further human rights, and placing priority emphasis on promotion of economic rights. —H must make special provision for use of the IFI’s in its Congressional human rights strategy (see below). —E must alert the Deputy Secretary to any inconsistency in State- Treasury-NSC positions on human rights in the IFI’s. Actions Being Taken —The Deputy Secretary is mandating the above four steps.37 5. Cooperation with the Congress Present US policy is in tune with what most on the Hill want. The next step—since some Congressmen fear that we have a helter-skelter approach that could dissolve in the face of Realpolitik—is to demonstrate to the Congress that our human rights program is serious, coordinated, and related to other US national interests. Our strategy for Congressional relations on the human rights question need not be so much a “strategy” as an attitude. That attitude should start and end with the determination to work with the Congress—not, as sometimes alleged in the previous Administration, 36 See Document 33. 37 In the left-hand margin next to the previous paragraph, including the four points, Christopher placed a parallel line and added: “Ann Swift working on paper.”
