Special Session on Disarmament 1233 Ambassador Leonard said that this assurance should be offered in a most solemn way. He proposed that Secretary Vance issue the statement in the name of the President, possibly at New York next week. The President said it should be done without delay. Otherwise, the decision would ooze out and be subject to misinterpretation. Are there things at SSOD, beyond these two, that are important? Ambassador Young replied that as the Vice President had announced, the United States favors a follow-up conference. We are pushing for greater openness about military budgets. We are in a good position at the Special Session. He said he had underestimated the significance of SSOD. The President asked if there was more substance to it than Ambassador Young had expected. Ambassador Young replied that SSOD will start a process. Other nations are looking to us for leadership. As in the case of the Seventh Special Session on North/South economic relations,4 this Special Session is the beginning of a longer process, and between now and 1981, SSOD will continue to have echoes. The President noted that it is important that the U.S. Delegation emphasize at SSOD what we have already done, including our efforts to get full adherence to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and to control conventional weapons in Latin America. He noted that we could make still more progress if others would adopt the policies that the United States had unilaterally imposed upon itself on conventional arms transfers. Third, the delegation can emphasize the important steps that we have taken in the area of non-proliferation and should make every effort to get other countries to join in these initiatives. The Secretary of State remarked that there is only one country which has not joined us on Tlatelolco,5 and that country is beginning to feel the pressure. Ambassador Leonard noted that it is important that the U.S. is continuing to make progress on SALT and on CTB, but even so, other nations fear that there are no ceilings yet on the arms race. The President interjected that they’re right. Ambassador Leonard continued that a cutoff is needed in order to impose a ceiling on the arms race. The new guidance will give the delegation a good posture for achieving a consensus document at the Spe- 4 The UN’s Seventh Special Session devoted to improving the economic prospects of the developing countries took place in September 1975. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–14, Part 1, Documents on the United Nations, 1973–1976, Documents 27, 28, and 29. 5 France.
