North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 779 258. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs-Designate (Bergsten) to Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal1 Washington, February 28, 1977 SUBJECT My IDA V Negotiations in Paris There were five noteworthy results of my negotiations in Paris last Friday:2 1. The technical details surrounding the IDA V replenishment were resolved to the satisfaction of most, but not all, of the other donor countries. The meeting was proposed by McNamara because of our decision to seek Congressional authorizations of future U.S. contributions “subject to appropriations,”3 and the resulting uneasiness of some other donor countries that the U.S. pledge would hence be “conditional”. Most of the group accepted our proposal to leave the IDA resolution unchanged, with clear language in the accompanying report which recognizes the “new” U.S. practice. However, the Germans have not yet committed themselves to the proposed approach—and the Japanese, French and Swedes are hiding behind the Germans. It still seems likely that the agreement can be finalized at Vienna on March 14–15, as scheduled, but it is not certain.4 2. We agreed that the IDA V replenishment would become active only upon appropriation of the first annual U.S. tranche (as well as the three-year authorization); the donors would meet to reconsider the sit- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten, 1977–1979, Box 1, DA–7–1–2 International Development Association (IDA). No classification marking. Reviewed by Godley on March 2 and Hessler on March 3. Copies were sent to Solomon and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs Paul Boeker. A stamped notation at the top of the page reads: “Noted by W.M.B.” 2 February 25. 3 In a February 24 memorandum to Blumenthal on his upcoming meeting with the IDA Deputies, Bergsten noted this decision was “required by the Budget Act. My position, and that of the World Bank, is that this ‘change’ is simply an explicit recognition of the de facto situation and that existing Bank practices can continue, unaltered.” (National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten, 1977–1979, Box 1, DA–7–1–2 International Development Association (IDA)) 4 On March 15 in Vienna, the IDA Deputies agreed on the terms of the fifth IDA replenishment, totaling $7.6 billion; the U.S. contribution would be $2.4 billion. (Telegram 2052 from Vienna, March 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770090–0515)
