958
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and still have a useful report. The State Department representative
pointed out that other ongoing studies such as the Year 2000 study of
population, resources and the environment would not be ready for the
fall initiatives but hopefully would be the basis for longer term
thinking.6 The representative of the Department of Agriculture felt that
there were resources in the private sector groups such as the Popula-
tion Council which would make useful contributions to the Ad Hoc
Group’s work.
5. The representative of AID suggested that the Chairman of the
Ad Hoc Group should talk with Mr. Van Dyk, who is chairing an inter-
agency development assistance study group to ascertain what role
population will play in their analyses. The Treasury Department repre-
sentative felt that, whatever the time frame of the report, it should be
based on an evaluation of our present population assistance efforts and
indicate what new directions our assistance should take to improve
performance.
6. It was agreed that the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Group would
consult with Mr. Van Dyk and other members of his Study Group and
work with them to ensure proper attention to population issues in the
strategies as they are being developed. The Chairman agreed to get into
Mr. Van Dyk’s hands as soon as possible a paper setting forth key
points for consideration by the Study Group.7
7. It was also agreed that, with a somewhat shorter deadline than
previously envisioned, the Chairman would draft an outline for the
next annual report which hopefully could be submitted in October. He
would also prepare as soon as possible a telegram asking key Em-
bassies for responses to questions about progress and prospects in pop-
ulation programs.8 This would provide useful background for the an-
nual report which he hoped could be more country-specific than the
previous one. Several members pointed out that, if such field replies
could be received in the next several weeks, they might also be of use in
connection with the various interagency development studies and rec-
ommendations referred to by the NSC member. The Chairman said he
would try to get telegraphic replies back as soon as possible, though he
noted the inevitable delays in such matters.
6 See Document 337.
7 Attached but not printed is a July 13 memorandum from Green to Van Dyk de-
scribing the nature of the population problem, summarizing U.S. policy, and outlining
program funding.
8 Telegram 167895 to multiple diplomatic and consular posts, July 19, asked for in-
formation regarding host country demographics, population programs and policies,
non-population programs, and food production. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D770268–0920)
