3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
65
reduction for both sides. Second, it would be a genuine step in setting
limits on the quantitative and qualitative aspects of armaments. Third,
it would represent a major political achievement and would provide
for new formulations improving Soviet/American relations. In the
eyes of the whole world it would be regarded as an exercise in political
wisdom by both sides. Now the Secretary proposed to run through the
details of this Comprehensive proposal (see Attachment I).3 Having
done so, Secretary Vance handed Gromyko the comprehensive pro-
posal in both languages and said he would be prepared to answer any
questions and to discuss its provisions in any way.
Gromyko said that as far as this new proposal was concerned,
having just now received it from the US side, he would have to defer
his response to one of our subsequent meetings during these talks.
Since it had been presented as an official proposal of the US, he would
provide an official response during the Secretary’s stay in Moscow.
On a separate piece of paper the Secretary also presented the details
of President’s Carter alternative idea of setting aside the unresolved
issues and concluding the new agreement on the basis of the Vladi-
vostok understanding (see Attachment II).4
Gromyko said that he would like to address the Cruise Missile issue
in specifics. We had a document which had been signed by both sides
and registered agreement in the form of an Aide-Memoire dated De-
cember 10, 1974.5 No indulgences of any kind had been provided there
for cruise missiles. When discussing the issues at Vladivostok, no dis-
tinction had been made between cruise missiles and ballistic missiles.
Indeed, it would make no difference to people whether they died as a
result of a cruise missile attack or a ballistic missile attack. After the
Vladivostok meeting some people had tried to draw a distinction be-
tween these types of missiles. The Soviet side had pointed out that it
would be inconsistent to pose the question in that fashion. On his side
there was no need to study the history of the negotiations leading to the
Vladivostok understanding, because he and others were living partici-
pants in those negotiations. Thus, both he and Brezhnev were quite cer-
tain about how things were discussed and accomplished there. Neither
Brezhnev nor Gromyko, nor other Soviet participants, needed to be re-
minded by reading briefs, about how things were resolved in Vladi-
vostok. Anyone who tried to adjust this matter retroactively would find
that such attempts would hardly strengthen his position. Furthermore,
3 Attached but not printed is an undated document entitled “Comprehensive Pro-
posal.” See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Document 157.
4 Attached but not printed is an undated document entitled “Deferral Proposal.”
See ibid.
5 See footnote 4, Document 1.
