International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
57
talked with the Japanese, and did not really represent a U.S. position.
This shades the truth a bit; it is at best disingenuous.
Obviously, it would be dandy if Strauss could persuade the Japa-
nese to accept greater restraint on TV exports than the President sug-
gested in his meeting with Fukuda. But we fear the language in this
letter may seek that worthy objective at the risk of jeopardizing the
President’s credibility with Fukuda. The Japanese attach great impor-
tance to gentlemen’s agreements. They are also pragmatic. If Strauss
were to straightforwardly indicate to Fukuda that on reflection the
President has come to the conclusion that the 2.5 million figure cannot
be sold to the American public as plausible rationale for foregoing the
ITC recommendations, we suspect the Prime Minister could accept that
and would probably be prepared to consider a somewhat lower figure.
But this letter is too sly and lawyer-like to be appropriate to this
situation.
We presume it is too late to do anything about this, but we did
wish to at least register our misgivings.6
6 According to telegram 5108 from Tokyo, April 8, which summarized Strauss’
April 6–8 visit to Tokyo, “two days of intensive discussions on television problem re-
sulted in outlines of several possible approaches to an agreed resolution.” The U.S. and
Japanese representatives agreed to come to a “mutually satisfactory negotiated settle-
ment on television this month so that this question would be out of the way by the
Summit.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770123–0006) For the
conclusion of the U.S.-Japan negotiations on color television receivers, see Document 31.
20.
Editorial Note
On April 9, 1977, Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumen-
thal, acting in his capacity as the Chairman of the Economic Policy
Group, forwarded to the President’s Assistant for National Security Af-
fairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and the Special Representative for Eco-
nomic Summits, Henry Owen, a paper entitled “Final Report and Rec-
ommendations: Economic Issues at the London Summit.” The paper,
which was drafted by the Economic Policy Group, was prepared in re-
sponse to Presidential Review Memorandum 7 (see Document 3).
(Memorandum from Blumenthal to Brzezinski and Owen, April 9;
Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25,
PRM–07)
During an April 14 Policy Review Committee meeting on Europe,
Owen discussed the status of the preparations for the London G–7
