1266  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
24-­hour basis. Signal strengths as low as 30 millivolts/meter are detect­
able under favorable conditions.
The electromagnetic system suffers from a defect of recording mil­
lions of lightning flashes which look very similar to the pulse transmit­
ted from a nuclear explosion. Therefore, the individual station cannot, 
on its own, determine whether the recordings have significance with 
respect to a suspected nuclear explosion. For that reason the film is 
transmitted to the analysis center at AFOAT–1 where correlation stud­
ies are made to determine the existence of multi-­station time and azi­
muth coincidences. The usual procedure is to search that part of the 
electromagnetic film covering a time period considered to have been 
significant from reports of the other geophysical systems or from the 
date and time established by measurements on fresh debris from the 
nuclear system.
Signal significance is determined by three methods: coincidence in 
times of arrival, consistency of intersections of azimuth, and compati­
bility of recorded signal strength at widely separated stations, assum­
ing a single source and applying known attenuation factors. These 
methods, however, are applicable only after some method of sorting 
has been accomplished. At present, this sorting depends upon estab­
lishing a time of the explosion by acoustic, seismic or nuclear means.
The electromagnetic system has produced time and azimuth, multi-­
station coincidences for all of the large Soviet tests as well as several 
smaller tests, and, of course, it has been checked for accuracy on U.S. 
tests. The time obtained by electromagnetic data can be determined to 
50 milliseconds and estimated to 20 milliseconds. The azimuth can be 
determined to ± 3 degrees.
Recent experience, on one small Soviet test, indicates the possibil­
ity of detection of relatively small tests in the USSR which, if conducted 
on the surface, produce large electromagnetic signals. If this experi­
ence on one Soviet test can be duplicated on all small surface tests, an 
important detection capability for small tests may be realized. At pres­
ent, however, the electromagnetic component of the Long Range Detec­
tion System does not report independently the detection of a nuclear 
test in the USSR. It is capable only of response to query.
An important contribution of the electromagnetic time, however, 
is that when combined with seismic time it is used to determine the 
height of burst of a nuclear test. The electromagnetic time, of course, 
corresponds to the exact detonation time of the device and the seismic 
time gives a reasonably accurate time at which the shock wave from 
the device strikes the earth. Since there is available a “time-­distance 
curve” on the shock wave transmission through the air from the burst 
to the ground, it is possible to utilize this curve to determine the height 
of burst.
