402
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Dr. Brzezinski agreed that this should be the number one item7 on
the agenda of the SCC tomorrow, once we have the benefit of Mr.
Christopher’s report. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski added that the French are uncharacteristically apolo-
getic about their position, while the British seem prepared to be cooper-
ative on the Soviet issue. Secretary Brown wondered if we could ask
their cooperation on Indian Ocean security measures. Secretary Vance
noted that we have had some indications of interest, but that the British
would not wish to make any decisions on this until Lord Carrington
returns from his visit to the Gulf. (S)
Secretary Vance felt that nothing which was currently under way
on the negotiating front should prohibit us from pressing ahead with
economic sanctions. He noted that a recent message from Bruce Laingen
via one of the ambassadors in Tehran argued the same way.8 It was
the judgment of the group that there was merit in keeping up the
pressure on the economic side. However, Secretary Miller noted that
the Iranian Central Bank has now gotten its house in order and is being
punctilious in its interest payments, so the prospects of loan default
provisions have, in fact, been overcome. The Iranians need no new
credits because of their substantial oil revenues, so our pressure on
credits is also having little or no effect. We must be realistic in under-
standing that our own embargo efforts will have very little practical
effect unless we get the cooperation of at least the major industrialized
states. Secretary Vance said that we had understood from the outset
that the psychological impact of sanctions would be more important
than the economic impact. Secretary Miller observed that the psycho-
logical impact is likely to be reversed if and when the story gets out
that Iran is proceeding on a business-as-usual basis. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski reported the President’s comment on the notes of
yesterday’s meeting that we should be aggressive and that the Europe-
ans need U.S. pressure.9 Secretary Miller noted that he will be meeting
with five of the European finance ministers in the near future, but it
7 Carter underlined the phrase “number one item” and wrote in the left margin:
“I agree.”
8 A January 15 message from the British Embassy in Washington transmitted the
text of telegram 3 from Tehran, January 14, for passage to the Iran Task Force at the
Operations Center. Telegram 3 is the text of a message given by Laingen to Lang “for
transmission to Iran Working Party.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom,
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Swiss
Channel) In a memorandum to Vance, Brzezinski wrote that after reading this telegram,
Carter agreed “on the importance, psychologically as well as tactically, of moving
promptly with unilateral sanctions with the broadest possible allied support.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 1/11/
80–1/31/80)
9 See footnote 3, Document 148.
