Costa Rica 455 (Date not mentioned). He stated that Panama, in a similar position, had not had to pay the penalty. Mr. Mann was informed that an investigation had already been started and that a report would be forthcoming in a couple of days. Minister Borbon expressed his pleasure at having had a frank discussion of Costa Rican economic problems with Mr. Mann. Mr. Mann in turn requested that he be informed of any obstacles which might arise in the consideration of the loan applications by the DLF and EXIM Bank and reiterated his intention to reply promptly to President Echandi, giving a report on the status of the Rural Credit and Water Works Project loan applications. CR–27. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Mann) to the President of Costa Rica (Echandi)1 Washington, November 10, 1960. Dear Mr. President: I have delayed telling you what a pleasure it was to hear from you in the hope that I would be able to give you some definitive answers to the two questions to which your letter of October 1 refers.2 Both your Minister of Economy and Finance, Mr. Jorge Borbon Castro, and your Ambassador, Mr. Manuel Escalante, made very effective presentations concerning both of these projects to the respective banking institutions. Your personal letter has of course been especially helpful. I do not need to tell you of our interest in your plan to open up new farms. I have talked again today with the Development Loan Fund about this project. The Fund is awaiting some information which it expects to receive next week from Costa Rica. I have been assured that the Fund’s staff is considering this project on an urgent basis and with sympathy. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 718.5-MSP/10–160. This letter was sent by pouch to the Embassy at San José, November 12, 1960. No record of its delivery to Echandi was found in Department of State files. 2 In his letter, President Echandi asked that the United States finance a plan for creation of new farms and that it agree to do so in time for him to announce the plan when he cast his veto of expected legislation on land distribution. (718.5–MSP/10–160)
