Summary of Print Volume III  XXXIII
now, our failure to do so will in effect be a step to ‘go it alone’ as a mil­
itaristic nation in world opinion without friends and allies.” (148, 150, 
166) Both he and President Eisenhower agreed that although nuclear 
weapons and not tests were the real danger to world security, public 
opinion demanded a cessation of testing. (155)
In August 1958 the National Security Council finally formulated 
a comprehensive proposal on test suspension to present to the Soviets. 
The initiative consisted of a 3-­year agreement to suspend testing. To 
take into account the Defense Department’s and Atomic Energy Com­
mission’s reservations, this new proposal stipulated that the test sus­
pension not continue beyond 3 years if satisfactory progress was not 
made on a viable inspection system. (165)
Meanwhile, a National Security Council ad hoc working group 
under Dr. Hans Bethe began to study the technical feasibility of moni­
toring a test ban. The recommendation of the group, supporting a sus­
pension, concluded that inspection stations with the immediate mobile 
access of inspection teams would provide adequate safeguarding for 
an agreement limiting nuclear testing. (147) In July and August 1958, a 
meeting in Geneva of experts from Canada, the United Kingdom, the 
United States, Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Romania 
made some progress in discussing the several technical details involved 
in inspection systems. (164, 176)
The first challenge the United States faced at this technical con­
ference was gaining British support for the U.S. position. The United 
Kingdom did not want even to consider suspending testing until it 
had developed its own sufficient nuclear capabilities. (150, 155) To get 
around British fears of vulnerability in the face of disarmament pres­
sures, the 1954 Atomic Energy Act was amended on June 2, 1958, to 
allow for increased exchange of atomic weapon information to U.S. 
nuclear allies, particularly the United Kingdom. (166, 175, 176)
Safeguards against surprise attack were another issue relating to 
disarmament that the United States tried to address during 1958. A 
study prepared by an inter-­agency working group concluded in Sep­
tember 1958 that an effective safeguard to prevent surprise attacks 
would require an inspection system to monitor any agreed upon lim­
itation of bomber readiness. (180) The United States also agreed to a 
meeting in Geneva of technical experts to study the practical problems 
and feasibility of inspecting against surprise attacks. Although this 
conference made significant progress on technical issues, the Soviet 
Union resisted inspection of its military sites. (185, 188, 189) Dr. George 
Kistiakowsky, the President’s Science Adviser, wrote President Eisen­
hower that inspection was not sufficient—­there was no way to mon­
itor missile-­launching submarines, for example. A better solution to 
the problem of surprise attack, he argued, was the actual disarmament
