202
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
fully at all aspects of a country’s situation in a realistic and balanced way,
and tailors the program to the country’s particular circumstances. The
IMF’s record is a good one. It has helped a large number of countries to
correct their economic problems, and it presses for measures that are
consistent with our objectives of an open and liberal trade and pay-
ments system. The IMF’s contribution to the world economy is widely recog-
nized—including in the Congress, which is much more supportive of the IMF
than of the other institutions.
While the U.S. has an important voice in IMF matters, we cannot
and should not try to control IMF operations. Any U.S. influence on partic-
ular country financing proposals must be used selectively and through
quiet, informal discussions. Any changes we could make in a particular
program would be marginal. We should not be disturbed by positions
taken by the IMF at the outset of a negotiation, since there is a process
of bargaining and compromise on both sides. If we overstep in trying to
exercise influence, we will weaken and undermine the fundamental principles
and useful work of this valuable institution.
W. Michael Blumenthal3
3 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
57.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury for
Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of the Treasury
Blumenthal1
Washington, September 23, 1977
SUBJECT
German Desire to Conform Views on National Economic Programs
German Finance Minister Apel has sent a message to you, Healey,
Boulin, and Boh outlining the new German stimulus package,2 and ex-
1 Source: Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection, 1977–1980, Chronological
File, Box 2, 9/21/77–9/30/77. Confidential. Drafted by Mackour and reviewed by
Widman and Hessler.
2 On September 14, the West German Government approved a multi-billion dollar
economic stimulus package. (Paul Lewis, “West Germany Is Planning Modest Boost for
Economy,” The New York Times, September 15, 1977, p. 95)
