728  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
related to our allies’ support for the NATO emphasis of our general 
purpose forces—­war reserve stocks and items we would buy in the 
two-­way street program.
To help you through this thicket, these are the programs I consider 
it essential to include and the reasons therefor:
(1) Basic nuclear modernization—MX, LRTNF, strategic cruise 
missiles, TRIDENT.
(2) Adequate naval power. In particular, we should go forward 
with two AEGIS ships to guard against the greatest threat to our navy—­
the Backfire bomber. To drop one AEGIS and substitute three additional 
FFG’s (whose main mission is ASW where we are in good shape) makes 
no military sense, and carries the “perceptions” argument too far.
(3) Continued procurement of major military items—­particularly 
fighters—­close to the FY 80 projected level. You should be aware that 
apart from a few modest increases, Harold’s “Basic” FY 81 program 
will generally slow the rate of procurement below what we asked for 
in the FY 80 budget.
(4) War reserve stocks. There must be an adequate program to 
reduce what is the major vulnerability and weakness in our NATO pos-
ture recently underscored by NIFTY NUGGET. Real capability to fight 
requires a better balance between our weapons systems and the ord-
nance and spare parts they consume.
(5) AV8B (U.K. HARRIER) and ROLAND (French air defense sys-
tem). Substantial procurement is essential for survival of the NATO 
two-­way street, one of your key contributions to a more rational allied 
defense effort.
(6) Rapid Deployment Force programs. In particular, we need to 
go forward with pre-­positioned Marine Corps stocks on ships, more 
KC–10 tankers and begin R&D on new CX long-­range, large-­size cargo 
aircraft.
(7) Procurement of the EF–111 to cope with the extremely inten-
sive Soviet air defenses in East Germany which protect their blitzkreig 
capability.
The Alternatives
I have directed my staff to look hard at alternatives.
—We could cut back military construction, but most of it is directly 
related to needed force modernization.
—We could hold down readiness; however, this has been one of 
your highest priorities.
—We could postpone new starts in ships, guns and aircraft and 
reduce production rates in ongoing programs. But is is essential to 
acquire adequately capable systems. Whether in NATO, at sea or in
