Costa Rica 453 CR–26. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Costa Rican Affairs (Feldman).1 Washington, October 7, 1960. SUBJECT Meeting of Costa Rican Minister of Finance and Economy with Mr. Mann, Assistant Secretary to Discuss Various Loan Applications Made With the DLF and EXIM Bank. PARTICIPANTS: Minister Jorge BORBON Castro, Minister of Finance and Economy The Honorable Manuel ESCALANTE Duran, Ambassador of Costa Rica ARA – Mr. Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary OAP – Mr. Charles E. Higdon, Acting Director OAP – Mr. Carwell OAP/C – Mr. Arthur W. Feldman, OIC, Costa Rican Affairs Minister Borbon opened the meeting by stating that he was in Washington to discuss the Rural Credit Loan Application with DLF and the Water Works Project and a loan application for the export of U.S. cattle to Costa Rica with EXIM Bank. He was pleased with the sympathetic receptivity shown by the agencies in discussing the loan applications. He referred to the letter President Echandi had sent, via his person to Mr. Mann2 and to the serious situation faced by President Echandi in obtaining suitable legislation on agrarian reform from the Legislative Assembly, which is now considering the matter. Several radical amendments have been tacked on to the bill which would counter the policy of the Echandi administration by getting the Government directly involved in the distribution and exploitation of land. The Administration would prefer that the supervision and distribution of rural credit be handled through existing agencies, which have made an outstanding record in this operation over the past 10 years. Minister Borbon stressed the importance of his returning to Costa Rica with some written assurance of general agreement on the Rural Credit Loan Application which President Echandi could then use in obtaining the legislation he desires. Mr. Mann replied that he was in full sympathy with President Echandi’s position and would see what could be done to obtain such written assurance. Mr. Mann also indicated how pleased
