194
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Option 3 was not recommended at this time, since it would tend
to signal a retreat and could remove pressure on Iran.5 (C)
2. The Shah. Secretary Vance briefed on the contacts presently under
way with two countries to provide refuge for the Shah. It will be several
more days before the Shah is physically up to a long trip, and Mr.
Cutler felt that there was no better than a 50–50 chance that we would
be able to find him a residence abroad within the next week or two.
All agreed that we should avoid getting ourselves into a public posture
of forcing the Shah to leave or an undignified scramble to find him a
place to live. Nevertheless, the SCC believed that on balance the Shah’s
departure would be more helpful than harmful to our chances of getting
the hostages released.6 (S)
Political-Military Issues:
1. Kennedy Speech. All agreed that Kennedy’s comments attacking
the Shah were factually exaggerated and very unhelpful.7 The President
and the White House should not respond, but there were others who
could make that point effectively. (C)
2. Referendum. The rather poor vote turnout thus far suggests grow-
ing opposition to Khomeini, particularly in the minority areas. We will
have a better reading tomorrow.8 (C)
3. AWACS. Material is being moved into Cairo West and transferred
to the isolated base in eastern Egypt. Secretary Vance continues to
oppose deployment of the AWACS to Egypt.9
4. Libya. The SCC agreed that we should suspend relations with
Libya. The American diplomatic staff would be reduced from 12 to 5,
no consular duties would be performed, and our diplomats would work
out of an Interests Section in another country’s embassy. Depending
5 Carter underlined “not recommended” and approved the item with a checkmark.
6 After this paragraph, Carter wrote in the right margin: “Check specifically: Ambas-
sador→Head of State, with a broader range of countries. This should already have
been done!”
7 In a December 2 television interview with KRON-TV in San Francisco, Kennedy
stated that the Shah “ran one of the most violent regimes in the history of mankind”
and that he had stolen billions of dollars from Iran. (Television News Archives, December
3, 1979; Time Magazine, December 17, 1979) Kennedy also called for the Shah to leave
the United States.
8 In the left margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “This was not adequately
mentioned in U.S. press. Again, Jody, State, etc. continue to do so.”
9 In the left margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Expedite.”
