Chile 263 pushed through a resolution saying that the release of any part of any Governmental inventories of copper at this time would cause “incalculable damage” to the security and well-­being of the country. The OCDM, and particularly Mr. Price, have been under sharp criticism in the trade press and in the Senate. The Senators have asked for public assurances that the D.P.A. copper would not be sold. The Labor Department probably has reason to oppose the action at this time, because the copper mining companies are in the early stages of wage negotiations which may lead to extensive strikes. A disposal of Government holdings of copper at any time prior to the final settlement of the wage negotiations and the conclusion of a new wage agreement would probably be regarded by labor as a strike-­breaking measure. On the other hand if there should be strikes and if the OCDM should wait until after a new wage agreement had been concluded it might well be possible to dispose of the D.P.A. inventories of copper at favorable prices and without incurring serious objections. Copper is the mainstay of the Chilean economy, accounting normally for 60 to 70 percent of the country’s hard currency earnings. Any move on the part of the United States Government which had the effect of pushing copper prices down seriously would be considered an unfriendly action by the Chilean Government and people. Chilean sensitivity in this regard was dramatically demonstrated last year when President Ibanez cancelled his impending state visit to the United States immediately after it was announced that our Administration favored action by the Congress to advance the date for lifting the suspension of the copper excise tax. Copper is of importance also, in lesser degrees, to Peru, Mexico, and Canada. These countries, especially Peru, have protested our imposition of import quotas on lead and zinc, and they would undoubtedly protest disposals of copper at this time. CH–22. Editorial Note May 20, 1959 On May 20, 1959, representatives of the United States and Chile signed in Washington an agreement providing for the Development Loan Fund to lend $300,000 to Chile to finance design engineering for a new international jet airport at Pudahuel. Documentation concerning the loan is in ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 31, “DLF.” For additional information, see Department of State Bulletin, June 1, 1959, p. 834.
