interested to know what reply the Chinese Government would make to the Japanese note of last October. The Ambassador stated that the Japanese Government had received no reply as yet and that it felt that no reply would be forthcoming unless the powers, and particularly the United States, could get together and agree on the proposition beforehand as the Japanese Government felt that the Chinese Government would accept any arrangement of this matter which the powers might agree upon. He pointed out that the Japanese proposal for a consortium represented a tremendous advance in the ideas of the powers hitherto interested in Chinese radio, and it meant that they definitely abandoned any idea of monopolistic or exclusive control over radio stations in China. He stressed the point that the Japanese proposal was that the stations were to be turned over to the control of the Chinese. I reminded him that I understood that the proposal would require that the stations be controlled during the existence of the consortium by engineers of the several countries involved. He stated that this was doubtless true. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I stated to the Ambassador that the Department was still interested, of course, in knowing whether this proposal of the Chinese Government was workable. I reminded him that the Japanese proposal was, in a sense, based on the old proposal for a financial consortium and I pointed out to him that the financial consortium had never been recognized by the Chinese Government, even though the consortium had expressed a willingness to take a Chinese group into membership. I asked the Ambassador whether the Mitsui station near Peking was in operation and he replied that it was not. I asked him why the Mitsui station was not in operation, stating that I had assumed that it was completed and had become operative. He stated that he did not know why it was not in operation but that he and his Government believed (doubtless someone in Peking had made such a statement to the Japanese) that the Chinese were refusing to take delivery of the station or issue a permit for its operation in face of American opposition to the station. I told him that this surprised me very much because I was certain that there was no opposition on the part of the United States to the operation of a station by Mitsui and Company or
