1000 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 304. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology (Benson) to the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)1 Washington, December 1, 1977 Dear Peter: Since your November 9 draft of the Presidential decision document on international health2 grows out of the draft Report on which we have already commented, the remarks in my letter of November 143 apply equally to the proposed decision memorandum. The State Department believes that the memo to the President needs substantial revision. The memorandum will be most helpful to all of us if it asks for the charge to explore and appraise the possibilities instead of asking for a mandate to establish programs and institutions. Those of us in State concerned with health will have to negotiate carefully with our internal management offices, with AID, HEW, EPA, and other programmatic bureaus, and with the OMB. This will be true for any of the major decisions. Further, these plans cannot be made outside of the much larger contexts of the long-term planning for AID, our State Department review of the technical attache´s’ program, and so on. State Department role (initiative 2, page 6). The Department, as I have assured you, is firmly committed to sharpening its attention to health and related issues. Our intention is to establish a clear focal point for health in the Department, to become staffed and able to identify and seize upon opportunities as they arise, to represent the internationalist cause to the domestic agencies, and to “broker” interests in this area effectively. For the State Department to become able to do these things would constitute a major improvement. But the leadership must be shared with HEW and the other departments and agencies. Initiatives are not likely to enjoy long-term success unless the agencies that carry the required resources and technical competence are deeply involved in their development. The State Department is evolving to take on a larger role in space policy, energy policy, environment policy, oceans and Antarctica policy, technicaldevelopment policy, and communications policy—as well as health policy. Considerations of both interdepartmental relations and internal 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 1, Envelope 5: “Eyes Only—Tony Lake From Henry Blaney 11/29/77.” No classification marking. All brackets in the original. 2 See footnote 2, Document 301. 3 See footnote 7, Document 302.
