Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 249. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee (Implementation) Meeting1 Washington, April 10, 1980 The meeting opened with a brief discussion of the situation between Iraq and Iran. There continue to be intermittent skirmishes but there is no sign that either side is engaged in a large-scale buildup or has made any commitment to extend the hostilities substantially. (S) The State Department reported that our allies’ reaction to your imposition of sanctions has been cautious so far. The Europeans have come to realize, however, that what we are doing not only affects our relations with Iran or potentially their relations with Iran, but also will be an important factor in relations between the United States and Europe. The EC–9 Foreign Ministers have devoted their current discussion to the Iranian question and we understand that they will be withdrawing their Ambassador from Tehran for consultations. (S) Treasury pointed out that it will be attending a large number of basically economic meetings with countries from all over the world in the next several weeks. They volunteered to take up the question of Iran and the Olympics as subsidiary themes in these meetings. Henry Owen added that he would be glad to do the same. State and Lloyd Cutler will provide talking points. (S) The bulk of the discussion focused on a memo by Ben Civiletti posing issues arising out of your commitment to introduce legislation for claims against the Iranian Government.2 There was general agreement on a variety of issues including timing of actions to be taken, alternate means of settling claims, and the desirability of maintaining maximum executive branch flexibility. There was however significant disagreement among the agencies on whether you should seek authority to vest Iranian resources as part of the claims legislation. (Treasury underlined the impact this could have on the dollar abroad; Civiletti and Cutler saw a claims process without vesting authority as being empty.) In addition there are a number of factors that have to be considered in providing relief for the hostages. (S) There seemed to be general agreement that legislation should be introduced to remove impediments to legal action against Iran resulting from jurisdictional limitation and the provisions of the Sovereign Immunities Act. There was much less agreement, however, on the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
