1956  1077
of September 10, 1955 the Embassy of India can act only in cases of 
Chinese who request it to do so and only if the Chinese Communists so 
desire. You further state that since you have no authorization from the 
Chinese Communists to visit the Chinese prisoners in this country you 
are unable to do so.
While the United States was of the view that the announcement did 
not apply to Chinese criminals in U.S. prisons, nevertheless in order not 
to furnish any basis for the further refusal of the Chinese ­Communists to 
permit Americans in China to return to the United States, it determined 
to make the necessary arrangement to permit such Chinese prisoners to 
return if they so desired.
The United States decision was made in the light of the insistent 
representations of Chinese Communist Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan 
at Geneva, that the Agreed Announcement was applicable to Chinese 
prisoners and strongly criticizing the U.S. for not permitting them 
expeditiously to leave the U.S.
The decision of this Government was also taken in the light of 
inquiries from your Embassy as to whether Chinese prisoners had been 
informed of the Agreed Announcement, and in the light of informal 
requests from your Embassy for a list of Chinese prisoners.
Following a survey by the U.S. Government to identify all pris­
oners of Chinese nationality in U.S. Federal or State prisons and after 
advising your Embassy on May 31 of our plans, this Department on 
June 13 sent a letter to all the Chinese prisoners informing them that 
they would be visited for the purpose of ascertaining whether they 
elected to return to China. A copy of this letter was sent you on June 18. 
The prisoners now expect a visit pursuant to this statement.
We have assured the prisoners that we will give them free choice 
between the courses which have been presented to them. In order for this 
choice to be universally accepted as a free one, we believe it is important 
that the representatives stipulated in the Agreed Announcement, namely 
the Indian Government representative, visit the prisoners. This action 
would be in compliance with Section 2A of the Agreed Announcement.
It is earnestly hoped that you will seek on a priority basis a recon­
sideration of the decision of your Government.
I appreciate all that you have done to assist us with this difficult 
question. UNQUOTE
Dulles
