Human Rights
537
168.
Memorandum From the Global Issues Cluster of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Priorities
HUMAN RIGHTS
Priorities
—Raise global awareness of human rights so that the issue is a reg-
ular concern of all governments and an expected component of rela-
tions both with other countries and with the international community.
Met.
—Organize U.S. foreign policy making so that human rights con-
cerns are taken into account in all relevant decisions including foreign
assistance, political actions and economic benefits. Partially Met—ex-
cessive delays and inconsistent decisions persist, mostly from uncer-
tain direction at the top.
—Begin the lengthy process of strengthening the international in-
stitutions (including the UN and its Commissions, the IFIs, and the re-
gional human rights organizations) so that ultimately they can become
the primary focus of international human rights activity. Partially
Met—UN and OAS Commissions are vastly improved, some progress
in gaining support in IFIs, long way still to go.
Our greatest weaknesses have been in the multilateral forums, par-
ticularly in coordinating those activities with bilateral policies, and
making our level of representation in these forums commensurate with
their growing importance. Increasingly in the months ahead we can ex-
pect to be attacked for hypocrisy in pursuing an aggressive human
rights policy while we have still not ratified any of the many major in-
ternational HR treaties. The Soviets will lead the way on this, followed
eagerly by others whose pride has been hurt by our policies.
Consequently, as outlined in an earlier strategy memorandum,2
we see two key initiatives for the next year: ratification of the Genocide
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 59, Administration’s Policy: NSC: 1978. Secret. No
drafting information appears on the memorandum.
2 Presumable reference to Tuchman Mathews’ October 2 memorandum to Brzez-
inski, printed as Document 167.
