1979  669
—Adding allies’ defense efforts to both sides changes the com-
parison, but much less in the investment area than when total defense 
efforts are compared. In either case we think there is more unproduc-
tive duplication among NATO than among Warsaw Pact programs, 
which are centrally directed.
—US technological leads are being eroded by massive, broad-­based 
continuing Soviet R&D programs, increasingly in high-­risk, high-­cost, 
potentially high-­payoff areas. However, as I have indicated earlier, we 
ourselves have two or three efforts underway that I consider of major 
potential effect.
—The fundamentally stronger underlying US economy is offset 
somewhat by Soviet design and manufacturing processes which facil-
itate military surge production. Further, the relevance of industrial 
mobilization is questionable in many cases.
Trying to assess the balance from the Soviet perspective suggests 
they probably measure their efforts against those of the US, the NATO 
Allies, and at least Japan and China. Therefore they may:
—Believe they face total defense efforts greater than their own.
—And see reasons to sustain or even increase the rate of growth in 
their defense efforts in the recent reversal of the downward trend in the 
US defense efforts, the NATO commitment to real defense growth and 
the US–PRC rapprochement.
The assessment also notes our uncertainty about how Soviet 
defense efforts will be constrained by demographic, energy and eco-
nomic problems. This is a possible future bright spot for the US and is 
a critical area for further study.
However, Soviet gains in the military balance are likely to be even 
greater in the future because:
—Soviet investment flows have continued to grow while ours, in 
general, are lower than in the 50’s and 60’s.
—The fruits of the Soviet differential in military investments have 
yet to be realized due to the long lead times between large investments 
in R&D and visible, deployed weapons.
Finally, the assessment addresses the consequences if current 
trends persist. The following three scenarios outline some possibilities:
—Continuation of current US and Soviet military trends into the 
mid-­eighties, followed by slackening in the Soviet military buildup 
because of economic, demographic and other problems.
—Continuation of current trends throughout the 80’s to a situa-
tion of clear US military inferiority with respect to the Soviets. This is 
unlikely to be a stable situation, however.
—A major confrontation a few years hence triggered by the Soviets 
aggressively pushing their advantage somewhere. Depending on the 
nature and severity of the crisis and the political reaction in the US to 
the crisis or to consequent US losses, a major increase in US defense 
expenditures and a more competitive US-Soviet relationship may
