Nicaragua  857
stirred up in the area. He remarked on Castro’s declaration that Cuba 
would assume a neutral position in the cold war between the U.S. and 
Russia. He said this was contrary to the Rio Pact. He then said he had 
been asking himself what was the reason for the downfall of Batista. He 
observed that a small group headed by Castro had landed in Cuba and 
had been able to build up their forces to a point where they had become 
powerful enough to cause the fall of Batista. Mr. Rubottom said that he 
would give him his opinion as to how this had occurred. He said that 
the Batista Government had been in reality a house of cards; that venal-
ity had existed from the top officials to the lowest; that the army had 
no motivation which would inspire a will to fight, it was ill-­trained and 
poorly led and had no deep-­seated loyalty to the Government; and that 
the Government did not truly represent the will of the majority of the 
people. The General remarked that Batista had no real political party 
structure and that he had not been the head of a political party such as 
President Somoza is. He observed that the Government of Nicaragua 
did not parallel that of former President Batista. He remarked that he 
thought Betancourt had changed for the better since 1948.
Internal Affairs
The General then turned to Nicaraguan affairs. He said there were 
3,500 members of the Guardia Nacional, who were well trained and 
loyal to the GON. He said they had been training in guerilla warfare 
tactics and were well prepared to handle any invasion attempt made 
against the country. He observed there was no place for an invasion 
force to go, once it had landed, except back to sea again. He did not 
appear to be worried about any such attempt taking place in the near 
future, and indicated his Government was well prepared to take care of 
itself. He said the majority of people were with the Government.
The General then said presidential elections would take place as 
scheduled in 1963. He remarked that the members of the ­opposition 
party (Conservatives) did not turn out to vote in the last ­elections, 
because they knew they would not win. He stressed that his 
Government was interested in the welfare of the Nicaraguan people, 
and said he had learned from his civic courses, while studying in the 
U.S., that a ­successful Government must cooperate with its people 
and be constructively interested in their welfare. He pointed out that 
in Nicaragua there was freedom of the press, freedom of expression, 
and freedom of assembly. He remarked that the reporters of opposition 
newspapers were not permitted by the owners to report the news in 
an ­unbiased manner. He said owners of the opposition papers did not 
want to give the Government credit for any good acts. He added that 
on the other hand the pro-­government newspapers swing too far over 
in the other direction. He said there was really no newspaper reporting 
in an unbiased manner.
