1062  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
our relationship and his stake in the U.S.-Soviet relationship to encour-
age him to overcome the resistance of his hardliners.
— Arnie Kanter’s “Ungroup” has drafted a letter that I could send 
to Gorbachev outlining those areas in which we may have some flexi-
bility and those where we have very little.
— Brent, will you lay out the approach for us?
220.	 Paper Prepared in the National Security Council1
Washington, undated
POINTS TO BE MADE FOR NSC MEETING ON START
— As the President indicated, we want to follow the same basic 
strategy used for CFE. A letter from the President to Gorbachev to 
engage him directly and encourage him to break down internal Soviet 
roadblocks.
— The letter will lay out the issues and our proposal for dealing 
with each of them. We will invite Gorbachev to send a high-level team to 
Geneva for intensive negotiations with a group led by Reg Bartholomew 
and offer an additional meeting between Jim Baker and Foreign Minister 
Bessmertnykh, if necessary, to break any remaining logjams.
— I want to turn now to each of the issues we need to address in 
the letter.
REAFFIRM HOUSTON DEAL
— We begin by telling Gorbachev that we are proceeding on the 
basis of the agreements reached by Jim with Shevardnadze at the 
Houston ministerial, making clear that this is the only basis on which 
we can quickly reach final agreement on START.
— In Houston, agreements were reached on:
– monitoring of mobile missile production, i.e., the “PPCM” 
provisions,
– accountability and inspection of heavy bombers,
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, H-Files, NSC Meetings Files, NSC0058—June 06, 1991—Strategic Arms 
Reduction Talks. Secret. Gordon, Davis, and Kuehne sent the paper to Scowcroft through 
Kanter under a July 5 covering memorandum: “At Tab I is a meeting memorandum to 
the President for the June 6 NSC meeting on START. At Tab II are talking points for your 
use at the meeting to lead the participants through the issues in the proposed letter to 
Gorbachev.”
