544 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 193. Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 CS DB–3966 Washington, April 17, 1953. SUBJECT 1. Attitude of Shah toward General Zahedi’s Plans for Ousting Mossadeq 2. Attitude of Shah and Opposition Leaders toward Present Crisis SOURCE [4 lines not declassified] 1. As of 10 April the Shah’s attitude toward General Fazullah Zahedi’s plans for ousting Mossadeq was reported to be as follows: a. The Shah is sympathetic to Zahedi’s candidacy but he prefers a “parliamentary” solution to the present crisis rather than forceful action to remove Mossadeq. b. The Shah does not want to appoint Zahedi by firman at this time and thus incur personal responsibility for the overthrow of Mossadeq. The reason for this attitude of the Shah is his lingering fear of the British who he believes do not want to see Mossadeq out of power just now. The Shah is convinced that the British have two policies in Iran: (1) An official policy which follows to a certain extent the American line; (2) A secret policy, the real one, which currently calls for the support of Mossadeq. The Shah is influenced in this latter supposition by the fact that certain personalities, such as Deputies Abdullah Moazami, Jayad Ganjei, and Haji Agha Reza Rafi who in the past have been considered as spokesmen for British interests, are now approaching him and urging that he accept the recommendations contained in the report of the Majlis “Committee of Eight” which, if accepted, would drastically curtail the powers of the Shah.2, 3 c. The Shah fears that a Zahedi “experiment” might bring about a repetition of the Qavam fiasco. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 80S01540R, Box 10, Folder 100, CSDB Intell Reports TS–88046 3966. Top Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Officials Only. 2 Source Comment: Mossadeq is fully cognizant of the Shah’s character and superstitiousness and he intentionally selects such men as Moazami to advise and influence the Shah. [Footnote is in the original.] 3 Washington Comment: According to an Iranian Home Service dispatch, dated 12 March, this Committee, which was constituted on 5 March 1953 to define and clarify the relationship between the Shah’s powers and the Government, is composed of the following: Hoseyn Makki, Javad Ganjei, Haerizadeh, Braham Majzadeh, Abdullah Moazami, Mozzafar Baghai, Reza Rafi, Kavim Sanjabi. [Footnote is in the original.]
