574.D7/106: Telegram [Document 198] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) WASHINGTON, September 19, 1925—1 p.m. 80. Department’s instruction No. 281, August 25.21 Department has ascertained that Telegraph Bureau issued call for proposals prior to Radiotelegraph Conference at London in 1912.22 Department has decided to follow similar procedure in obtaining proposals of various governments for study at Radiotelegraph Conference. Inform Radiotelegraph Section of International Bureau through appropriate channels that this Government desires to have it proceed in accordance with provisions of Article 13 of Radiotelegraph Convention to obtain the additions or modifications to International Radiotelegraph Convention and Regulations that the Governments desire to have considered at forthcoming conference to be held at Washington in spring of 1926. Add that as provisions of Radiotelegraph Convention signed at London deal with communication between ships and between ship and shore and do not cover many uses of radio which have been developed since 1912, United States desires to have Bureau invite governments to submit propositions on the following subjects: [Here follows list of subjects contained in section 2 of the fifth paragraph of the Department’s telegram No. 263, August 18, 4 p.m., to the Ambassador in Great Britain, printed supra.] State that British Government has expressed a desire that revision of international code of signals be included in subjects to be considered by a special subcommittee during conference and that draft international code will be forwarded soon. Add that United States believes it would be advantageous to consider this subject during Radiotelegraph Conference and hopes that those governments interested in the code may send representatives qualified to discuss it. Suggest to Bureau that call for propositions be issued by October 1st and provide that propositions must be submitted not later than February 1st. KELLOGG 21 Not printed. 22 In this connection, see International Radiotelegraph Convention of Berlin, 1906, and Propositions for the International Radiotelegraph Conference of London (Washington,
