1192  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
“passive”) to protect our nuclear retaliatory power. Next appears the 
Majority view in Par. 7 (left hand column) which begins with a specific 
reference to the increasing ICBM threat and the present limitations on 
our active defenses. In Par. 7–a, while recognizing the need for “active” 
defenses, a particular effort to exploit “passive” measures is called for—
and in 7–­b, the Majority view extends this principle to a requirement 
for increased attention to “passive” defense of the U.S. population. The 
Minority view of Budget and JCS (right hand column) called for a con­
tinued balance of “active” and “passive” measures, consistent with the 
changing nature of the Soviet threat and other factors—with a specific 
requirement in Par. 7–­A for predominant emphasis on “active” defenses, 
and particular emphasis on both “active” and “passive” measures to 
protect our nuclear retaliatory power (but at this point the JCS part 
company with Budget, and the JCS would call for increased attention 
to “passive” defense of the civilian population). Perhaps the Council 
would now want to discuss this question, beginning with comment 
from the Majority and Minority proponents, before discussing a later 
split on Civil Defense aspects. (CALL ON: Defense—and then Budget 
and JCS).
Par. 20, p. 15: In this paragraph on Civil Defense, there is in some 
respects a continuation of the preceding split on Relative Emphasis. 
There has been circulated to the NSC a related paper on “Measures for 
the Passive Defense of the Population with Particular Regard to Fallout 
Shelters.” The pertinence of the OCDM paper will be apparent from an 
oral summary of it which the OCDM Director is now prepared to give 
to the Council. (CALL ON: OCDM).
(After the OCDM Presentation): The OCDM presentation on Fallout 
Shelters appears to sharpen the policy issues involved in the alternative 
views which are set forth in Pars. 20 and 21 of the Continental Defense 
paper.
Alternative I, the Majority view (p. 15–16) would identify an effec­
tive civil defense as providing a deterrent to enemy attack, and a com­
prehensive system of fallout shelters is described as a key element of 
civil defense (JCS objected to the second sentence of Par. 20 in which 
the questionable prospect for an active defense (against ICBM’s in the 
1960’s is stated as a reason for the urgent development of an effective 
civil defense). CALL ON: Defense and JCS.
Alternative II, the Treasury view, is stated, on p. 16—and the dif­
ference of views appears to relate mainly to the brakes which would 
be put on Federal financing of a shelter program, admittedly desirable 
though it may be. (CALL ON: Secretary of the Treasury).
Alternative III, (Budget view) on p. 16–­A, is a restatement of present 
Continental Defense policy on Civil Defense (Par. 24 of NSC 5802/1) 
with a cross reference to existing policy on Fallout Shelter which was 
stated in NSC 5807/2 (at a time when greater weight was given to the 
prospects for an adequate active defense against ICBM’s). CALL ON: 
Budget Director.
Par. 23, p. 17: The split here is on the emphasis which should be 
placed on the dispersal of the population as a civil defense objective, in 
relation to the fallout shelter program. (CALL ON: Budget, for comment 
on the Minority view.)
Par. 25, p. 17: Raises the issue as to whether the future stockpiling of 
civil defense items should be confined to requirements for initial recov­
ery from attack, or extended to recovery after attack. Treasury-­Defense-­
Budget hold the Minority view that our policy should be limited to
