North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
845
functional fora by adopting prejudicial guidance and timetables for
them.
While the developing countries may favor elements of this option,
it would hamper mutually satisfactory negotiations in the functional
fora and could encourage a return to the more confrontational at-
mosphere of the past. It tends to “front load” political benefits by set-
ting ambitious deadlines and goals at the cost of later castigation for
inadequate fulfillment. Other industrialized countries support min-
imizing the actual negotiating role of the UN General Assembly and
other general fora.
RECOMMENDATION
That we seek to manage UN General Assembly discussions along
the lines of option 1.7
B. How active should we be in selecting which UN body will have
the North/South overview function.
1. To affirm publicly our support for the Venezuelan concept of a
special, restricted-membership committee attached to the UN General
Assembly in an effort to mobilize support for this concept.
If there is to be an overview mechanism, we consider this idea the
best of the various alternatives. But it is unclear whether sufficient de-
veloping country support can be generated for it. Furthermore, our
open support of the initiative would not necessarily help garner sup-
port for it.
2. Maintain our current low public profile on this issue and wait
and see if the developing countries can agree on the concept of an over-
view mechanism and the question of where it should be located.
This option would permit us to avoid committing ourselves until
the fate of the Venezuelan proposal in developing country circles is
clear. While there are relative advantages and disadvantages to the
Second Committee and ECOSOC alternatives, one is not sufficiently
preferable to prompt an active role for the US in support of it if the Ven-
ezuelan idea is not supported by developing countries. Should circum-
stances later warrant, we could then assume a more active position. On
the other hand, developing country failure to agree on an overview
mechanism would not necessarily be contrary to our interests.
RECOMMENDATION
That we maintain a low profile as in option 2.8
7 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
8 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
