822
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
309.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
[memorandum number not declassified]
Washington, August 8, 1980
THE STATE OF THE AFGHAN INSURGENCY ([classification
marking not declassified])
Our information on the status of the insurgency—[2 lines not declas-
sified]—is extensive but uneven in quality and far from complete. We
have difficulty getting enough good information on such basic ques-
tions as how the insurgents are organized, how many there are, how
they cooperate, and how many casualties there have been. The limits
on such information have made it difficult, for example, to arrive at
confident judgments about the insurgents’ ability to stand up over time
to increasing Soviet pressure. (See Annex A [1 line not declassified])
Insurgent Activity
Perhaps our best information comes indirectly through the Soviet
and Afghan reaction to insurgent activity. [1 line not declassified] we
can establish that the insurgency has spread to every Afghan province
since the Soviet invasion. Insurgents harass traffic on the main roads,
attacking military and civilian convoys and sometimes setting up their
own checkpoints. They attack isolated Soviet and Afghan army units,
occasionally slipping inside security patrols to hit garrisons. Although
they usually attempt to avoid clashes with large units, the insurgents
have inflicted heavy casualties on them in a few engagements. They
have organized strikes and demonstrations in cities, particularly Herat,
Qandahar, and Jalalabad, but also Kabul. They have killed numerous
Soviets and Afghan officials on the streets of Afghan cities. Sabotage
and arson—particularly the burning of schools—are common. In rural
areas, their threats and killings have disrupted civil administration and
prevented the implementation of government programs. In some areas,
except for a few isolated garrisons, the insurgents are in complete
control, dispensing justice and raising taxes.
The insurgent hold is strongest in some mountainous areas where
terrain inhibits Soviet military operations. These areas are generally
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 12, C–367, 09 Jul 80–27 Aug 80, Afghanistan.
Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed
are a covering memorandum from Carlucci to Brzezinski, August 8, indicating the
memorandum was prepared in response to a request from Brzezinski, and a memoran-
dum prepared in the CIA, July 25. A typed note on the first page reads in part: “The
author of this paper is [name not declassified] Southwest Asia Analytic Center, Near East
South Asia Division, Office of Political Analysis. It was coordinated with the Office of
Strategic Research and the Directorate of Operations.”
