Human Rights
421
15. One area of particular potential concern for the U.S. emerged at
this HRC: the American Indian issue. A representative of the Interna-
tional Indian Treaty Council spoke twice, as reported septel.5 Speaking
on the item of the right of self-determination the IITC effectively pre-
sented though exaggerated the argument of consistent USG denial of
this right to our Indian population. They again spoke late in the session
on the topic of alleged calculated judicial prejudice against Indians and
alleged brutal mistreatment of Indian prison inmates. While no resolu-
tions were presented, the statements at this session may well be laying
the groundwork for escalated action at future HRC sessions.
16. Many other delegations were favorably impressed by the
USRep’s reply to the first of the above statements that we welcomed the
Indians’ use of the HRC forum, and promised continued USG efforts to
respond to Indian complaints. However, it was our impression that
most other countries, quite apart from the Soviets-EE’s, believe the In-
dians’ complaints have some validity. Unless we show positive im-
provement in this area, we might find others raising this subject at a
later time.
17. Lastly, the Commission must also be considered from the
standpoint of its function as a forum to expound and exchange views,
as well as to function as a mechanism. From this standpoint the U.S.
also profited considerably. For example, Soviet discrimination against
its Christians and Jews was raised vigorously for the first time in recent
years in strong statements by U.S. Chief Delegate Mezvinsky and
Congressman John Buchanan. Several Christian and Jewish non-
governmental organization reps, as well as the Israeli observer del here,
expressed their deep appreciation. Additionally there were several ex-
changes between the U.S. and the USSR, Cuban and Argentine dels.
None responded and all seemed decisively outpointed when the U.S.
offered to accept HRC investigation of racial ethnic minority human
rights in America upon the expectation that the Soviets, Cubans and
Argentinians would also open their doors to the HRC to investigate the
complaints against them.
18. However, exchanges of rhetorical blows were rare. More
striking, particularly in the closed session debate, was the lead in de-
fense of respect for human rights taken by such developing countries as
Senegal, Nigeria, Colombia, Lesotho and Panama. These responded
strongly to reject Soviet-Cuban arguments that revolutionary situations
5 In telegram 1941 from Geneva, February 8, the U.S. delegation indicated that
Jimmy Durham, representing the International Indian Treaty Council, had delivered a
statement on February 8. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780060–0167) In telegram 2116 from Geneva, February 10, the delegation reported that
Mezvinsky had delivered a statement to the Commission in response to Durham’s earlier
statement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780067–0543)
