Venezuela 1263 explained that a total of some 12 or 13 landings (one a week southbound) is probably all that would be necessary since the strip at Maiquetia should be finished within the next three or four months, Betancourt was fully briefed on this matter and as we were leaving his office he read an order to the effect that the work on the runway at Maiquetia be undertaken and completed as quickly as possible. In reply to Ambassador Sparks’ question concerning the recently expressed position of the AD youth concerning Figueres, Mufioz- Marin, Romauldi, and so on, the President said this small wing of the party is completely a dissident one, of very small consequence, and that its members will be expelled from the party. He said that his invitation to Mufioz-Marin to visit Venezuela still stands, and he expects there will be no trouble when he comes, but the President also made clear that there is at the moment no definite date for the visit. The inference was that the President would await developments before issuing a definite invitation. The President in an aside to Ambassador Sparks at the luncheon table referred to the previous conversation on March 10 and recalled to the Ambassador how he had said Venezuela would establish its Legation in Tel Aviv rather than Jerusalem which had been done. VE–26. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Venezuela1  Washington, April 3, 1959, 8:27 p.m. 645. Re recent discussions oil problem with Perez Alfonso, we have questioned Canadian Emb in detail regarding time factor. After consulting with Ottawa Emb has informed us: 1) Canadian Prime Minister2 has already publicly announced that Govt will move quickly to establish national energy board. 2) Govt will propose resolution which will give Govt authority to control imports and exports of oil and gas. 3) This proposed resolution will be debated approximately April 20. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 831.112/4–359. Confidential. Drafted by Mann. 2 John G. Diefenbaker.
