1979 689 (including tanker costs). Alternative MX concepts with adequate survivability would be even more costly (Air Mobile MX and Trench MX for example), except for the vertical shelter MPS system. That would cost about $27 billion (FY80$) but would not be as satisfactory a solution either from a verification or a survivability point of view. (C) The costs have been carefully prepared, but with any complex system projected 10 years into the future, there is bound to be uncertainty. Historically, major DoD projects have averaged 15% higher than their originally estimated costs. I have taken that as a challenge to prepare careful and conservative estimates in the first place and to maintain tight management control during the execution phase. The most critical phase in terms of cost control is the first year or two, when requirements tend to balloon (“gold-­plating”) and when the contract structure is established. There is already pressure to “improve” the system in various ways (installing radar intrusion sensors at each shelter instead of each complex, e.g.) which I intend to resist. There are some features which probably will ultimately be added to the system (mass simulators, e.g.), but which I intend to defer until their need is clear. Finally, there is the possibility that the Soviets will increase their ICBM threat more than we have estimated, especially in the absence of SALT or termination of SALT. In that case we would expand the MX system in response and that would, of course, increase the cost. Expanding to 300 missiles and 6900 shelters, for example, would cost an additional $8 billion. (C) It may also be possible to reduce costs by actions we take in the engineering development phase. The shelter spacing is set conservatively at 7,000 feet. We will explore the possibility of reducing this to 6,000 feet with concomitant reduction in road costs. We will also investigate the development of automated mass production techniques to reduce the cost of the shelters. Finally, there is another side to the threat uncertainty. We may be able to negotiate significant reductions in the Soviet ICBM threat in SALT III, which would allow us to deploy fewer MX missiles than planned, with a corresponding cost reduction. (S) A key technical-­military issue with this system is whether it poses a sufficiently difficult task to the formidable Soviet counterforce capability projected for the 1990’s and beyond so that our ICBM forces can then be considered survivable. The system will not achieve its full operational capability for 10 years. During that period we must depend primarily on our SLBM and bomber/cruise missile forces for high confidence deterrence because of the possibility of a crippling surprise attack on our Minuteman force. While the bombers and cruise missile carriers can also be attacked at their bases by Soviet SLBMs, I believe that our at-­sea SLBM force will be invulnerable to attack during this 10-­ year period. However, we cannot count on such SLBM invulnerability
