Yugoslavia
969
Soviet Union and between the Soviet Union and China. In the Yugoslav
view, it was impossible to improve detente without an improvement in
these relationships. Tito had expressed this view and the new Yugoslav
leadership had reiterated it both to Brezhnev and to Hua Guofeng.
The leadership had the impression that both leaders shared their con-
cern but it was quite apparent that they had different views on how
the matters could be resolved. In the Yugoslav view, dialogue between
the major powers was important, if only to stop the current deteriora-
tion of relations. (C)
Turning to the situation in the non-aligned movement, President
Mijatovic said that although the situation today was not entirely compa-
rable with the situation in 1961 when the NAM extended its appeal to
the big powers to hold discussions, there were many similarities. Today
there was a similar danger of great power confrontation. The situation
required frankness. The Yugoslavs had the feeling that they could talk
to the United States frankly and openly, which was not the case with
some of their other partners. In their view, it was important to stand
aside from any attempt to involve other countries in great power con-
flicts, and they wished to abstain from any act that would complicate
problems. On the contrary, they believed they should try to improve
the situation. Patience was needed in order to preserve the spirit of
dialogue. This was the essence of Tito’s policy. Tito and all of the new
Yugoslav leadership recognized the changes introduced in interna-
tional politics in recent years by President Carter’s Administration and
regarded them positively. They expected the United States to persist
in this line, and their conviction had been reinforced by the President’s
arrival statement and by what he had said in this meeting. They very
much appreciated his views. (C)
Turning to the question of blocs, President Mijatovic said that
Yugoslavia’s position was well known but Yugoslavia was not a priori
against blocs. It evaluated the situation from the standpoint of non-
alignment—i.e. to what extent the policy of a particular country contrib-
uted to peace in the world. Yugoslavia did not build its relations at
the expense of other countries nor on their closeness of views. They
insisted on observance of this point. Yugoslavia did not and would
not give up that principle. The Yugoslav leadership, he stressed, very
much appreciated the fact that the United States accepted Yugoslavia
as it was and because it was as it was. (C)
Returning to the question of blocs, President Mijatovic posed a few
questions. What were President Carter’s expectations regarding future
U.S.-Soviet relations, SALT II and SALT III? He also wanted to know
President Carter’s view about the triangular relationship between the
United States, the Soviet Union and China and the Soviet contention
that China was a dangerous superpower. (C)
