850
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
It is not clear, however, if the Soviets would go along with the
type of conference that the Pakistanis are advocating. The Soviet
Ambassador in Islamabad told the Pakistanis that his government
rejected the concept of an international conference; he reiterated the
initial Soviet opposition to the Islamic Conference resolution in May
proposing such a gathering. Among the objectives of the Pakistani
diplomatic delegation scheduled to arrive in Moscow this weekend
(and led by Foreign Secretary Piracha) is clarification of Soviet views.
317.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, September 15, 1980
AFGHANISTAN: THE MILITARY SITUATION
**In the 10 months since the invasion, combat between Soviet and insur-
gent forces in Afghanistan has increased considerably. Neither side probably
will be able to inflict any major military setback before the end of good
weather in late October. If insurgent claims of impending food shortages for
the resistance are accurate, the winter combat season could pose more problems
for them than for the Soviets.**
The Insurgents
**The information on the condition and morale of the insurgents is hard
to come by and our judgments are necessarily somewhat tentative.**
**Some Pakistani officials believe the insurgents may be losing their will
to resist, but this view is not shared by Zia and is not borne out by the
evidence available to us. To be sure, the insurgents are no better organized
than when the fighting began, and they are taking heavier casualties. But
there are also more of them, they have better weapons, and they have learned
how to use them. Moreover, they usually confront the Soviets only when they
enjoy the military advantage.**
*Government control in many of Afghanistan’s provincial cities is more
tenuous than before the invasion. US journalists who visited Herat in the
last week of August, for example, confirmed [1 line not declassified] that the
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 7, Afghanistan Crisis—September 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only.
The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The
article printed here was found in this form.
