446 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Syrian crises convinces us that the use of threats will remain a basic element in Soviet policy. At times the Soviet leaders will probably bring the threat of Communist military strength into the open by menacing words or harsh diplomatic exchanges. Moreover, the USSR might go considerably further in certain situations—­e.g., by supporting indige­ nous Communist or other forces in local military action, or even send­ ing Soviet “volunteers,” judging that grave risk of general war would not result. Thus the risks of general war arising through miscalculation may increase. 3. But in general the Soviet leaders will probably continue to pre­ fer non-­military means of achieving their objectives. They probably regard the present world situation as ripe to develop further in their favor through continuation of such tactics. While determined to build up their armed strength against any eventuality, the present leaders have probably decided that a continuation of “peaceful co-­existence” will best assure against the risks of nuclear conflict and at the same time offer far-­reaching opportunities to weaken and divide the Western powers and to promote Soviet influence in the key underdeveloped areas of the world. 4. Almost certainly the Soviet leaders expect further crises as the interests of the two great power groupings clash in the Middle East and elsewhere. They will take a strong line in such crises. Yet we believe that in general they will continue to emphasize such tactics as high-­ level goodwill visits, broadened contacts, promotion of cultural and other exchanges, expanded foreign trade, long-­term credits and techni­ cal assistance, and arms aid. Their aim will be to cause further blurring of the lines between the Communist and non-Communist worlds and to undermine and cause a retraction of Western, especially US, strength from around the periphery of the Bloc. It appears to the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, that increasing Soviet boldness during the next five years will be unlikely unless the Soviets attain clear mili­ tary superiority, or unless the Soviets have reason to expect a wavering or irresoluteness in US policy. The first condition is not believed attainable; the second is not believed demonstrable. The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes therefore that paragraph 2 should read as follows: “The respect of the Soviet leaders for US nuclear power will continue and they are unlikey to initiate general war or to pursue courses of action which in their judgment, gravely risk general war over the next five years. At the same time, however, they probably regard their own growing nuclear capabilities, added to their great conventional strength, as enforcing caution on the Western powers. The USSR’s posture during the Suez and Syrian crises convinces us that the use of threats will remain a basic element in Soviet policy. At times the Soviet leaders will probably bring the threat of Communist military strength into the open by menacing words, harsh diplomatic exchanges, by supporting indigenous Communist forces, or even sending “volunteers,” judging that grave risk of general war would not result. The Soviets must recognize, however, that the possibilities of miscalculation in crisis situations are such that general war might nevertheless occur, and that preparedness for it is therefore essen­ tial. We remain convinced that the USSR will not desire to let any crisis develop to the point of seriously risking general war.” [Footnote is in the original.]
