712 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Pros —Utilizes the leverage of reclassification to seek trade concessions we have been seeking unsuccessfully from the Japanese. —Congress would probably support the 25 percent duty as leverage if we get meaningful concessions. —Would be responsive to Congressional and public concern over rising U.S. trade deficit with Japan and continuing Japanese import barriers. —Reduces friction with Japanese by agreeing to negotiate now. Cons —Negotiations might yield minimum results which would anger industry and labor and endanger our earlier decision not to seek voluntary restraints on Japanese car imports. Short of an OMA limiting Japanese autos, it is highly unlikely we could get sufficient concessions in the auto sector to satisfy the U.S. auto industry. An OMA is a possibility only after the USITC finds injury in its Section 201 investigation. —If the concessions are primarily in non-auto sectors, it might appear that a negotiating chip that could have helped the troubled U.S. auto industry had been wasted. —May cause political problems with the Japanese who may resent being asked to pay for removal of a penalty duty levied against the EC at a time when we continue to need their close support on Iran and Afghanistan. They believe that under the GATT they are entitled to 8.5 percent, a position we are prepared to contest. —If we are unable to reach a satisfactory agreement with the Japanese, we would be left with a 25 percent duty on an item not now in significant production in the U.S. although comparable models could be available as early as model year 1982. Option III: Implement reclassification and hold the truck tariff at 25 percent for the time being. Inform the Japanese that in the current political and economic climate in the U.S., we do not believe that negotiations would prove successful. We will continue to consult with the Japanese on the situation and will be willing to negotiate a reduction in the truck tariff when it becomes feasible and appropriate. Pros —Would be responsive to demands of many in the U.S. auto industry who seek some protection from imports in a recession, even though it does not affect passenger cars. —Would minimize the chance of negotiations that might yield minimum results which would anger industry and labor and endanger our earlier decision not to seek voluntary restraints on Japanese car imports. Short of an OMA limiting Japanese autos, it is highly unlikely we could get sufficient concessions in the auto sector to satisfy the U.S. auto industry. An OMA is possible only after the USITC finds injury in its Section 201 investigation. —Would be responsive to Congressional and public criticism that we do not deal firmly enough with Japan and that we are not sufficiently concerned with our growing trade deficit with Japan.
