1.

Memorandum From the Coordinator for Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs (Wilson) to All Regional and
Functional Assistant Secretaries of State and the
Administrator of the Agency for International Development
(Parker)
Washington, January 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Guidelines on U.S. Foreign Policy for Human Rights
Observance of internationally recognized human rights is impor-
tant, both in the general formation of US foreign policy and in specific
implementation of recent US legislation. In order that the Department
may proceed most consistently and effectively in promoting progress
in this area, a set of guidelines has been drafted on “US Foreign Policy
for Human Rights.” These are intended to formalize and make more
systematic our ongoing procedure for dealing with human rights
matters.

Should you wish to provide written comments and suggestions on
the attached set of guidelines, I would appreciate receiving them by
COB, Wednesday, January 12.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
Guidelines on US Foreign Policy for Human Rights
General Policy
Progress toward full observance of internationally recognized
human rights throughout the world is one of the central goals of U.S.
foreign policy. To help achieve that objective, we seek social, economic,
and political conditions in all countries which foster observance of
human rights and encourage attitudes within each country that con-
tribute to progress in this field.

Pertinent Legislation
The Congress has recently enacted legislation designed to help as-
sure the observance of human rights abroad, in the context of certain
U.S. bilateral and multilateral relations:
—The Harkin Amendment to bills authorizing increased US par-
ticipation in the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and initi-
ating US participation in the African Development Fund (ADF) re-
quires that the US Executive Directors to those banks vote against any
loan or grant to any country that “engages in a consistent pattern of
gross violations of internationally recognized human rights . . . unless
such assistance will directly benefit the needy people of the country.”
Similar provisions have been incorporated into the legislation author-
izing foreign development assistance.

Human Rights
—The International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control
Act of 19765 states that the US should not provide security assistance
“to any country the government of which engages in a consistent pat-
tern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights”
and that whatever security assistance is provided should “promote and
advance human rights and avoid identification” of the United States
with governments that deny their people human rights. The Act calls
on the Secretary of State to provide “full and complete” reports on the
human rights practices in each country receiving security assistance.
Checklist for Guidance
Judgments about human rights are necessarily difficult. The De-
partment cannot provide one set of definitive guidelines for all cases.
We think it necessary, however, that our personnel at least ask the same
questions and proceed as consistently as possible on the basis of com-
parable data and standards.

To that end, Department officers—whether preparing reports in
the field or making findings in Washington—should proceed with the
following sequential checklist of questions:
1. What information is available? Embassy investigative reporting,
while essential, is not enough. Department officers should seek out evi-
dence provided by the intelligence community, non-governmental or-
ganizations, multilateral organizations and Congressional hearings
and weigh carefully the reliability of these varied sources. Such data
should provide the basis for answering the questions in the following
paragraphs.
2. Are there violations of “internationally recognized” human rights?
The prime point of reference for this determination, in the view of the
Department and the Congress, is the UN Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. The main focus for purposes of both field reporting and
Department decision-making should be on crimes against the person as
described in Articles III, V, VIII, IX, X, and XI of the Universal Declara-
tion. (See attachment.)
3. If there are such violations of “internationally recognized
human rights,” were those violations “gross” in nature? Present legisla-
tion makes clear that primary attention centers on government-
perpetrated or tolerated torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
was to promote observance of human rights, prohibited the extension of security assist-
ance to nations that violated human rights except under extraordinary circumstances,
and established the position of Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
within the Department of State. (Congress and the Nation, Volume IV, 1973–1976, pp.
874–877) The position of Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs had been established in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ment or punishment, prolonged detention without charges, or other
flagrant denial to the right to life, liberty, and the security of person.
4. If there are such “gross” violations, is there a “consistent pattern”
of same? Since no mathematical formula is appropriate to the wide va-
riety of existing cases, Department personnel should look instead for
regular recurrences (for regional, class, ethnic or political patterns), and
for changes in the extent of violations over time. The numbers of viola-
tions in each category should be reported as precisely as possible.
5. If there does appear to be a case of “consistent pattern of gross
violations of internationally recognized human rights,” what is the role
of the government in question? Department personnel should try to pro-
vide documentary evidence such as laws, decrees, directives on in-
ternal security, etc. showing whether the government itself, through
acts of commission or omission, bears responsibility for violations
against human rights; whether the government has taken steps to im-
prove the protection of human rights; and whether that government
has cooperated with outside inquiries on human rights.
6. Finally, what special circumstances should the Department, in
consultation with the Congress, consider as it formulates policies for
achieving progress on human rights? Our efforts in behalf of human
rights may require us to weigh the following: the degree and character
of other U.S. interests in the country; the degree of U.S. influence in the
country; likely third-country reaction to U.S. action or inaction on
human rights; reaction of democratic elements in the country con-
cerned to possible U.S. actions; and possible retaliation by the host
country against U.S. positions on human rights. We may also take into
consideration the past and present legal and cultural environment of a
given country, the existence of an internal or external threat to national
security, the violent or non-violent character of the government and its
opposition. However, with specific regard to implementation of legis-
lation governing development assistance and international financial in-
stitutions, the only exception to making judgments wholly on the basis
of observance of human rights is for situations on which assistance
goes directly to “needy people.”
Procedure
The above guideline questions for thinking and acting in behalf of
human rights are part of a continuing Department effort to assure
greater progress in this area. To help assure specific implementation of
this goal, the following actions will be taken:
1. In complying with human rights legislation relating to U.S. par-
ticipation in international financial institutions, the Bureau of Eco-
nomic and Business Affairs will provide a schedule of pending loans
together with information on whether the Harkin amendment is appli-
cable to the loan or not.

D/HA in conjunction with appropriate geographic bureaus and H,
L, EB and S/P will review this material to determine whether, in cases
that do not fall under the “needy people” provision of the Harkin
amendment, there is evidence of a consistent pattern of gross violations
of internationally recognized human rights.

2.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
International Organization Affairs (Lewis) to the Coordinator
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Wilson)
Washington, January 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Guidelines on U.S. Foreign Policy for Human Rights
I have the following comments and suggestions on the set of
Generally the guidelines would be much improved if they gave
greater prominence, other than the single reference in the first question
of the checklist, to multilateral organizations. I think special treatment
is due to multilateral organizations because of the extensive human
rights activity in which the three principal ones, the Council of Europe,
the OAS and the UN, are engaged. This activity is usually well publi-
cized and is well known to those in Congress who are interested. We
should, therefore, take special pains to canvass thoroughly the devel-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
opments in that broad field because of the readily available evidence
they will supply of the human rights posture of many governments. An
important byproduct would also be the greater assurance that our offi-
cial positions in multilateral forums will be coordinated with those
taken bilaterally and with the Congress. I think the problem of coordi-
nation between the multilateral and bilateral in our international
human rights posture will be assuming greater importance as the re-
porting under the new legislation grows and more of the reports are
publicized.

The basic standard discussed in the guidelines is that of a “con-
sistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights.” This key standard had its origin in the United Nations in the
human rights framework, namely, in ECOSOC Resolution 1503 which
established the new procedures for dealing in the United Nations with
private human rights communications. Practice in the United Nations
in applying this standard certainly should be consistent with our appli-
cation of the same standard in our bilateral relations, particularly in our
reporting to the Congress, and the guidelines should provide for this. I
would therefore suggest as a minimum the following amendments to
the guidelines:
1. In the sequential checklist of questions, there should be added a
question which would assure a determination with respect to a partic-
ular country of that country’s general posture on human rights ques-
tions in international forums, e.g., the Council of Europe, the Organiza-
tion of American States, or the United Nations. This would include the
government’s support for effective measures through these organiza-
tions to render their human rights activities effective, support for multi-
lateral human rights conventions and their measures for implementa-
tion, and of course information on instances in which a particular
government may be the object of charges of human rights violations. In
the latter case, it would be important to assure that account was taken
of the substance of the government’s response to the allegations, as
well as the extent of cooperation by such government in procedures un-
dertaken by the organization concerned to study or investigate the
allegations.
possible United Nations actions.
3. Under the section on procedure in paragraph 1, IO should be in-
cluded among those bureaus which will play a role in reviewing the
material relating to compliance with human rights legislation. This
dentiality of communication regarding human rights violations. For the text, see Yearbook

Human Rights
would be of particular pertinence in cases involving a judgment as to
the existence of a consistent pattern of gross violations of internation-
ally recognized human rights. An IO role in this procedure would also
be important to assure that the positions taken by the United States rep-
resentatives in the United Nations and other international human
rights forums with respect to particular countries would reflect and be
consistent with the determinations made by the Department in com-
plying with the requirements of human rights legislation.

3.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs-Designate (Brzezinski) to Jessica Tuchman
of the National Security Council Staff
Washington, January 17, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights

4.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, January 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Attached is an initial summary of policy options in the area of
human rights. It pretty well covers the ground of those actions recom-
mended by members of congress and by various interest groups, and of
course, those deadlines set by law which the Administration must meet
in the near future. There is virtually nothing innovative in it, but it does
contain enough substance so that if Administration action were taken
on some or all of these options it would amount to a very major initia-
tive on the President’s part.

On rereading it, I find one major weakness which concerns South
Africa. I am very concerned that in the process of making major deci-
sions on resolving the crises in Rhodesia and Namibia, that the U.S. not
become locked into a South African policy which precludes us from
exerting major pressures on that nation. Our past support of South Af-
rica in the UN is viewed by many as our single most repugnant policy
in the area of human rights. Continuing that posture—particularly if
the violence in South Africa continues to escalate—might negate every
other human rights initiative the Administration takes. This issue obvi-
ously requires much more thought—soon.

Human Rights
Attachment
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, January 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Background
The pattern of Congressional–Executive relationships in the area
of human rights is probably the best example of what happened during
the last Administration when congressional concern met executive dis-
dain—with results that satisfy no one. When all other efforts to influ-
ence Administration policy proved useless, Congress used its ultimate
weapon and attempted to write into law human rights guidelines for
military and economic foreign assistance. Recognizing the Executive’s
prerogative in this area, Congress attempted to keep its language flex-
ible enough for appropriate diplomacy, with the result that the Admin-
istration completely ignored it. Forced to the wall, the Congress re-
sponded by limitations or outright prohibitions of aid to certain
nations.

Kissinger was then free to make the case that the only alternative
to his own quiet and effective diplomacy was ineffective and inflexible
Congressional action. At no time in the past eight years, could
Congress elicit from the Administration any action on—or even recog-
nition of—the policy alternatives that lay between these two extremes,
including: restricting the amenities of normal diplomatic intercourse;
public statements by American Ambassadors, the Secretary of State, or
the President; initiatives taken in international forums and support by
the U.S. of initiatives taken by others; and Sense of the Congress Reso-
lutions supported—rather than undercut—by the Administration.
International human rights is an issue on which the new Adminis-
tration has one of its best opportunities to radically improve execu-
tive–congressional relations. Any action which the Administration
takes in the direction of Congressional concerns will be warmly wel-
comed, particularly by the House and Senate Foreign Relations Com-
mittees, which fully recognize the inappropriateness of congressional
attempts to manage foreign policy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Possible Early Actions
1. Military Aid.

The Administration will have to submit its Fiscal ’78 budget re-
quest for military aid under the Security Assistance Act in March. Sec-
tion 502(b) of this Act (enacted last summer), requires that no security
assistance be provided to any government “which engages in a con-
sistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights” except under extraordinary circumstances. Because of this pro-
vision, and the last Administration’s flagrant violation of it, the content
of these budget requests will be taken as the single most important signal
of this Administration’s policies on human rights.

In Fiscal ’77, Congress cut off all military aid to Chile and Uru-
guay, and attention is now focused on a total prohibition of military aid
to Argentina (current level: $49 million) and a cutback for South Korea,
as well as on Iran, Indonesia and the Philippines. Although time is ex-
tremely short, if decisions can be reached quickly enough, there is some
opportunity for quiet diplomacy to show results by March, or at least
before Congressional action occurs. For example, a government’s will-
ingness to allow field visits by representatives of international organi-
zations and non-governmental organizations and to provide all data
requested by them, might be taken to weigh significantly in favor of
continuing security assistance.

Another option—going one step further—would be to cut from the
requests of the worst violators, anything that might be directly used for
maintaining a repressive regime in power. In other words, to distin-
guish between items necessary to maintaining internal security and
those used for external defense.

Simultaneous with the budget request, the State Department is
also required by Section 502(b) to send up reports on the status of
human rights in each country for which a budget request is made. In
the past, these reports have become another bone of contention because
they have been intentionally incomplete and evasive. If this Adminis-
tration is serious about human rights, a major effort should be taken to
see that these reports are as honest, complete and unclassified as secu-
rity requirements allow.

In sum, Congress—if kept informed—will welcome a gradual im-
plementation of Section 502(b) as long as the Administration shows its
clear intent to support the spirit of the language. On a case-by-case
basis (no attempt should be made to establish global guidelines) the
Administration can request signals from the more extreme violators
which would indicate their willingness to improve the human rights

Human Rights
situation. Congress will understand that because time is so short, little
concrete evidence of change can be expected, but the Administration
can make clear its intention to monitor the situation in the coming year,
and its determination to take more serious action next year if there is no
improvement.
2. Economic Aid.

The situation is very similar to that outlined above. Budget re-
quests must be submitted in March for economic aid under the Devel-
opment Assistance Act, and this Act contains language similar to Sec-
In the case of more extreme violators, the Administration might
recommend that no new programs be initiated unless there is an over-
riding humanitarian consideration, and that existing programs be
phased out unless they can be shown to (a) be directly beneficial to
people in need, and (b) provide minimal support to maintaining a re-
pressive government in power. In a more positive sense, priority can be
clearly assigned to those governments in the third and fourth worlds
which respect international standards of human rights.
3. Food Aid.

Under the past Administration, the Food for Peace program
positions of several extremely repressive governments through the
congressional loan program. The worst instances were South Korea
and Chile which received disproportionate amounts of Title 1 aid. A
thorough review of this program, whose purpose purports to be hu-
manitarian, is needed.
4. International Organizations.

There are some immediate steps the United States could take in the
UN to signal its intent to take serious action on human rights. The first
would be ratification of the Genocide Convention of 1949, and the
second would be ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and Cultural Rights. Both of these covenants were written in 1966, and
have now acquired more than the required number of 35 ratifications to
bring them into force. All of these actions require a two-thirds vote by
the Senate which in turn requires active support and lobbying by the
Administration to push them through.

The UN Commission on Human Rights will meet in February–
March, 1977. If possible by that date, consideration should be given to
U.S. initiatives to strengthen the working procedures of the Commis-
sion and other UN affiliated bodies concerned with human rights, as
well as substantive initiatives on international efforts to prevent tor-
ture, and arrest and detention without charge or trial.

Finally, to bring the U.S. into line with established UN policy, the
Administration should work for repeal of the Byrd amendment, and
consider a change in U.S. policy toward South Africa, particularly con-
cerning U.S. investment there.
5. Multilateral Banks.

Currently the multilateral banks show small regard for human
rights in deciding on financial support to particular countries. The
Inter-American Bank, (which greatly increased its support for the
Chilean junta over what had been given to the Allende government) is
particularly at fault here. The Harkin amendment to the Inter-
American Bank Authorization Act10 requires the U.S. delegate to the
Bank to vote against loans to repressive regimes. However in practice
the Administration has flouted this requirement by making sure that a
particular loan has enough votes to pass, even while the U.S. delegate
formally votes against. Also, the Latin states are strongly opposed to
U.S. actions to influence the Bank’s actions in this way. In the World
Bank, however, many of the European delegates have been actively

5.

Editorial Note
According to a memorandum for the record prepared by Executive
Secretary of the Department of State C. Arthur Borg on January 27,
1977, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance devoted a portion of his first
“large” assistant secretaries meeting on January 25 to outlining the re-
sponsibilities of Deputy Secretary of State-designate Warren Christo-
pher, the functional assistant secretaries, Department Counselor Mat-
thew Nimetz, and Director of the Policy Planning Staff Anthony Lake:
“After introductory remarks conveying his sense of pleasure of be-
coming Secretary, Secretary Vance set forth his view of the role of the
Seventh Floor Principals. He said that Mr. Christopher would be his
‘alter ego in every respect’ and that Christopher should receive all
paper that comes to the Secretary. Christopher will attend all meetings
if he so desires. He will have direct responsibility for overseeing Law of
the Sea matters, human rights questions, International Women’s Year
and the Board of the Foreign Service and he may be given additional
special assignments in the future. The Secretary said that P, E, and T
would have the ‘usual responsibilities’ except that T would also have
the responsibility for ‘oversight and integration’ of non-proliferation
policy as well as arms transfer questions. The Secretary said that the
Counselor would assist him in many areas as a ‘trouble shooter.’ He
has been given two specific assignments at the outset: the Greece,
Turkey and Cyprus complex and the Micronesian Negotiations. The
Secretary noted that a Cyprus fact finder would be designated later in
the week and that the Counselor will accompany that individual on a
fact-finding mission to Greece, Turkey and Cyprus.

“With regard to 6th floor responsibilities, the Secretary said that
Tony Lake would be responsible within the building for coordinating
the preparation of responses to Presidential Review Memoranda
(PRMs). Secretary made the general comment that all Assistant Secre-
taries have direct access to him whenever they feel it is necessary and
he wants them to use their prerogative. He stressed that the Principals
perform an oversight function but that this will not interfere with their
access to him.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
In his memoirs, Vance further explained the extent of Christo-
pher’s role in the formulation and management of foreign policy:
“I wanted Warren to have the same relationship of mutual trust
and confidence that I had enjoyed with [former Secretary of Defense]
Bob McNamara, and he did. He was truly my alter ego, and his deci-
sion on any issue was the equivalent of mine. When I traveled, Warren
was fully in charge of the department. I did not want to try to manage

6.

Memorandum From the Coordinator for Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs (Wilson) to the Deputy Secretary of
State-Designate (Christopher)
Washington, February 2, 1977
D/HA Monthly Report
Human Rights Reports for the Congressional Presentation Document—
In accordance with legislative requirements, unclassified human rights
reports have been prepared on all countries proposed for security
assistance programs in FY 1978 for submission to Congress as part of
the annual program presentation. The 79 reports have been cleared at
the Assistant Secretary level in the geographic bureaus and are now
ready for the printers in DOD.

Evaluation of Human Rights Reports on the Philippines Declassified—
At Congressman Don Fraser’s request, the Department agreed by letter
of January 19 to declassify its evaluation of two human rights reports
on the Philippines by Amnesty International and Major Religious Su-
periors, which the Department had earlier submitted to Congress in
classified form. Fraser’s House Subcommittee on International Organi-
zations plans to distribute the evaluations to interested human rights
organizations, but not to release them to the press.

Human Rights Contacts with Congress—On January 5, in response
to an invitation, I briefed staff members of the House International
Relations Committee on human rights work in the Department. The
Human Rights
meeting was cordial and there was a good exchange of information and
views. On January 13, Congressman Fraser held an informal meeting to
discuss ratification of the international human rights instruments. I and
other representatives from the Department who attended pointed out
some of the problems which will have to be faced in submitting these to
the Senate.

Indochinese Refugees—The flight of refugees from Vietnam, Cam-
bodia, and Laos continues. There are now almost 80,000 refugees in
Thailand and more than 2,000 Vietnamese who escaped by small boat
with temporary safehaven in countries around the periphery of the
South China Sea. We are providing financial support (More than $11
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) program of care and main-
tenance for those in camps. We also plan to participate in the UNHCR
international resettlement effort by admitting up to 100 “boat case” ref-
ugees per month plus dependents under the conditional entry provi-
sions of the immigration act. But first the Government of Hong Kong
must be persuaded by us and the UNHCR to permit those selected for
admission to the U.S. under this program to be given centralized final
processing in Hong Kong. With such approval, we will begin moving
approved refugees without dependents as soon as U.S. private volun-
tary agencies find sponsors, and will move refugees with dependents
as soon as non-preference numbers are available. Alternative plans to
the use of Hong Kong are also under consideration in the event we get a
turndown.

Admitting Soviet Refugees from Italy—The “drop out” rate in Vienna
of Soviet refugees with exit permits for Israel has continued to hover for
some time near 50 percent. Since many of these refugees wish to come
to the United States, this has resulted in a mounting backlog (now
about 3,000) of such refugees in Rome, where they apply for immigra-
tion to the U.S. To cope with this at our recommendation the Attorney
General on January 13 approved use of the “parole” provisions of the
immigration act. The program is supported by Jewish resettlement
agencies and on Capitol Hill. Not included are those Soviet refugees
who had previously proceeded to Israel and subsequently went to
Rome with hopes of immigrating here. These are not considered ref-
ugees since they could return to Israel without persecution.
Haitian Asylum Seekers—Haitians are the most numerous single
group of asylum seekers. Our advisory opinions to INS recommend
against granting asylum to most, on the grounds that they seek eco-
nomic betterment and would not suffer persecution if returned to Haiti.
In January, responding to a recommendation from the Subcommittee
on Immigration of the House Judiciary Committee, we sent an officer to
Miami and to Port au Prince for a review. With the agreement of the

7.

Memorandum From Robert Gates, Center for Policy Support,
Central Intelligence Agency, to Acting Director of Central
Intelligence Knoche, the Deputy Director for Intelligence
(Stevens), and the Deputy Director for Operations (Wells)
Washington, February 3, 1977
SUBJECT
Brzezinski Meeting on Human Rights
Summary
1. Dr. Brzezinski and Jessica Tuchman, NSC Staff Member for
Global Issues, convened an interdepartmental meeting on 2 February
to discuss translating the President’s commitment to promoting human
rights abroad into “consistent and responsible” action. A list of partici-
pants is attached. In his opening remarks, Brzezinski referred to recent
“complications” (the State Department pronouncements on Czechoslo-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
vakia and the USSR), but said that the President specifically told Soviet
Ambassador Dobrynin last week that the US would be raising such
issues again in the future.
2. After lengthy discussion, summarized below, the following
major points emerged:
—A Presidential Review Memorandum concerning human rights
probably will be issued this week. It will direct an examination of im-
mediate actions the Administration can take to signal its intentions to
the Congress and foreign states with respect to human rights and for-
eign policy, and will call for a longer range study reviewing all the
issues, complications and options relating to human rights consider-
ations and measures in framing US foreign policy. The first part of the
study will have a very short deadline, probably next week. The second
will be due in March or April.
—No tasks were assigned at the meeting pending issuance of the
PRM. While State, Commerce and Treasury will have the leading role
in responding to both parts of the PRM, CIA probably will have a part
to play primarily in the longer range study.
—Following the meeting, Dr. Tuchman indicated to me that, at the
outset, the Agency might give attention in its reporting to human rights
problems and conditions abroad and probably will have a role in the
PRM and other interagency forums in analyzing the effectiveness of
measures under consideration or already taken. She admitted that a
clearer role probably will emerge as the Administration’s policy
develops.
—Tuchman said that the importance the White House attaches to
the human rights question abroad is demonstrated by the President’s
designation of Brzezinski as the White House contact on foreign human
rights questions, a position filled in recent years by domestic advisers
such as David Lissy, Myron Kuropas and Leonard Garment.
—Brzezinski
told
the
participants
that
similar
interagency
meetings are likely to be called in the future for discussion of human
rights issues and US policy. (It would seem appropriate for CIA to designate

Human Rights
a senior officer to serve as the Agency’s representative at these meetings, and to
coordinate Agency participation in preparation of the PRM and subsequent
intelligence support.)

The Discussion
3. Discussion at the meeting centered on three problems: how to
proceed organizationally, signals to the Congress versus effective ac-
tion abroad in promoting human rights, and the necessity of making a
distinction in our human rights policy between Communist and non-
Communist states.

How to Proceed
4. A key consideration determining the need for prompt action is
that final decisions on the FY 78 FMS (foreign military sales) budget—
the most convenient and obvious means to signal both the Congress
and foreign countries of Administration intentions vis-a`-vis human
rights—must be made within two weeks. Therefore, there was general
agreement that any study must involve examination both of short-term
options and a longer-range, comprehensive review of the problem.
Brzezinski and Tuchman left us with the impression that a PRM will be
issued in a day or so calling for proposed options for action within five
to ten days. The PRM will also call for a longer range study of the
problem to be due later in the spring.

Signals to Congress Versus Effective Action Abroad
5. This subject dominated the meeting, with the NSC Staff more
concerned for the near term with signalling the Congress of serious Ad-
ministration intentions than with effective action abroad. The most ob-
vious means proposed to send such signals immediately is to cut the FY
6. Brzezinski said he was uneasy about singling out one or two
countries for cuts. A State Department participant expressed particular
concern that Latin America is being singled out because there are so
few conflicting US interests and the decision therefore seems easy. Sev-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
eral participants pointed out that FMS cuts would have little effect in
the countries concerned and, in fact, could prove counterproductive—
for example, in Korea. Others expressed concern that cutting FMS
would neither satisfy the Congress nor be effective abroad.
7. The NSC representatives asked for options other than cutting
FMS to demonstrate our concern for human rights and there was some
discussion of juggling PL–480 funds, economic assistance and multila-
teral initiatives. Representatives from State and the US Mission to the
UN urged a serious effort to obtain US ratification of the Genocide
Treaty and the International Covenants on Human Rights, as well as re-
peal or amendment of the Byrd Amendment. These, they argued,
would be effective, early signals to the Congress that would buy time
for study of the problem and US options in a rational way. It was
agreed that the PRM would address these and other possible options.
Human Rights Policy Toward Communist Versus Non-Communist States
8. The NSC Staff was concerned about the existence of a double
standard in US human rights policy between Communist and non-
Communist countries—i.e., that we take firm action against non-
Communist countries while merely tut-tutting Communist states. The
State Department participants asserted that, in fact, there is no pressure
from the Congress to have a single approach to both Communist and
non-Communist countries and that there is recognition on the Hill of
the existence of a double standard. State contended that public pres-
sure or actions against the USSR would doom to failure efforts to pro-
mote human rights there. Kempton Jenkins, Acting Assistant Secretary
of State for Congressional Relations, added that there is considerable
disenchantment in the Congress with the Jackson/Vanik Amendment
and a desire to find a way out of the problems it has created. (Tuchman
noted that the President has made no decision whether to break with
the Jackson/Vanik Amendment, although he has decided to go
“all-out” on the Byrd Amendment.) The discussion of this aspect of the
human rights problem closed on an inconclusive note.

8.

Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple
Diplomatic Posts
24394. Subject: United Nations Human Rights Commission Meet-
1. Action posts are accredited to governments of states members of
the UN Commission on Human Rights, which will meet in regular an-
ment attaches importance to our participation in this Commission.
President Carter has stressed the high priority which his administra-
tion will attach to the promotion of human rights. Prior to the Commis-
sion’s opening, Dept considers it would be useful if appropriate offi-
cials in host governments were apprised of the elements of the overall
approach to international human rights matters which the Carter ad-
ministration intends to follow. In discussion with appropriate host gov-
ernment officials, posts should be guided by paras 2–6.
2. In presenting the following outline of the emphasis and direc-
tions to be followed by the Carter administration in the field of pro-
moting international human rights, posts should stress our desire that
the renewed impetus which we hope to bring to human rights pro-
grams through the United Nations will be a collaborative effort carried
out in close consultation with other governments. We will be fully re-
ceptive to new ideas which these governments may propose. We hope
to work closely with them in the appropriate UN organs to maximize
the opportunities which we feel are present in these bodies to
strengthen respect for human rights in the world.
3. Throughout his campaign President Carter placed priority
among his concerns that of human rights, not only for the American
people but for the peoples of the world. A human rights theme flowed
through the President’s inaugural address, as exemplified by his state-
ment that “The world itself is now dominated by a new spirit. Peoples
Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Hewitt; cleared by Baker, Pascoe, Wilson, Whiting,
Holly, Lake, Runyon, Bray, and Sebastian; approved by Habib. Sent priority to Bonn,
London, Ottawa, Rome, Stockholm, Vienna, San Jose, Nicosia, Quito, Cairo, New Delhi,
Tehran, Amman, Maseru, Lagos, Islamabad, Kigali, Dakar, Ankara, Ouagadougou, Trip-
oli, Damascus, Lima, and Belgrade. Sent for information priority to Brussels, Copen-
hagen, Dublin, Luxembourg, Paris, The Hague, the Mission to the EC, the Mission in Ge-
neva, and USUN. Lowenstein served as head of the U.S. delegation to the HRC meeting.
sized the desirability of communicating U.S. policy regarding human rights to the EC–9
political directors, who were scheduled to meet in London January 25–26. (National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
more numerous and more politically aware are craving and now de-
manding their place in the sun—not just for the benefit of their own
physical condition, but for basic human rights.”
4. At his news conference held on January 31, Secretary Vance dis-
cussed the issue of human rights as follows:
Qte. On the issue of human rights, the President has often ex-
pressed his deep concern in this area, and has reaffirmed that deep con-
cern in the inauguration address.

“We will speak frankly about injustice, both at home and abroad.
We do not intend, however, to be strident or polemical, but we do be-
lieve that an abiding respect for human rights is a human value of fun-
damental importance, and that it must be nourished. We will not com-
ment on each and every issue, but we will from time to time comment,
when we see a threat to human rights, when we believe it is construc-
tive to do so. Unqte.
5. Reflecting the high priority which has been assigned to human
rights, we will be developing new policies and seeking new opportu-
nities for the promotion of human rights in the world through the UN
Human Rights Commission and other UN organs dealing with human
rights questions, such as ECOSOC and the General Assembly. Our pol-
icies will be based upon the principle of equal rights for all peoples ev-
erywhere. We must avoid selective application of this principle in the
United Nations.
6. We are conscious of the Charter commitment of all United Na-
tions members to promote respect for basic human rights. While we
recognize the virtues of diversity and do not expect uniform acceptance
of our own standards, we cannot in any case ignore such basic trans-
gressions of internationally recognized human rights as genocide,
apartheid, torture, jailing of people for their beliefs, denials of fair treat-
ment to minorities and denials of the right to emigrate and the right to
worship, or denial of many other basic rights and freedoms. Basic civil
and political human rights reinforce and promote basic economic
rights and needs of peoples, and vice versa. Consequently, we will also
seek to provide leadership in the pursuit of measures to alleviate suf-
fering and deprivation due to lack of food and economic opportunity,
to environmental abuses and to deficient health care. And finally, we
will firmly and vigorously advocate the concept of majority rule in
places such as Southern Africa where that concept is not yet realized.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.

Human Rights
7. For Damascus: You may wish to tailor the presentation to reflect
recent developments in Syria.
8. For Bonn, London, Ottawa, Rome, Stockholm and Vienna: Sup-
plementing discussion points as presented in reftel, posts should in ad-
dition to paras 2–6 above include the following in their presentation. In
his inaugural address President Carter stressed the interrelationship of
national and international freedom and respect for international
human rights as follows: Qte. Because we are free we can never be in-
different to the faith [fate] of freedom elsewhere. Our moral sense dic-
tates a clearcut preference for those societies which share with us an
abiding respect for individual human rights. We do not seek to intimi-
date, but it is clear that a world which others can dominate with impu-
nity would be inhospitable to decency and a threat to the well-being of
all people. Unqte. In the coming months we will be seeking to develop
with those governments that share our human rights traditions pro-
grams which we hope will make more effective international efforts
through the United Nations to cope with those situations of serious
human rights abuses. There is an impression of a vacuum in leadership
in this field in the United Nations. We stress the urgency of our belief
that the vacuum needs to be filled by our countries working together.
Unless we do act with increased vigor and determination forces which
deny the basic values which we share will fill that vacuum.
9. For Bonn and Rome: While we assume that UK presidency
passed on to other EC–9 members points and views covered in reftel,
suggest that in discussion of this message with host government offi-
cials posts also cover reftel issues (as supplemented by USUN 1525 and
Geneva 412, repeated to you).

Vance
Others Group (WEOG) of the Human Rights Commission had met in order to discuss
strategy for the upcoming HRC session and had reviewed the provisional agenda. (Na-
WEOG and described possible agenda items and approaches related to the upcoming
German Government looked forward to “closer consultation” with the United States re-
garding international human rights matters. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770041–0087)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
9.

Action Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, February 4, 1977
Human Rights
Issue for Decision
Interest in human rights continues to grow. A PRM on human
rights may result from an interagency meeting convened by the NSC,
February 2. Brzezinski’s stress there on finding a “constructive way to
infuse human rights into foreign policy” reflects a gathering belief that
one of the main questions before the Carter Administration is, not
whether we will help promote human rights, but how. This memo-
randum thus suggests both short- and longer-term measures for imple-
menting the President’s commitment to internationally recognized
human rights.

Background/Analysis
The Administration’s strong interest in human rights is clear. The
President’s statements on this subject reflect the expressed will of the
Congress, specific US endorsement of the UN Charter and Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, and the belief that there is a connection
between what we believe at home and what we do abroad.

How to act on the President’s statements is, of course, less clear.
Implementation depends on our designing an overall strategy—with a
coherent set of goals, sense of priorities, and assessment of US leverage.
The State Department now lacks such a strategy. Attempts to deal with
pending problems are often uncoordinated. There is no focal point for
considering future initiatives or establishing a general context that
could reduce the need for tough decisions in other areas under crisis
conditions.

Several approaches (singly or in combination) could help:
1. Agenda for immediate consideration. Although we would caution
against rushing into word or deed without more careful review of our
overall objectives in human rights, there are some steps that could be
taken quickly. Such measures could give immediate substance to state-
fidential. Sent through Christopher. Drafted by Vogelgesang. Another copy is in the Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of An-
wrote: “2–11.”
Human Rights
ments from the Carter Administration without constraining later
choices. Among items for your priority consideration are the following:
a. Expedited announcement of well-known and well-qualified coordinator
for the human rights office (D/HA). The authority of that person and his/
her access to you would be a useful signal to the Congress and else-
where and a needed channel for in-house decision-making.
b. Authorization for the Deputy Secretary to establish an ad hoc Human
Rights Coordinating Group, administered by D/HA and to include, as
appropriate, representatives from P, T, L, H, S/P, IO, PM, EB, and the
regional bureaus—initially at the Deputy/Assistant Secretary level.
Such a mechanism could help assure Department-wide consensus and
coordination on cross-cutting issues in the human rights area. Among
matters for immediate attention: the security assistance package due
for Presidential decision next week, votes this month in the Inter-
American Development Bank, agreement on general guidelines for
press inquiries, and reference to human rights in PRM’s and other in-
teragency exercises.
c. Recommendation that the President declare US intention to sign UN
human rights covenants. Since the President is already on record in be-
half of ratifying the genocide convention, the convention against racial
discrimination, and the two covenants on political and economic
rights, and since the next session of the UN Human Rights Commis-
sion convenes February 7, the time may be ripe for the State Depart-
ment to support a Presidential push for ratification of all four. Al-
though L’s study on this subject is not finished, preliminary findings
suggest that we could defuse Congressional opposition by indicating
that we would accompany signature and ratification with appropriate
reservations and statements of understanding on points where there is
incompatibility between these instruments and the Constitution and
relevant US legislation and court decisions.
d. Action on bilateral issues. The Department will be under increased
pressure from the Congress (most predictably, in upcoming hearings
before the Humphrey Subcommittee) to explain how we factored
human rights into our positions on security assistance. Given the immi-
nence of a Presidential decision on the security assistance package next
week, we should urgently consider our public position on the human
rights aspects of the package and how decisions on individual coun-
tries could be best communicated, perhaps by the Deputy Secretary, to
the countries concerned and to the Congress. There will also be several
Harkin Amendment votes this month in the Inter-American Develop-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ment Bank5 which could involve comparably difficult decisions and
similar needs for communication.
e. Consultations with the Congress. You could talk with several
leading Congressional advocates of human rights—both in the near fu-
ture and after the completion of the Department’s overall review of
human rights policy. In your early meetings with such Hill repre-
sentatives, you could seek out their views, promise close cooperation,
and report on the first steps taken by this Administration. Other De-
partment officers could meet with members of Congress and staff to
seek ideas for our own policy review.
2. Development of longer-term strategy. Although we do not advocate
prolonged study, we do see value in putting specific decisions into a
larger and more balanced context. We believe that either State Depart-
ment studies or any possible PRM’s on human rights should avoid pre-
cipitate recommendations and instead stress formulation of a more
general framework for US decisions. We therefore suggest consider-
ation of the following:
a. Formulation of overall policy strategy. Such an exercise should in-
clude general principles, factors to be considered on a case-by-case
basis, the range of available responses, potential risks and/or limits to
human rights initiatives, and elements of a proposed strategy. (See Tab
A for draft S/P outline for human rights strategy paper.) S/P could
take the lead on this exercise, in conjunction with D/HA and the rele-
vant bureaus. An initial draft could be available for review by the
Deputy Secretary this month.
b. Statement of criteria for implementation of human rights provisions in
current legislation. Because there is so much confusion about what con-
stitutes a “consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally rec-
ognized human rights” (basis for decisions on US economic assistance,
security assistance, and loans to some international financial organiza-
tions), the Department of State, in consultation with the Congress,
should try to clarify criteria so that we can be more responsive, both to
the Hill and overall US foreign policy objectives. S/P, in consultation
with D/HA, has taken a preliminary cut at this problem (see Tab B).
We could refine a draft for review by the Deputy Secretary.
c. Drafting and coordination of bureau strategy papers. Papers, to be
done in parallel with the above, could help provide balance between,
on the one hand, stress on human rights and Congressional concerns
and, on the other, broader regional/functional foreign policy concerns.
They should concentrate on identifying those national governments

Human Rights
permitting or perpetrating a consistent pattern of gross violations of in-
ternationally recognized human rights, suggesting what US actions
could help or hurt the situation, and how such actions might affect
other US national interests.
d. Proposal for Presidential attention. At some later point, you may
want to encourage the President to complement his already consider-
able support for human rights with such initiatives as a major foreign
policy address (dealing entirely or in part with human rights) or a well
publicized meeting with outside spokesmen/experts on this subject.
e. High-level speech on human rights. In the not-too-distant future,
you could make a speech or present a statement before the Humphrey
hearings in early March.
f. Consideration of change in current legislation. Working together
with the Congress on promotion of human rights may lead to opportu-
nities to amend some current legislation which either does not serve the
intended purpose of furthering human rights or runs counter to other
foreign policy objectives—or both. In addition, we may find more ways
to shift from legislation with a punitive cast to more positive measures
that reward nations improving their observance of human rights.
Recommendations for Action
1. Authorize the Deputy Secretary to establish an ad hoc Human
Rights Coordinating Group, as described above.
2. Instruct the Deputy Secretary, with or without the Coordinating
Group, to consider the action items noted above.
3. Mandate S/P, together with D/HA and other interested bu-
reaus, to draft (as per above and Tabs A and B):
a. overall strategy paper;
b. guidelines for implementation of human rights provisions in
current legislation.
4. Sign the memorandum on human rights at Tab C. Attached for
your information at Tab D are the instructions on regional strategy
papers on human rights to be issued by the Executive Secretary.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Tab A
Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Staff
Washington, undated
Draft Outline for
A Human Rights Strategy for the United States
BACKGROUND
I. Justification for a Human Rights Policy
A. Moral reasons
B. Legal justifications
C. Political advantages
II. General Implementation Principles
A. Posture of general concern re all human rights violations on a
universal basis and of special concern re gross violations
B. Need for long-range objective of gradual raising of world
standards
C. Avoidance of tone or implications of US moral arrogance
D. Realization of the complexities of issues involved and need for
careful and coordinated handling of all responses
E. Impossibility of uniform, automatic responses to specific viola-
tions and consequent need for case-by-case responses
F. Need for common and coordinated approach of all relevant ele-
ments of US Government
G. Need to establish credibility with US Congress and public for
the Administration’s efforts
H. Preference, wherever possible and appropriate, for multilateral
and cooperative international and regional efforts
III. Factors to be Considered in Each Case
A. Factors relating to the human rights situation itself
1. Nature and extent of violations
2. Level of political development
3. Direction of human rights trend
4. Degree of governmental control and responsibility for violations
5. Validity of internal and external security justifications
Human Rights
B. Other factors affecting potential US response
1. Range and significance of other US national interests involved
2. Nature of US association with regime
3. Degree of estimated US influence on human rights behavior of
regime
4. Attitude of internal democratic opposition, if any, and of poten-
tial alternative political leaders to any particular US response
5. Degree of US Congressional, media and public interest in
situation
6. Attitudes and roles of other governments
7. Estimate of likely consequences of any US response in terms of
human rights conditions and of other US interests
C. Regional factors
1. In Latin America
a. Historic sensitivity to US penchant for interventionism
b. Need for balanced approach to regimes of different political and
ideological orientations
2. In Africa
a. Overriding interest of countries in racial issues
b. Sensitivity of leaders to any statement or action which may ap-
pear to have colonial overtones
3. In Soviet Bloc
a. Potential impact of US response on issues of world peace
b. Potential impact on Eastern European volatilities
c. CSCE considerations
4. In East Asia
a. External and internal security factors
b. Current intractability of communist regimes
5. In Near East and South Asia
a. Problem of even-handedness among traditional adversaries
b. Impact on oil supplies
IV. Choice of Available Responses
A. What are the objectives of any US response?
1. To help individual victims?
2. To raise general human rights standards in a country?
3. To dissociate the US from repressive policies and regimes?
4. Or some mix of the above?

B. Choice of appropriate responses from a range of options between:
1. quiet diplomacy and publicized approaches or statements
2. symbolic acts/statements and substantive measures

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
3. negative measures and positive statements or moves to encour-
age favorable trends
4. multilateral and bilateral approaches
V. Potential Risks in Human Rights Policy
A. Possible consequences of impinging on sovereignty sensitivities
of individual countries
1. Strained US relations with regime leaders, with possible nega-
tive impact on other US national interests
2. Opportunities for regime leaders to arouse popular nationalistic
support for resistance to foreign interference
3. Possible counterproductive results of US response leading to
more severe repression
B. Possible negative consequences for human rights efforts
generally
1. Widespread loss of faith in human rights efforts if expectations
are raised too high in this relatively intractable area and results are
meager
2. Loss of impact of public statements if employed too frequently,
with the US ultimately ignored as a tiresome (and ineffective) interna-
tional scold
3. Danger that authoritarian regimes in a region, or around the
world, will join forces, especially at the UN and OAS, to resist
large-scale, across-the-board human rights campaign
4. Inhibiting effect on whole effort if one or two major fiascos
occur—such as replacement of authoritarian regime by one more re-
pressive following US criticism
C. Problem of inconsistencies in US responses
1. Likely pressure for US to be obviously even-handed in treatment
of human rights violations in strong and in weak countries, in left and
in right regimes, in allied and in adversary states
2. Difficulty of demonstrating even-handedness if quiet diplomacy
is used in some cases and publicized approach is used in others of an
apparently similar nature
3. Use of argument about inevitable inconsistencies (“lack of bal-
ance,” “double standard”) as excuse for US not taking action in this
field at all
D. Risks of inaction
1. Continued erosion of politically valuable US image as supporter
of freedom everywhere
2. Injury to US interests and loss of US influence in a country
whenever its authoritarian regime, with which the US is identified, is
swept away
3. Loss of opportunities to identify with future leadership elements
in many countries
4. Weakened US posture in ideological contest with totalitarian
adversaries

Human Rights
5. Prospect of growing preponderance of nations in the world that
do not share our values and consequent danger to our own values at
home if we fail to oppose this trend
6. Loss of US public and media support for US foreign policy
7. Continued loss of Executive Branch initiative to Congress on im-
portant aspects of foreign policy
RECOMMENDED STRATEGY
I. Procedural Steps
A. Development and approval of a carefully considered strategy
and detailed plans to implement a more vigorous national policy to ad-
vance human rights around the world, including special implementing
strategies for each geographic region to take common regional factors
into account
B. Public announcement and clarification of US policies in state-
ments that establish a general US posture of concern for human rights,
but which present some of the complexities involved, which avoid
raising unrealistic expectations and which allay fears that we are em-
barked on a crusade to drastically alter or topple 100-odd governments
around the world
C. Common and coordinated line on human rights by all US
agencies operating overseas so that diplomatic efforts of US missions
are not undermined by contrary signals from other US sources; reex-
amination of US contacts with repressive internal security elements
abroad and their implications for human rights
D. Establishment with Congress of Department’s credibility on
human rights policy to permit Executive Branch to regain initiative in
this field and to have more flexibility on use of levers such as aid and
arms policies, public reporting on human rights conditions, and voting
in international financial institutions, all of which are now mandated
by the Congress
E. Establishment in Department of procedure for making recom-
mendations to Secretary on major decisions on human rights issues,
whether in bilateral context or in multilateral framework so that impact
on all Departmental elements can be carefully weighed—including P,
T, Regional bureaus, L, H, D/HA, S/P, IO, PM, and AID
F. Internal Departmental information program to clarify role of
missions in human rights efforts and to train junior and mid-career of-
ficers to understand complexities
G. Initiation of needed studies to analyze usefulness of various
diplomatic tactics, symbolic gestures, substantive actions and multila-
teral approaches in achieving favorable results
II. Substantive Measures
A. Steps to put our own house in order by moving forward on rati-
fication of pending UN covenants, by legislating more generous ref-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ugee, asylum and visa policies, and by making more emphatic repre-
sentations on behalf of US citizens adversely affected by repressive
measures abroad
B. Employment generally of unpublicized diplomatic approaches
in dealing with human rights problems and development of proce-
dures and tactics which make such diplomatic efforts as effective as
possible
C. Selection of, and concentration on, a limited number of “worst”
cases—perhaps one or two in a region—on which to focus in the hope
of gathering the largest possible number of allies, including milder au-
thoritarian regimes in the “Third World,” in a common attempt to raise
international standards gradually from the current “bottom” of official
murder and torture. Such an effort might typically have two phases:
1. Intensive discussions with “target” regimes to press for im-
provements in their practices, and clarification, wherever appropriate
and possible, of the minimum steps that are sought from them if they
are to get off the hook (to reduce the paranoia and sense of siege which
dominate some of them and motivate their extreme measures)
2. If such tactics fail, shift to public statements and other more in-
tensive measures, both to bring added pressure and to dissociate US
clearly from a repressive regime
D. Employment of diplomatic style that reduces symbols of US
embrace of authoritarian regimes and serves to communicate various
degrees of disapproval of repressive measures and appropriate degrees
of detachment from repressive regimes
E. Promotion of positive short-range programs to applaud and en-
courage favorable human rights trends and long-range technical assist-
ance and cultural exchange programs to help foster growth of political
institutions and practices that favor protection of individual rights
F. Strengthening of US role in international bodies dealing with
human rights, use of multilateral approaches to human rights situa-
tions in individual countries, and enlistment of help of like-minded
countries in bringing pressure to bear on human rights violators wher-
ever the indications are this tactic might be effective

Human Rights

10.

Memorandum From the Coordinator for Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs (Wilson) to the Deputy Secretary of
State-Designate (Christopher)
Washington, February 4, 1977
SUBJECT
S/P Human Rights Memorandum to the Secretary
The S/P memo to the Secretary of today’s date2 was read but not
commented on by this office in view of S/P’s insistence on sending it
forward immediately. No other interested bureaus have seen it. Our
preliminary views are as follows.

General: We agree that action needs to be taken soon on a number
of important pending issues and most particularly, as I indicated to you
earlier, that an in depth study be undertaken at once by S/P, either in-
ternally within the Department or as part of a broader interagency

11.

Memorandum of Conversation
Washington, February 8, 1977
PARTICIPANTS
Rep. Donald Fraser (D-Minn)
Lucy Wilson Benson—T
Robert Boettcher, Fraser’s Staff
John Salzberg, Fraser’s Staff
Ann Swift—H
SUBJECT
Human Rights and Security Assistance
Mrs. Benson called on Rep. Donald Fraser at his request to discuss
the security assistance program and human rights. After a brief discus-
sion of Mrs. Benson’s new responsibilities, the conversation turned to
the Carter Administration’s ongoing consideration of security assist-
ance levels.

Rep. Fraser agreed that the Administration was making a good
start in the human rights field; but voiced his concern that unless
human rights concerns are somehow institutionalized into the system,
the initial momentum of the new Administration will be lost and the
bureaucracy will return to its old habits. It is easy to talk about human
rights, but many of the decisions stemming from human rights con-
cerns, such as program level cuts, are very hard to make. Officers at the
lower levels of the Department must be willing to push human rights.
Rep. Fraser said he would like to see the Administration take a
zero-base-budget type of approach to the security assistance levels. He
suggested that since country figures submitted in the CPD are not firm
anyway, that a CPD could be submitted with only an overall request
and a statement that the new Administration was reviewing the secu-
rity assistance program levels with several considerations in mind, in-
cluding human rights, and that country levels would be set after these
determinations had been made.

Mrs. Benson discussed generally the Administration’s commit-
ment to human rights and said she would like to see the development
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of an overall consistent strategy. She would like to see some sort of ra-
tional criteria developed which could be applied across the board so
you were not faced with situations where we cut aid to Argentina with
one hand, and did nothing to Iran with the other. Mrs. Benson said she
realized that development of a broad human rights policy would be
difficult, but that the Secretary was serious and would make certain the
word reached both our Ambassadors and our people at all levels at
State. We were no longer faced with a situation where the Secretary of
State was unresponsive on human rights matters.

Turning to specific actions on the security assistance program,
Rep. Fraser asked what would be happening in specific areas, such as
Argentina. Mrs. Benson replied that the study was still going on but
that State had recommended cuts in certain countries such as Uruguay,
Argentina, Ethiopia, and of course Chile. We had not cut Indonesia and
Thailand since EA had argued persuasively against this and since grant
aid was scheduled to be cut out of both these programs in 1979.
Rep. Fraser at this point indicated some unhappiness with the slow
speed of the Indonesian prisoner release program4 and stated firmly
that he would object if the Thai program included increases in either
grant or FMS. He said he felt that one of the motivations behind the
Thai military takeover from the democratic government was the mili-
tary’s feeling that this way they would get more aid. They certainly
should not be rewarded. Fraser said he knew the Korean situation was
very complicated and he was glad to hear that it was under review, as a
thorough study of all aspects of the situation was needed.
Bob Boettcher, following on from Rep. Fraser’s agreement that mil-
itary assistance cuts were not a very effective human rights weapon,
said that there was a whole range of alternatives between “quiet diplo-
macy” and aid cuts which can be more profitably used to encourage
human rights. Secretary Kissinger, however, had always insisted there
were only two alternatives: “quiet diplomacy” or cuts. Rep. Fraser
added that quiet diplomacy had proved ineffective (if it had ever been
used), and no cuts had ever been made except at the Congress’
insistence.

As an amplification of Rep. Fraser’s zero-based-budgetting ap-
proach, Boettcher suggested the Administration consider putting for-

12.

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State-Designate
(Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, February 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
At your request, Tony Lake prepared the attached memorandum
on human rights. Patt Derian and I reviewed the memorandum with
Tony. We are in basic agreement with him that the Department should:
—Move rapidly to pull together our best thinking on pending de-
cisions with human rights implications.
—Begin to bring human rights considerations to bear on the full
range of foreign policy issues and be prepared to lead a PRM exercise
on human rights.
—Establish as orderly a process as possible for dealing with
human rights matters.

However, it seems to me that the way to begin this process is for
me to call together the ad hoc Departmental group that Tony recom-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
mends we set up, and to involve its members in deciding on next steps,
particularly:
—How best to prepare for pending decisions; and,
—The scope and content of the regional strategy papers.
Therefore, my suggestion to you is that you approve Tony’s rec-
ommendations. I plan to convene the group on Monday, February 14,
so that we can move forward promptly on intra-Departmental strategy
papers.
with these Congressmen to solicit their ideas, I suggest you ask Warren
Christopher to hold the meeting as soon as possible in your stead. So
there is no misunderstanding that Mr. Christopher is acting on your be-
half, I strongly recommend you make a personal call to Cranston,
Fraser and Kennedy before you leave to inform them you have asked
Mr. Christopher to get together with them.

Human Rights
Recommendation
1. That Warren Christopher meet with Congressional human
rights leaders on your behalf.
2. That you call Cranston, Kennedy and Fraser before your trip to
inform them of this.

Attachment
Action Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of
State for Congressional Relations (Jenkins) to Secretary of
State Vance
Washington, February 3, 1977
Meeting with Congressional Human Rights Leaders
Principal congressional Members interested in human rights, Don
Fraser in the House and Senators Kennedy and Cranston in the Senate,
although pleased by the Administration’s public stance on human
rights, are becoming increasingly restive about not being consulted on
how it will be put into practice. This restiveness will increase if, lacking
a full understanding of what the Administration proposes to do in the
human rights field, they judge program levels for security assistance as
the sole indicator of our human rights policy. I suggest an early
meeting with them before your Middle East trip.

I believe the meeting should be an exploratory session. You could
reiterate the Administration’s commitment to human rights without
getting into specifics and draw the Congressmen out as to the ideas
they have in the area—and they have many. In the process we would
hope to reassure them of our determination to move on this matter. We
would also hope to channel their energies into a constructive search
with us for effective ways to bring about improvements in the protec-
tion of human rights, and to steer them away from a sterile sniping at

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
security assistance levels. (Fraser has already been in touch with Lucy
Benson, obviously because of his concern about decisions on Security
Assistance. She will meet with him, but avoid discussing the Adminis-
tration’s position on Security Assistance levels.)

If you agree, we will arrange for the preparation of a briefing book
covering, among other things, (a) a willingness on your part to be selec-
tive in assigning Ambassadors to those countries with human rights
problems and, further, to instruct all Ambassadors on the importance
of human rights to this Administration; (b) a study currently in process
by S/P to look thoroughly into the human rights area and explore
methods by which we can have the greatest effect on human rights vio-
lators; (c) the possibility of using international forums to gain support
for human rights observance; (d) possible support for the international
covenants on economic, social and cultural rights, on civil and political
rights, and on the genocide treaty.

Recommendation:
That you authorize me to arrange for a meeting with the
above-named Congressmen before you leave for your Middle East
trip.

Human Rights

14.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to All Assistant
Secretaries of State
Washington, February 11, 1977
Human Rights
The President has stressed this Administration’s strong commit-
ment to the promotion of human rights. The Department of State must
help implement this goal of US foreign policy.
To carry out a policy which is constructive for furthering both
human rights and our other national objectives, we need an overall
human rights strategy and internal mechanism for helping assure bal-
anced decisions in this area. To that end, I have taken the following
actions:
—Asked the Deputy Secretary to establish an ad hoc Human

15.

Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Borg) to All Regional Assistant
Secretaries of State
Washington, February 15, 1977
SUBJECT
Guidelines for Preparation of Regional Strategy Papers for the Promotion of
Human Rights
As the Secretary directed in his memorandum of February 11, the
regional bureaus are to prepare papers which propose human rights
strategies appropriate in their regions. These strategies should con-
tribute to the overall human rights policy being developed by the
Policy Planning Staff.

Each regional strategy plan should cover the following points:
1. General considerations affecting the human rights situation in
the region as a whole.
2. Description of conditions in the countries with the most serious
problems. (Generally the human rights violations with which we are
most urgently concerned involve widespread gross violations directed
against the person, such as officially sanctioned murder, torture and
prolonged imprisonment without fair trial.) These descriptions should
be brief summaries and not detailed material of the type included in the
security assistance reports.
3. A strategy for dealing with these worst cases which should in-
clude such items as:
a. What specific actions would we like the governments to take
and how should this be communicated to them?
b. What leverage can and should be used?
c. What favorable response should we be prepared to give if the
governments accept our suggestions?
d. What are the necessary limits of our possible efforts and why?
e. Are there multilateral channels that might be used to affect the
situations favorably?

Confidential.

Human Rights
4. Description of human rights situations of a less egregious char-
acter in other countries that we may be able to affect favorably and sug-
gested tactics for dealing with them.
5. Steps the United States may take that would favorably affect the
human rights situation in individual countries or the region as a whole.
Even though the preparation of these papers is intended to pro-
ceed in parallel with the work on the overall strategy paper, serious di-
vergences are not expected since the overall paper will be developed in
close cooperation with the relevant bureaus.

The regional papers should be submitted to D/HA by COB Feb-
ruary 22. Direct any questions on format or the Department’s overall
strategy exercise to Mr. Spear (extension 21181).

C. Arthur Borg

16.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, February 18, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights Proposal
As I reported in yesterday’s evening report2 the President has di-
rected that we proceed on his initiative to sign and urge the ratification
of: The International Covenant on Economic and Cultural Rights; the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the Genocide
Convention; and the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Ra-
cial Discrimination. Lipshutz and I agreed to meet with Pat Derian
who has been appointed Commissioner of Human Rights and Humani-
tarian Affairs at State, and Jim Fallows to discuss what should be done.
I mentioned to him that I thought that the UN might be the best pos-
sible forum for such a speech.

In the course of the past few days I have been doing some reading
and a lot of talking with different people on the subject of human
rights, and have come up with a proposal which I think merits some
consideration. In brief, it is that President Carter use this opportunity
(announcement of the four treaty actions) to make a major speech at the
United Nations.

Here are the reasons why, and some thoughts on what such a
speech might include.
—One of the problems that comes up again and again is American
hypocrisy in this area. Our protracted failure to ratify the Genocide and
Racial Discrimination Conventions and even to sign the international
covenants, has in large part prevented us from using the United Na-
Human Rights
tions as a forum to speak out on human rights because of our quite ap-
propriate fear of being embarrassed by the charge of hypocrisy. Thus
the President’s intention to take these actions is not only a major step in
itself, but opens the door for many other U.S. actions on human rights.
—With his appointment of Andy Young, Carter has signaled that
he intends to make the United Nations a more important force in U.S.
foreign policy. No other national or international organ has the same
potential as the UN to advance the cause of human rights. (I stress po-
tential—how much depends on the changes proposed below.)
—There is a lot of debate about the value of words on this issue. On
the one hand, we hear lots of comment about when is the President
going to stop talking about human rights and actually do something.
On the other hand, Intelligence reports from various countries show
that Carter’s words—particularly in his Inaugural Address4—have al-
ready had a significant, positive effect on the policies of some other na-
tions. However too many words (particularly when addressed to indi-
vidual cases) carry the potential for all kinds of trouble: too many of
them rob each one of its force; individuals abroad may be provoked
into actions designed to elicit American response; damage to bilateral
relations, etc. This speech would allow the President to enunciate
strong U.S. principles on human rights, but in a manner completely di-
vorced from any individual case or nation. It would set the context in
which other American statements and actions could follow. A speech at
the UN would demonstrate that the U.S. is willing to say these things
on the record, and in a forum where we may take some heat as a result.
In his speech I would propose that the President—in addition to
announcing the four treaty actions—make the following points and
proposals:
—We reject the policy of remaining silent in the face of terrible
abuses of human rights because of a fear of embarrasing our friends or
ourselves because of our own lesser violations of human rights. All na-
tions, including the U.S. have been guilty of this. We all sin but that
need not silence us about the worst sinners.
—A gentle but moving call to try to create in the UN a political
forum to respond to human sufferings.
—There are many in this country as there are in other nations who
have become disillusioned with the United Nations. But it is still im-
portant—vital—to building and maintaining a peaceful world order.
The way to disarm that disillusionment is to make the UN work better.
—Therefore I propose some major steps to strengthen the UN
mechanisms on human rights. Specifically, urge the creation of an of-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
fice of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (see note #1).
Secondly, move the entire UN Human Rights Division from Geneva
back to New York where the most active human rights non-
governmental organizations are situated, and where the permanent
press corps with its proddings and its disclosures can stimulate a more
positive UN role. With good reason, a high UN official has acknowl-
edged that the reason for the transfer from New York to Geneva was
that the Human Rights Division “would be more asleep” in Geneva.
Third, propose certain mechanisms to strengthen the workings of the
UN Commission on Human Rights, its Sub-Commission on Discrimi-
nation and the recently created Human Rights Committee.
—The President might then make some attempt to define what
are—in the view of the United States—the most basic human rights. I
would suggest that they are those which concern the sanctity of the
person: detainment and arrest without charge, torture, killing, etc. This
would of course raise many problems, (e.g.—is the right to emigrate
one of the most basic?) but it does seem possible to me that some agree-
ment might be reached on this, and that these constitute a category that
can be set apart.
—A rejection of the trade-off often advanced by the LDCs between
human rights and human needs. The often aching need for economic
development cannot be accepted as a reason for violating these other
rights. The President could point out that the U.S. does nevertheless
understand that “human rights begins at breakfast” and therefore
Tuchman, Henze expressed agreement with Tuchman’s proposal but added that he was
“more skeptical of the likelihood” that the United States could obtain consensus on the
UN human rights measures: “This is not a reason for avoiding proposing some of the
measures you outline but we should be careful not to get hung up on pushing them, be-
cause I fear that a majority of UN members will find various reasons to oppose the cre-
ation of an Office of UN Commissioner for Human Rights. The Soviets will see it as an
American attempt to create a new platform for meddling in their affairs; the Chinese can
hardly support it; most Africans will be fearful of it; many Latin Americans and Asians
too.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security,
shouting match, and should capture the attention of all the countries of the world.” (Ibid.)

Human Rights
might also choose to use this occasion to make a proposal or announce
U.S. initiatives in the field of economic and social development. For ex-
ample, he might announce the World Health Initiative (recently pro-
posed by Peter Bourne and approved by the President), a call for ac-
tion on and U.S. contribution to the creation of international food
reserves, or some other proposal concerning general economic devel-
opment, following up on the Kissinger proposals to the Special Session
last year.
—The President might then choose to make a few points on what
U.S. policy will be. First, that the United States does not believe that
human rights is a purely domestic matter, and accepts the opinion of
the International Court of Justice (1971) which held that in ratifying the
United Nations Charter, member states have undertaken legal obliga-
tions in the matter of human rights, and their actions are therefore a
matter of appropriate concern to the entire global community. The
President might reassert that the United States will carry over its con-
cern with human rights into its bilateral relations, either using the posi-
tive language he employed in the Inaugural (societies which show “an
abiding respect for individual human rights” will receive a “clearcut
preference”) or a tougher posture concerning possible sticks we might
use (security assistance, multilateral loans, etc.).

This is of course only a rough outline of such a speech and some of
it is (and is intended to be) highly controversial. However, in my dis-
cussions with people about the PRM, I have discovered that there is
wide confusion over what even the most basic elements of U.S. policy
on human rights should be. I believe therefore that the exercise of
writing such a speech as is proposed here—with the President’s close
personal involvement—might provide the basis for proceeding to de-
velop a coherent policy of how to implement the various incentives and
sanctions at our disposal.

Writing about it Bill Korey notes that the Commissioner would have
“access to the complaint communications and, with tact and ‘quiet per-
suasion,’ could attempt to remedy serious grievances. He would also
assist and provide advice to various UN organs on human rights
matters. As envisaged by the Costa Rican delegation and its supporters,
the person chosen by the Assembly for the position of High Commis-

17.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
38407. Pass to PAOs. Subject: Human Rights Reporting to the
1. The human rights provisions of current security assistance legis-
call for two different kinds of reporting to the Congress.
2. The first are reports under Subsection (B) of the law, which are
part of the annual security assistance presentation to the Congress.
Confidential. Drafted by Spear; cleared by Tice, Derian, Whiting, Lister, Harris, Goott,
Runyon, Michel, Swift, Vogelgesang, Silverstone, and Gamble; approved by Christopher.
Repeated to Rio de Janeiro on March 18. (Ibid.)
provided a status report on all human rights reports prepared in the Bureau of Inter-
American Affairs (ARA). (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
ther updated the status of the ARA human rights reports. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770009–0771)

Human Rights
Nearly 80 of these have been completed, are being printed and should
go to the Congress in a few weeks as part of the regular security assist-
ance congressional presentation. They reflect developments as of De-
cember 1976; an introductory statement notes that there have been sig-
nificant changes in some countries since that time. The reports are
unclassified and may well be published by the congressional com-
mittees to which they are submitted. Copies of the individual country
reports are being or have been sent under separate cover to posts con-
cerned. They should not be shown to host governments at this time. At
the time they are released to the Congress, posts will be advised and
may then, at their discretion, bring them to the attention of host gov-
ernments. Posts not repeat not wishing to do so, should advise the
Department.
3. In discussing these reports with local officials, posts should note:
A) That they are required by law.

B) They cover all countries for which the U.S. is proposing security
assistance (including FMS cash sales); the fact that a country is reported
on does not mean that it is necessarily on any sort of human rights
“blacklist.”
C) The reports seek to be factual and do not reach any conclusion
on whether a country engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations
of internationally recognized human rights or not.

D) References to reports by nongovernmental groups such as the
International Commission of Jurists, Freedom House, Amnesty Inter-
national, etc. and international organizations like the International Red
Cross, the UN and OAS Human Rights Commissions are required
under the law.
4. The second category of reporting is statements, called for under
Subsection (C)(1) of the law. Either house of the Congress or its Foreign
Relations Committee may request a statement on the human rights
practices of any security assistance recipient country. This must be sub-
mitted within 30 days of the request or assistance must cease until it is
provided. To date, statements have been requested on Argentina, Haiti,
Peru, Iran, Indonesia and the Philippines. These were provided in clas-
80 unclassified reports would be sent to Congress as part of the annual presentation for
the security assistance program. An advance set of reports would be sent to the Senate
Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance “to be used informally” in preparation for Christo-
pher’s March 7 testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. (National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
sified form initially. Subsequently, the Department was asked for and
provided unclassified versions of these statements. The Congress can
be expected to ask for statements on a number of other countries on
which reports are submitted under para 2 above. Posts will be notified
when reports are requested.
5. Several points should be noted about these statements:
A) The countries were selected by the congressional committees,
not by the Department. The Department has not been informed of the
basis for selecting these particular countries.

B) As in the case of the Subsection (B) reports, these Subsection
(C)(1) statements make no determination regarding a country’s human
rights practices—a point frequently missed in media stories which
characterized the statements as State Department condemnation of the
6 countries.

C) On the basis of the facts on human rights practices and the justi-
fication for security assistance set out in the statements, the Congress
may then decide to enact legislation to terminate, reduce or continue
assistance to a country.
amended, provides that the annual AID presentation to the Congress
include a full and complete report on steps taken to insure that devel-
the Department indicated that earlier that fall, Fraser had invoked Section 502 (B) and
had requested human rights statements for Argentina, Haiti, and Peru. The statements
were designed to provide Congress with information about human rights in the country
specified, steps the United States had taken to promote human rights within the country,
and a justification for security assistance programs. The Department sent confidential
copies to Fraser in October; Fraser then requested that these be declassified. In addition,
Humphrey had requested copies of 17 reports, including those for Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay. The Department sent copies of the reports to Humphrey’s
subcommittee staff, commenting that the reports “will remain confidential.” (National
to Jenkins, Fraser explained that his purpose in requesting the reports was not “exclu-
sively for the use of Members and Staff of the Committee on International Relations. It is
important for the American public to have access to this information and to have the De-
partment ‘on the public record’ with respect to its own evaluation of the human rights sit-
uation in the country concerned.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
1977, the Department noted that unclassified versions of the Argentina, Haiti, and Peru
statements—in addition to ones for Indonesia, Iran, and the Philippines—were given to
Fraser on December 29 and were subsequently published by the House Committee on In-
ternational Relations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770009–
0771) Ultimately, Humphrey’s Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance released 82 reports
on March 12. (Don Oberdorfer, “State Dept. Lists Rights Conditions In 82 Countries,” The

18.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, February 21, 1977
The President’s recent actions in the field of human rights, in par-
ticular the letter to Andrei Sakharov, have to be seen in the broader
context of President Carter’s well-known intention to try to make for-
eign policy reflect this nation’s commitment to the personal freedoms
that are the lifebeat of our form of government.

It should be clear that our purpose in making these statements is
not to embarrass any particular government or to espouse any indi-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
vidual cause, but to do what we can to advance the cause of human
rights everywhere.

We cannot do everything and we will not try to. We obviously
cannot speak out at every abuse, but these public statements will not be
our only tool. We will use quiet diplomacy in those cases where that
would seem to work best. As the President said in his Inaugural Ad-
dress, we will show a clear-cut preference in our bilateral relations for
those nations which share our respect for human rights. We will in time
make clear to those to whom we provide assistance, what we expect
from them in return. And of course we will do what we can to en-
courage respect for international treaties and commitments.
In closing let me say that all our actions in this field are based on
the conviction that human rights is never purely a domestic matter.
There are human ties and concerns that transcend national boundaries,
and bind individuals together whatever their form of government. The
President believes that every responsible member of the global commu-
nity bears certain obligations to the rest, and a decent respect for
human rights is one of these.

Human Rights
19.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Hartman) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, February 22, 1977
Meeting at NSC on Human Rights Problems
Marshall Shulman and I, accompanied by Mark Garrison, met
with Brzezinski, Aaron, Schecter and Hyland on February 18 to discuss
coordination of tactics in handling human rights problems. Without at-
tempting to reach decisions, we discussed the following points:
—A possible Administration statement, with a worldwide gloss,
suitable for use in lieu of addressing specific questions each time a new
one arises. No agreement on venue or timing, but a consensus that it
would be useful to produce a draft to look at (our contribution is at
Tab 1).
—In any case, there was a general feeling that we should try to
move away from reacting to every new human rights development,
provided that is the President’s desire. Zbig thought the President
would listen to advice on this point.
—The Bukovsky meeting at the White House (the Vice President,
possibly a handshake with the President at that time). Consensus: Bu-
kovsky will make a media circus of it and will probably criticize any ef-
fort to come to terms with the Soviets; it would be unwise to tangle
with him publicly at that time.
—The President’s press conference, sometime this week: Bu-
kovsky and the Sakharov correspondence will probably be major
items.
—We need some human rights initiatives not related to the Soviet
Union (Warren Christopher has a project under way to accomplish
this).
fidential; Nodis. Drafted by Garrison (EUR/SOV). A handwritten notation on the memo-
randum reads: “CV OBE.”
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Agreed that Schechter could be the contact point for assuring a
coordinated public reaction—or non-reaction—when new develop-
ments arise.
—Consensus that we should push for favorable handling of our
own US-interest emigration cases, and consider what can be done to
help the most urgent of the dissident cases (specifically Kovalev, the
one singled out by Sakharov).

Tab 1
Draft Administration Statement
Washington, undated
In recent weeks, the attention of our country and the world has fo-
cussed again on the issue of human rights. This Administration, re-
flecting the deeply held views of the American people, is putting into
practice what the President said in his inaugural address: “because we
are free, we cannot be indifferent to the fate of freedom elsewhere.”
In this imperfect world, we cannot comment on all the wrongs
done to individuals, much less hope to correct them all. But no one can
now be in any doubt where we as a government and as a people stand
regarding injustices, whether perpetrated at home, in those countries
which share our values and aspirations, in those countries where
hunger and poverty are the most pressing concerns, or in those so-
cieties which do not share our basic view of the rights of man.
In pursuing “a just and peaceful world that is truly humane,” our
efforts include the negotiation of agreements which advance our na-
tional interests, including verifiable and enforceable agreements on the
limitation of armaments. Success in these endeavors can also play an
important role in establishing a climate in which the best of human as-
pirations can more successfully be encouraged. And as the President
said, success in arms limitation negotiations can mean life instead of
death. Maintaining life is fundamental to morality.
Human Rights
20.

Action Memorandum From the Coordinator for Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs-Designate (Derian), the
Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business
Affairs (Katz), and the Assistant Secretary of State for
Congressional Relations (Bennet) to the Deputy Secretary of
State (Christopher)
Washington, undated.

Proposed Reply to Congressman Reuss on Human Rights
Issue for Decision
forwarded to the Secretary a copy of legislation he proposes to intro-
duce governing the U.S. vote in international financial institutions re-
garding loans to countries in violation of human rights.
We need to respond promptly as Congressman Reuss has stated he
intends to introduce the legislation not later than March 1.
Our proposed reply (Tab 1) asks Reuss to hold off further action.
Background/Analysis
The Harkin Amendment to legislation of the Inter-American De-
velopment Bank (IDB) and the African Development Fund (AFDF)
now requires us to vote against loans to a country which engages in a
consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights, unless such
assistance will directly benefit the needy people in such country.
The Reuss bill would:
—Introduce Harkin-like restrictions in the World Bank and the
Asian Development Bank (in addition to the IDB and the AFDF).
classified. Drafted on February 25 by Thomas; cleared by Stahnke, Spear, Preeg, Vogel-
gesang, and Runyon and in substance by Lake. Thomas initialed for the clearing officials,
with the exception of Vogelgesang, and for Bennet. The memorandum was drafted on
Another copy is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records
1977.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Delete the exemption which, under the Harkin Amendment, au-
thorizes us to support aid programs for needy people, and
—Require the Secretary to prepare and transmit to Congress a list
of countries engaged in gross violations of human rights.
Bureau Views
We oppose the Reuss proposal. We are taking steps to develop a
comprehensive, broad-based policy on human rights. Our initiatives
vis-a`-vis the international financial institutions must flow from this
overall strategy. In this connection we plan to contact key governments
and the management of development banks and ascertain how best to
relate our overall human rights objectives to the lending policies of
these multilateral institutions. We have cited this initiative in the pro-
posed reply to Congressman Reuss. The thrust of the letter is to con-
vince Reuss that we are taking strong steps to support human rights,
we need time to develop a comprehensive strategy which has an appro-
priate role for the multilateral institutions and, therefore, we want him
to hold off further action on his bill.

Recommendation
That you sign the letter (Tab 1) to Congressman Reuss and person-
ally call him to underscore the rationale for our reply.
Talking points you may wish to use when calling Congressman
Reuss are at Tab 3.

Human Rights

21.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff
Washington, February 25, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights Proposal
I like the Human Rights Proposal2 and agree very much with your
rationale. I think the concept of balancing a call for human rights with a
discussion of his concern about human needs is very valid. As far as

22.

Memorandum for the Record
SUBJECT

23.

Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Foreign Assistance
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Secretary Vance
Secretary Blumenthal
Secretary Bergland
Director-designate Gilligan
Senator Sparkman
Senator Inouye
Senator Humphrey
Senator Long
Senator Case
Senator Young
Speaker O’Neill
Congressman Mahon
Congressman Zablocki
Congressman Harrington
Congressman Long
Congressman Cederberg
Congressman Stanton
Congressman Foley
Congressman Reuss
Congressman C.W. Young
Douglas J. Bennet, Jr.

The President opened by stating that he was willing to take a large
share of the political heat for this year’s foreign aid bill because of its
importance to our foreign policy at a critical moment. We have new op-
portunities for gains in Africa and Latin America if we have the flexi-
bility to deal with them. OPEC is willing to help. We must back up our
human rights commitment.

Secretary Vance then outlined the components of the $1. billion in-
appropriated for the first time.

Human Rights
The President then acknowledged difficulties with the aid program
in the past which have become important symbols: World Bank sal-
aries, the fact that 40 per cent of IDA funds go to India alone, the
over-concentration of administrators who live in relative opulence in
Washington and other capitals. The Administration is seeking to ad-
dress each of these issues.

Congressman Reuss agreed on the need to support IFI’s. He volun-
teered the desirability of a “Congressional declaration supporting the
Administration view that human rights are important and that we will
use our vote and any other leverage in the IFI’s to advance human
rights.” The Administration faces a moment of truth tomorrow on two
multilateral loans to Argentina.

The President replied that the Administration would “err on the
side of human rights” decisions involving multilateral loans. He stated,
however, that there can be no absolute standards as the Korean case
shows. A declaration by Congress with regard to human rights in the
IFI’s would be fine, the President said, as long as it left the Administra-
tion some flexibility.

The President noted that the IFI’s have exerted “conservative
lending pressure” on borrowers which has been healthy for inflation
control.

Senator Humphrey noted that while India gets 40 per cent of IDA
loans, it is not at the top of the list on a per capita basis. The President
stated that India had made remarkable progress recently not only be-
cause of good crops, but in human rights as Mrs. Gandhi has taken
steps away from totalitarianism.

Senator Case switched the discussion to his concern that foreign
assistance decisions should not be contingent upon any U.S. domestic
pressures. It has been argued, he said, that U.S. assistance is actually
spent in the U.S. and benefits American industries, that P.L. 4803 helps
American agriculture, and so forth. In the long run, it would be better
to separate our parochial interests from our foreign policy objectives to
achieve flexibility in meeting the latter. Congressman Long nodded ap-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
proval throughout Case’s remarks. Senator Humphrey subsequently
noted that Case’s position was not realistic politically because much of
the support for our aid program came from farmers, for example, who
perceived the benefits of P.L. 480.

Senator Inouye noted that the Senate had supported foreign aid vig-
orously for the last four years but expressed several concerns of his
own:
—U.S. IFI contributions should be no more than 25 per cent. The
President subsequently agreed that this was a desirable policy objec-
tive, but as Secretary Blumenthal concurred, it would take several years
to achieve.
—We are picking up 70 per cent of the cost of the U.N. drug agency
whose work is largely devoted to Europe and which has a very small
impact on heroin imports to the United States.
—While others charge that we contribute only . per cent of our
gross national product to aid, that figure covers development assist-
ance alone, does not include military assistance (including aid to Is-
rael), callable capital, Ex-Im Bank loans, P.L. 480, etc. Nor does it in-
clude the fact that we spend 6 per cent of our GNP for defense while
nations like Japan, whom we in fact defend, are spending less than 1
per cent. Senator Humphrey observed that the figures can hardly be to-
talled since the Ex-Im Bank is a money maker, the callable capital hasn’t
been called, and P.L. 480 does as much good for our farmers as its
beneficiaries.

Chairman Mahon stated that foreign aid in general was highly un-
popular in Congress and that it passed only because of the Middle East
package. The House will not approve a $7 billion package, he pre-
dicts. Chairman Zablocki, Congressman Cederberg and Congressman Long
agreed. The President reiterated the Administration’s intention to deal
with Congressional concern, but also stated that the public will support
a cleaned up program adequately focused on human needs.

Congressman Long expressed concern about contradictions he per-
ceives within the Administration’s position. The same Administration
which preaches openness wishes to turn over a larger share of aid
dollars to international institutions which escape Congressional con-
trol, whose operations are secret, and for which no adequate audit is
available. This is why he opposed the 40 per cent increase in aid to
multilaterals.

Secondly, he said we preach reduction in conventional arms avail-
ability at the same time we give countries (who are spending their own
resources for arms) IDA loans which are virtually free.

From these contradictions, Congressman Long concludes that our
best option is to improve our own already excellent bilateral aid pro-
gram and reduce emphasis on IFI’s.

Congressman Cederberg supported Reuss’s initiative to retain the
President’s flexibility on IFI’s. Congressman Stanton emphasized the

24.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
SUMMIT MEETING
I. U.S. Objectives
We should use this meeting to explain the Administration’s
human rights policy and its importance, and to seek our allies’ under-
standing and support for our efforts. We should reassure them that
this will be a realistic, sustained, cooperative effort; that we are not en-
gaging in a single-handed moral crusade.
—If our consultations with the Congress permit it by this time, we
might use this meeting to inform our allies of our intention to press for
U.S. accession to and ratification of the UN human rights covenants,
the convention on racial discrimination, and the genocide convention.
—To the extent we have general agreement by early May, we
might also advise these governments that we hope to develop a con-
sensus among the members of the international financial institutions on
fidential. Drafted by Spear, Rovine, and Vogelgesang on March 9. Concurred in by
Daniel O’Donohue (P), Derian, Hartman, Dobbins, Winder, Christenson, and Tarnoff.
O’Donohue and Tarnoff initialed the memorandum; Spear initialed for the other clearing
officials. Sent under cover of a March 10 memorandum from Borg to Brzezinski. (Ibid.)
Another copy is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special
Economic Summit. For the text of the Joint Declaration issued in London at the conclu-
mentation on the Summit, including the records of the sessions, is in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, volume III, Foreign Economic Policy. Carter also attended a four-nation May
9 meeting on Berlin before departing for Geneva to meet with Syrian President Asad. He
then returned to London for the May 10 North Atlantic Council meeting. The President’s
remarks made in Washington and London, the transcript of a news conference following
the summit, and texts of the joint declaration of the international summit meeting, the
declaration on Berlin, and NAC communique´ are printed in Department of State Bulletin,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
how to handle loan proposals for governments that do not respect
human rights and will be pursuing the subject with them bilaterally.
II. CSCE Human Rights
Since there will probably be a NATO Summit meeting right after
this session, that would be a more appropriate forum for discussion of
CSCE human rights questions.

III. Anticipated Reaction
All participants in the Summit are likely to accept more or less
willingly an exchange of views on human rights and may be willing to
accept some general communique´ language on the importance of the
subject. However, most will oppose efforts to reach agreed policies on
human rights.

UK and to a lesser degree Canada will welcome discussion of
human rights at the Summit.

France will probably oppose such discussions as serving no useful
purpose and possibly embarrassing the French Government.
Germany and Italy will be cautious about human rights discussions
because they consider other issues more deserving of attention in this
forum. The Germans have expressed concern over the impact of human
rights activities on their Ostpolitik efforts. Both countries will listen
carefully, but will be unenthusiastic at best.

Japan looks forward to the Summit primarily as an opportunity to
discuss economic and trade issues, but will be willing to discuss human
rights in a general context without reference to specific countries or
cases.

If the European Community (EC) Commission participates, it will re-
main in the background.
better world rests on each nation’s clear expression of the values that have given meaning

25.

Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, March 21, 1977
Human Rights
1. Your recent and continuing initiatives on Human Rights have
basically dispelled most initial skepticism about the seriousness of your
commitment. The uncertainty that exists now is mainly over what
your real motivation is and what lengths we will go to, particularly in
straining relations with the USSR.
2. Our survey around the world shows differing but not unex-
pected reactions in various areas:
a. In the Soviet Union, over and above the obvious reactions you
have had, they are perturbed at the lack of similar criticism of China
and they are worried about how hard we will come down on Basket 3
in the CSCE Conference in Belgrade this June. Still, the Soviets are ba-
sically playing a defensive game, trying to counter our human rights
moves without irrevocably damaging our bilateral relations.
b. They are particularly anxious to disabuse us of any notion that
our emphasis on this question will help the Soviet dissidents.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
c. East Europe: There is considerable puzzlement in Eastern Eu-
rope as to what we4 are about—perhaps because many of these coun-
tries are very interested in the forthcoming Belgrade Conference. They
tend to worry as to what the impact of this U.S. emphasis on human
rights is going to be on that forum. They clearly also are concerned as to
whether we will move the Soviets away from de´tente and perhaps put
more pressure on them.
d. China: The Chinese are generally pleased with our stand be-
cause they read it as a toughening of our position toward Moscow.
They seem blithely unconcerned about any vulnerability of their own
position on human rights.
e. West Europe and Japan: There is generally broad approval for
taking this stand with the general inclination to favor tempering our
position with considerations of practicality. Basically they also tend to
look at the issue more in their own parochial and regional terms than
they do in vocal [local?] ones. Specifically the impact on East/West/
Central relations. They are very worried at a deterioration of those rela-
tions since they normally prefer flat behind-the-scenes diplomacy.
f. Latin America: They are nearly unanimous in denouncing these
new pressures. Clearly this is the strongest in the countries that feel
most challenged, like Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, Guatemala, El Sal-
vador and Chile. They think and complain, as usual, that we aren’t
making allowances for their special problems nor giving them the spe-
cial attention that we should to a neighbor. It particularly galls some of
them that we appear not to be willing to make exceptions for them as
we are doing for South Korea, in their view.
g. There is a developing cohesiveness of support for each other in
their defiance of Washington on this issue.
h. In the rest of Asia, other than Japan, there is a general lack of en-
thusiasm one would expect in totalitarian states like South Korea, In-
donesia and Taiwan.
i. In Africa, reactions have been varied. The Ethiopians feel they
are being singled out unjustly. The Black African States applaud the ef-
fort as long as they don’t look past its implicit support for Black ma-
jority rule.
j. Much the same in the Middle East where again the Arabs ap-
plaud our position as long as it is discussed primarily in terms of the
rights of the Palestinians. Iran is sensitive, vulnerable and worried
about the long-term impact on their relations with the United States.

26.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
62223. Subject: UN Address by the President.
1. First major foreign policy address by President provides oppor-
tunity to initiate dialogue with host government on issues which will
be major emphases of new administration, and to note administration’s
commitment to work on these issues in multilateral context. Text of ad-
dress carried on Wireless File. Following guidance suggests points
which should be stressed in discussions with host government.
2. Importance of United Nations. Decision to deliver first major
foreign policy speech at United Nations underlines major importance
administration attaches to UN system. Speech follows highly suc-
cessful visit to Washington by SYG at invitation of President to discuss
sized that all nations had responsibility for supporting ideals of UN
which he described as commitment to freedom, self-government,
human dignity, mutual toleration and peaceful resolution of disputes.
3. Peace and security. President’s remarks briefly highlighted
problem areas of the world. On Middle East, he called for a flexible
framework for a just and permanent settlement. On Southern Africa, he
pledged US to work for majority rule through peaceful means, noting
that Congress repealed Byrd Amendment this week, bringing US into
full compliance with UN sanctions against Rhodesia. (President signed
Limited Official Use. Drafted by Kriebel; cleared by Shurtleff, Frederick Brown, McNutt,
Tuchman, Perry, Hill, Phelps, Phyllis Oakley, Goott, Sebastian, Gold, and Congden; ap-
proved by Baker.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
bill March 18). He called for strengthened US relations with Latin
America and Southeast Asia, improved relations with former adver-
saries and further development of our relationship with PRC in spirit of
Shanghai Communique´.
4. Arms control. Discussion of US-Soviet relations focused on vig-
orous pursuit of SALT talks, leading to deep arms reductions as well as
strict controls or even a freeze on new types and generations of
weapons. Alternatively we are prepared to explore a more limited
agreement, based on elements on which there is consensus, setting
aside for prompt subsequent negotiations the more contentious issues.
He called for exploring total cessation of all nuclear testing, noting that
it was not necessary that all nuclear states immediately adhere to such
an agreement. He called for discussion with both the Soviet Union and
with other states on control of conventional arms transfers. He said we
would explore with the Soviet Union mutual military restraint in the
Indian Ocean and emphasized that the US intended to make a strong
and positive contribution to the UN Special Session on Disarmament in
5. International economic issues. The US is sympathetic to the
problems of developing world and the government has asked for dols
7. billion in foreign assistance for the coming year. It has asked
Congress to increase the US contribution to the UN Development Pro-
gram and to meet our pledges to international lending institutions par-
reinstated the embargo against the importation of Rhodesian chrome and other strategic
minerals. The bill, however, retained the substance of the Byrd amendment, in terms of
barring the President from refusing to import strategic materials from other non-
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee’s Subcommittee on African Affairs, asserting
that its passage would help restore American credibility, permit the United States to ful-
fill its obligations under the UN Charter, and aid in a negotiated settlement of the Rhode-
ident’s remarks at the signing ceremony, held in the Cabinet Room, see Public Papers:
that he believed that the bill would “be of help to us in southern Africa. I have the au-
thority to reestablish the purchase of Rhodesian chrome whenever I choose, so this
would give us some leverage perhaps over the Rhodesians and complete the long
struggle for majority rule.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 34)

Human Rights
ticularly IDA and the World Bank. The President has committed the US
to an open international trading system but one which does not ignore
domestic concerns in the US. He said we were willing to consider nego-
tiation of agreements to stabilize prices of individual commodities, in-
cluding a common funding mechanism for financing buffer stocks
where these are negotiated.
6. Human rights. Since all the signatories to the UN Charter have
pledged to observe and respect basic human rights no UN member can
claim that mistreatment of its citizens is solely within its own jurisdic-
tion and no nation can avoid the responsibility to speak out when
freedoms are eroded anywhere in the world. We acknowledge our own
deficiencies, but are committed to deal with them quickly and openly.
He said US would sign UN Covenants on Economic, Social and Cul-
tural Rights and the Covenant on Political and Civil Rights and seek ra-
tification of them along with Conventions on Genocide and on Elimina-
tion of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. He called for strengthening
of the UN human rights machinery, endorsing idea of UN High Com-
missioner for Human Rights, suggesting that Human Rights Commis-
sion meet more often and that it be brought back to New York where its
work would receive more publicity. (US did not favor 1972 move of
UN’s human rights division to Geneva.) He declared that HR were im-
portant in themselves and should not affect actions in other important
areas which also had their own importance.
7. Action requested. Posts are requested to call President’s speech
to attention of host governments as appropriate at earliest opportunity
using the preceding paras as appropriate and drawing on speech more
extensively in areas of particular interest to host governments. While
governments, drawing on media reports or reports from their UN Mis-
sions, may seek to stress one aspect or another of the President’s
speech, posts should emphasize that the foreign policy emphases,
maintenance of peace, reducing the arms race, a more cooperative in-
ternational economic system, and human rights will all be pursued
with vigor by the administration.
8. For Peking. You may deliver by note.

Vance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

27.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, March 21, 1977
SUBJECT
NYT Editorial on UN Covenants
“But he also added the United Nations’ Convention on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the Convention on Civil and Political
Rights—documents that the United States has refused to sign because
their provisions seemed to justify denials of rights that Americans
deem important. Mr. Carter in fact reversed the policies of a decade
without a word of explanation.”

28.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
64799. Inform Consuls. Subject: USG emphasis on human rights.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
1. You will have seen statements by President Carter and Secretary
Vance5 making clear that a firm commitment to the promotion of
human rights is an integral part of US foreign policy. Posts have also re-
ceived texts of Deputy Secretary Christopher’s March 7 testimony on
human rights. You should, of course, draw on them in discussions of
this issue.
2. The Soviet Union and some other countries have attacked our re-
cent expressions of concern over human rights violations as interfer-
ence in their internal affairs. Soviet reasoning has no basis in interna-
tional law—emphatically do have the right to make these statements.
Posts may, as appropriate, draw on following to counter claims that
USG statements on human rights constitute interference or interven-
tion in internal affairs in other countries:
—As President Carter said in his March 17 speech to the UN, “All
the signatories of the UN Charter have pledged themselves to observe
and respect basic human rights. Thus, no member of the United Na-
tions can claim that mistreatment of its citizens is solely its own
business. Equally, no member can avoid its responsibilities to review
and to speak when torture or unwarranted deprivation of freedom
occurs in any part of the world.”
—The UN Charter legally obligates UN members as well as the or-
ganization itself to promote “universal respect for, and observance of,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language, or religion” (Articles 55 and 56).
country and make my concerns expressed throughout the world, not singled out against
any particular country.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, February 28, 1977,
p. 245)
Human Rights
—Other important treaties in the area of human rights include the
Genocide Convention, the Convention on Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, and the Covenants on Civil and Political Rights
and Economic and Social Rights. The USSR is party to all of these
treaties. President Carter has pledged to seek prompt Senate consent to
these treaties in order that the US also will become a party to them.
—The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by the UN
General Assembly in 1948, while not a treaty, is an authoritative state-
ment of the human rights which the Charter is meant to promote.
—The Final Act of the Conference on European Security and Co-
operation8 provides “In the field of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, the participating states will act in conformity with the pur-
poses and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and with the
Universal Declaration as set forth in the international declarations and
agreements in this field, including inter alia the International Cov-
enants of Human Rights, by which they may be bound.”
—When a state’s practice is inconsistent with its international
human rights obligations set forth in the above treaties, it may not, of
course, legitimately complain that the practice is an internal affair on
which others may not comment. (Addressees should also be aware that
it has been the long-standing USG position that statements by one gov-
ernment about the affairs of another, even in the absence of treaty obli-
gations, do not constitute unlawful intervention under international
law.)
3. You should also point out as appropriate that the USG monitors,
evaluates and criticizes when necessary our own human rights per-
formance. The US Commission on Civil Rights, an independent agency
of the USG, is charged with the responsibility to encourage construc-
tive steps toward equal opportunity for minority groups and women. It
investigates complaints, holds public hearings, and collects and studies
information on denials of equal protection of the laws because of race,
color, religion, sex, or national origin. Voting rights, administration of
justice, and equality of opportunity in education, employment and
housing are among the many topics of specific Commission interest.
Recent studies by the Commission cover the following areas of civil
rights:
—Education: desegregation in schools; equal educational opportu-
nities for minorities; problems particular to minorities including isola-
tion, performance, language barriers.
—Employment: unemployment and layoffs; equal opportunities
for employment; affirmative action programs.

29.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, March 25, 1977
SUBJECT
Attached Action Memorandum on Human Rights
The attached memo tries to pull together in one place (1) our gen-
eral approach on human rights and (2) a nine-point agenda for specific
action. We hope that it helps fulfill the following purposes:
Human Rights
—Apprise the Secretary of items needing his approval/guidance
and the range of activities underway.
—Set the framework, substantively and bureaucratically, for
follow-up action by the Department’s functional and regional bureaus
(in most cases getting them to provide solid specific programs for re-
view by the Human Rights Coordinating Group (HRCG) which you
chair).
—Provide a still-shot for all bureaus concerned with human rights
of what’s being done and how their human rights efforts relate to the
whole.

The memo tells the Secretary that numerous efforts are in train,
many of which require your action or review. The following is a check-
list of those action items requiring your attention, which D/HA and
S/P will help staff out:2
—Request regional assistant secretaries to follow-up on previous
strategy papers with specific courses of action for all individual coun-
tries (page 5).
—Meeting of the HRCG to decide follow-up on several nations for
which the bureaus have already prepared illustrative Country Action
Programs (page 5).
—Establishment of HRCG core group (page 6).
—Your chairmanship of interagency working group (page 6).
—Help in expediting confirmation of Patt Derian as Human Rights
Coordinator (page 6).
—Request AID, together with other concerned bureaus, to devise
more means for donor-nation cooperation on human rights (page 9).
—Request status report and action plan to improve women’s
rights (page 9).
—Provision for assuring implementation of present human rights
legislation and working effectively with the Congress and other
agencies on use of international financial institutions (page 10).
—Request IO to provide “Agenda for US Action on Human Rights
at the United Nations” for HRCG review (page 15).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Request ARA to provide “Agenda for US Action on Human
Rights in the OAS” for HRCG review (page 18).
—Request PM and T to draw on “Program for US Use of Security
Assistance to Further Human Rights” for HRCG review (page 19).
—Follow-up on Executive Branch action, legislation, and neces-
sary administrative procedures to modify Section 212 (a) (28) of the Im-
migration and Nationality Act, expand refugee and asylum policies,
and protect US citizens abroad (page 20).
—Request for HRCG review of action plans by CU, USIA, and PA
Attachment
Action Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) and the Coordinator for Human Rights
and Humanitarian Affairs-Designate (Derian) to Secretary of
State Vance
Washington, March 25, 1977
US Foreign Policy on Human Rights:
General Approach and Specific Action Program
Issues for Decision
The Carter Administration has moved fast to establish its bona fides
on human rights. Problems—most notably, an impression of inade-
quate coordination within the Executive Branch and backlash from
abroad—remain. We now need to assure that our policy for furthering
human rights is as effective as possible and that it relates to the full
range of US diplomatic objectives. This memorandum thus requests
your approval of a general statement of US policy on human rights and
specific actions for implementation of that policy and provides you
with an overview of programs underway.
1. Statement of General Policy
The world now knows that Jimmy Carter thinks human rights are
important. Many—not just representatives of foreign governments and

Human Rights
journalists, but also our own personnel—do not know what he means
by “internationally recognized human rights,” which human rights are
to get priority US attention, and what criteria we plan to apply in indi-
vidual cases. We therefore believe that a clearcut statement of US policy
on human rights should stress the following:
—“Internationally recognized human rights” are those set forth in
ticles of that document express rights which enjoy international con-
sensus (adopted by the UN General Assembly), encompass concerns
specified by the Congress (e.g., the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as
amended), and reflect traditional American values.
—There is an important relation between the political/civil lib-
erties12 and the economic/social rights specified in the Declaration. We
cannot pursue our commitments to both economic development and
political freedom if we give one set of rights priority over the other.
—Although our long-range goal is to help raise the standards of
national observance of human rights around the world, we may have to
set more selective priorities in the short-term. Thus, in addition to con-
tinuing pursuit of economic development, social well-being and polit-
ical liberty, we will take most vigorous action, when constructive for
the case at hand, with regard to crimes against the person: i.e.,
officially-sanctioned murder, torture, or detention without fair trial
(Articles III, V, VIII, IX, X, and XI of the Universal Declaration).
—Our criteria for formulating and implementing this general
policy in individual cases will include consideration for the following:14
• Nature and extent of violations—contravention of the Universal
Declaration? Recurring regional, class, ethnic, or political patterns to
violations?
• Direction of movement—situation improving or deteriorating?
For example, we need a particularly sophisticated and nuanced ap-
proach for countries which, while still serious violators of human
rights, are moving to improve their performance in this area.
• Tradition or level of development—realistic, for example, for US
to promote Anglo-Saxon precepts in tribal or feudal society?
• Validity of security justification—is an emergency abrogation of
rights needed to meet an internal or external threat that could not be
otherwise contained?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
• Openness to outside inquiry—is the country in question willing
to permit investigation by such public international organizations as
the UN or such respected non-governmental organizations as the Inter-
national Commission of Jurists?
• Extent of other US interests/leverage—the degree and character
of US influence in the country? Likely third-country reaction to US ac-
tion or inaction on human rights? Reaction of democratic elements in
the country concerned? Possible retaliation by the host government
against US policies on human rights (such as recent renunciation of
military assistance by several Latin American nations or possible
cut-off of oil elsewhere)?

Action Requested
—That you authorize a general statement of US policy on human
rights which is: premised on the UN Universal Declaration, balanced
with attention for both political/civil15 and economic/social rights,
most concerned in the short-term with improving performance by
those governments committing crimes against the person, and based
on consideration of the criteria set forth above.
—That you authorize dispatch of guidance, to the field and for ref-
erence within the foreign affairs agencies in Washington, which reflects
this general policy. (Tab 2)
2. Action with Individual Countries
We continue to resist the idea of a country “hit list.” It would not
reflect the universal dimension of our policy—i.e., general concern for
all rights everywhere and working with all nations. And, it might be
counterproductive—i.e., needlessly antagonize some nations, while
giving others a free ride. Flexibility is in order—both for defining the
continuum of countries of most concern to us and in discerning what ap-
proaches [public or private, bilateral or multilateral, symbolic or sub-
stantive, positive or reactive, etc.] could be most useful.
However, while stressing the fundamental global character of our
program, we will inevitably focus on some nations more than others—
identifying or responding to particularly egregious cases of murder,

Human Rights
torture, or detention; weighing those cases where US action on human
rights per se could endanger other objectives (such as disarmament)
which, in fact, serve or complement the cause of human rights; or
seeking out like-minded democracies for positive initiatives in the
United Nations.

Given this range of considerations, we need to augment material
now available to help identify upcoming opportunities to advance
human rights; deal with specific countries which, for a variety of
reasons, may pose more immediate problems for the United States; and
avoid overloading the human rights circuit by appearing to single out
one country or doing too much at one time. Further, we should pay
particular attention to finding positive ways to foster human rights
(such as using public statements by the Administration and the
Congress, bilateral and multilateral loans, etc.). And, although it is hard
to know in advance all the costs of advocating human rights, we
must try to identify possible short-term problems and monitor the
consequences.

Actions Being Taken
—The Deputy Secretary is asking regional assistant secretaries to
follow up on previous strategy papers with specific courses of action
for all individual countries.
—The Deputy Secretary is planning to convene the Human Rights
Coordinating Group (HRCG), by April 15, to review action for several
illustrative countries needing prompt attention.
3. Executive Branch Coordination
Measures to strengthen coordinated direction of US policy on
human rights should include:
—Expediting confirmation of the Coordinator for Human Rights. Patt
Derian remains a “closet” Coordinator.
—Enlarging the D/HA Staff. Although five new positions have been
approved for the Office for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(D/HA), no assignments22 have been made and expansion of that staff
is vital if the Department is to monitor our overall human rights policy.
—Providing training. The Foreign Service Institute should expand
efforts to stress human rights as a factor in US foreign policy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Expanding the scope and effectiveness of the Human Rights Coordi-
nating Group. This group—which you set up recently, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary and including Deputy Assistant Secretary-level rep-
resentation from all Department bureaus concerned with human
rights—should meet at least once a month to project pending issues
and determine matters for decision by you or the Deputy Secretary. A
smaller core group—to include D, P, IO, H, L, and S/P—should be
available to meet, at Assistant Secretary level, for fast-action items.
—Assuring interagency coordination. The State Department should
take the lead in helping assure a coherent line on human rights by
all concerned parts of the Executive Branch (most notably, Defense,
Treasury, CIA, USIA, AID). In lieu of the now-cancelled PRM on
human rights, this effort will require action by the Deputy Secretary
through an interagency task force or ad hoc group.

Actions Requested:
—That you inform the President of the policy being implemented
by the State Department and propose the use of an interagency ad hoc
group, chaired by the Deputy Secretary to help assure Executive
Branch coordination. (See Tab 325 for proposed memorandum from you
to the President.)
—Authorize the Deputy Secretary to expedite confirmation of Patt
Derian as the Coordinator for Human Rights.
—Authorize the Deputy Under Secretary for Management to de-
tail five Foreign Service Officers to D/HA by April 1.
—Request that D/HA, assisted by S/P, provide you with a brief
status report (due by the first day of each month) on items proposed in
this memorandum and subsequent initiatives on human rights.
Human Rights
4. Economic Assistance
US use of economic assistance—whether bilateral or through inter-
national financial institutions (IFI’s)—is another means to promote
human rights. It fosters economic and social development which is it-
self a plus for general human rights and a basis for better observance of
political and civil liberty and provides a specific tool (positive or
reactive) for dealing with individual country performances on human
rights.

A. Bilateral Programs. The US Government needs to take several
general steps to assure that economic assistance reinforces respect for
human rights.
—AID country programs should be consistent with other US ef-
forts (security, information) in a given nation. We should not, for ex-
ample, withdraw economic assistance on human rights grounds at the
same time USIA praises the human rights record of the host nation.
—Since promoting human rights is a long-term process, we must
resist quixotic fluctuations in our use of economic assistance to further
human rights.
—We could help human rights and economic development by in-
creasing participation by the poor in both the direction and benefits of
US programs for development aid.

Specific action programs which merit attention include:
—Follow-up and expansion of AID’s program for “New Initiatives in
Human Rights.” Launched by the then Administrator in 1975 as a com-
plement to the Agency’s “New Directions” program for stress on the
poor, this effort has foundered on lack of staff, meager encourage-
ment from high levels of the State Department, and specific resistance
from certain regional bureaus within the Department. The AID pro-
gram could address the following: increased cooperation with interna-
tional and regional organizations, help for the rural and urban poor in
gaining effective access to rights and protections provided for them
under the law and in development programs, and sponsorship of
studies and conferences on human rights problems and their relation to
economic development.
—Increased consultation with other industrial nation donors. The US
Government should follow up on a proposal made last year by the then
UK Minister for Overseas Development to confer on best means to wed
Development Assistance Policy, contains the provisions of the “New Directions” man-
date, which focuses on fuctional categories such as population planning and agricultural
production as criteria for foreign assistance. (Congress and the Nation, Volume IV,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
concern for human rights and economic assistance. Possible ap-
proaches: Make this idea an agenda item for talks with visiting senior
officials from the OECD area or propose it as a topic for consultation at
the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the OECD. With the
ground prepared for talking with the British and Scandinavians, the US
could be in a position to have the AID Administrator make a major
presentation at the next session of the high-level DAC.
—Further efforts in behalf of women’s rights—since available informa-
tion suggests that women suffer more violations of basic economic, so-
cial, and political rights than do men.

Action Requested
—Authorize the AID Administrator to follow up and expand on
the “New Initiatives” program, with the first step, formal presentation
of an action plan and stipulation of resource needs to the HRCG by
Actions Being Taken
—The Deputy Secretary is asking D/HA to follow up with AID on
ways to increase consultations on human rights with other industrial
nation donors. One end product: a cable to the field, with input from
EUR and EA, indicating how the US plans to work with the other in-
dustrial democracies to further human rights.
—The Deputy Secretary is asking AID and IO, in conjunction with
D/HA and S/P, to draw up a status report and action plan to improve
women’s rights. (Due for review by the HRCG by May 15.)
B. Use of International Financial Institutions (IFI’s). The so-called
Harkin Amendment, which injects human rights considerations into
the bills authorizing US participation in the Inter-American Develop-
ment Bank (IDB) and the African Development Fund (ADF)—together
with the recent Reuss bill35 and Humphrey proposal extending human
rights considerations to all the IFI’s—present us with a difficult

Human Rights
tradeoff. On the one hand, we want to comply with current legisla-
tion, thus giving it a chance to affect observance of human rights and
demonstrating our willingness to work with the Congress in this re-
gard. On the other hand, we want to avoid turning our advocacy of
human rights into a point of useless political contention within the
IFI’s—thus feeding confrontation along North-South lines, fostering
even more politicization of the IFI’s, and undermining the legitimate
role of these institutions.

Our present approach is to make a good faith effort to fulfill the
spirit and letter of Harkin. At the same time, we remain open to Con-
gressional initiatives which might allow more flexibility for Executive
Branch use of the IFI’s as one of several means to promote human
rights. To facilitate adequate implementation of this approach:
—EB must provide all relevant members of the HRCG (D/HA, E,
ARA, H, L, and S/P) with prior notice of US decisions on Harkin
Amendment votes.
—In addition, EB should draw on previous analysis of human
rights and the IFI’s to provide a policy paper for HRCG review by April
15. That paper should include evaluation of such approaches as using
US votes to register disapproval of human rights violations, encour-
aging the institutions themselves to further human rights, and placing
priority emphasis on promotion of economic rights.
—H must make special provision for use of the IFI’s in its Congres-
sional human rights strategy (see below).
—E must alert the Deputy Secretary to any inconsistency in State-
Treasury-NSC positions on human rights in the IFI’s.

Actions Being Taken
—The Deputy Secretary is mandating the above four steps.
5. Cooperation with the Congress
Present US policy is in tune with what most on the Hill want. The
next step—since some Congressmen fear that we have a helter-skelter
approach that could dissolve in the face of Realpolitik—is to demon-
strate to the Congress that our human rights program is serious, coordi-
nated, and related to other US national interests.

Our strategy for Congressional relations on the human rights
question need not be so much a “strategy” as an attitude. That attitude
should start and end with the determination to work with the
Congress—not, as sometimes alleged in the previous Administration,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
contravene legislative intent or use Congress as the culprit in advo-
cating human rights abroad. Hopes that human rights would go away
as an issue or efforts to block growing Congressional determination to
promote human rights led to the frustration which, in turn, prompted
legislation which may or may not be the most useful way to further
human rights.

Given that backdrop and present political intent on the Hill, the
Executive Branch approach to the Congress on human rights should
include:
—Extended Contacts with the Hill. Close contact and consultation
with both members of the Congress and their staffs are important. Such
consultations should not be limited to human rights interest groups on
the Hill and D/HA in the Department.
• Each regional bureau and concerned functional bureau, in con-
sultation with appropriate officers in H and D/HA, should work out a
regularized schedule of informal contact with Congresspersons and
staff in their areas to explain specifically upcoming decisions or
problems.
• Such consultations should cover the spectrum of members and
issues. For example, as we develop our policy on human rights toward
Korea, EA, in consultation with D/HA and H, should consult with in-
terested and key members of Congress.
—Top Priority Items. The following items are of particular imme-
diate concern to the Congress and should therefore figure prominently
in the Department’s six-month Congressional action plan on human
rights.
a. Harkin Amendment on the International Financial Institutions
and Bilateral Economic Assistance. (Follow-up on productive consulta-
tions with Congressmen Reuss, Harkin, Fraser, Gonzalez, et al.)
b. Security Assistance
• General: Executive Branch to review all country programs before
September 30, making allowance for changes in human rights per-
formances. Specific consideration should focus on minimal programs in
Latin America, especially Central America, and grant security assist-
ance to Indonesia and Thailand.
c. UN Human Rights Covenants and Conventions. (Follow up on
President’s March 17 UN speech)
d. Korea, Philippines, East Timor
e. Rhodesia, South Africa, and Namibia
Human Rights
—Cooperation with Human Rights Lobby. Since there is an increas-
ingly active, vocal, and influential human rights lobby operating on the
Hill, the Department should complement its efforts with the Congress
with efforts to meet and talk with representatives of the more impor-
tant human rights organizations in town: the new Washington office of
Amnesty International (AI), the Washington Office for Latin America
(WOLA), the National Catholic Conference, B’nai B’rith, and the Coali-
tion for a New Foreign Military Policy.
—Use of Fellowship Program: Encourage State Department recip-
ients of Congressional Fellowships to work with known Congressional
advocates of human rights such as Fraser, Koch, Harkin, Reuss, Cran-
ston, Kennedy, etc.
—Two Caveats. First, no strategy of consultations will be effective
unless we have a consistent policy to explain. Second, we must stress
promotion of human rights as a joint Executive-Legislative Branch en-
terprise. Since there may well be short-term costs (at home and abroad)
for this policy, we will want Congress aware of potential costs, ready to
share responsibility with us during rough periods, and thus able to
provide the most enduring consensus for our human rights policy.
Action Being Taken
—H—assisted by D/HA, L, and S/P—following up on the above
outline with a six-month plan for working with the Congress to pro-
mote human rights. (Due to the Deputy Secretary by April 10.)
6. Multilateral Diplomacy
The US should put increased effort into working with other na-
tions and using multilateral mechanisms to further human rights.
Dealing through multilateral channels has the advantages of reducing
the image of the US as the moralistic mother-in-law of the world and
enlisting the force/leverage of international opinion behind the cause.
At the United Nations, our general approach should include:
—Factoring human rights into all US activities at the United Na-
tions, not just for those occasions (such as meetings of the Human
Rights Commission—HRC) when it is specifically on the agenda.
—Determining before both the convening of a new session of the
General Assembly and each major UN conference, a few priority
human rights issues for special US attention—ones either important to
us or ripe for forward movement.
—Consulting early and often with close allies and, when possible,
with non-aligned nations, to identify issues of shared concern and
forge appropriate coalitions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Seeking greater collaboration with Third World nations by
stressing the relation between promotion of all human rights—polit-
ical, civil, economic, social, and cultural.
—Continuing to involve Congress in the preparation for and par-
ticipation in UN meetings.
—Concentrating US efforts on the worldwide problems of crimes
against the person.
—Trying to assure even-handed study and statements on country
and area human rights situations so that not just a few targets (such as
Chile, Israel, and South Africa) are singled out without significant ref-
erence to other gross violators.

Specific recommendations for US action on human rights at the
United Nations should include:
—Pressing for US ratification of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the International Conven-
tion on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the
covenant on political and civil rights and the covenant on economic, so-
cial, and cultural rights (as noted in the President’s UN speech, March
17).
—Preparing immediately a human rights strategy for the Spring
UNGA and, if and when announced, the Special Session for the
North-South dialogue.
—Seeking ways to eliminate the racism-Zionism issue in order to
allow full US participation in the international struggle against racism
and racial discrimination.
—Considering the selection of one of the USUN ambassadors as
US Representative to the HRC. That would facilitate continuity in the
US statements and actions at the HRC, ECOSOC, and the General As-
sembly, and provide one known full-time US spokesperson at the UN.
That individual could be charged with factoring human rights consid-
erations into US participation in UN meetings on economic and social
development (important for greater cooperation with the LDC’s) and
maintaining closer contact with non-governmental organizations
which form an important part of the human rights constituency and
which lobby actively at the United Nations.
—Finding ways to strengthen the Human Rights Commission,
such as following up on the President’s proposal for more frequent
meetings of the HRC, returning the Commission to New York, and in-
creasing its mandate with the appointment of a UN Human Rights
Commissioner. We should also use the HRC to preserve and defend the
Commission’s procedures for dealing with private complaints on
human rights.

Human Rights
Action Being Taken
—The Deputy Secretary is asking IO to expand on the above for an
“Agenda for US Action on Human Rights at the United Nations.” For
HRCG review by April 5.

At the Organization of American States (OAS), the US should capi-
talize on the significant potential of the Inter-American Human Rights
Commission (IAHRC). ARA has come up with the following proposals.
a. Budget Increase. The IAHRC would develop a program justifying
a supplementary budget increase request from the OAS to increase
substantially its present annual funding of around $463,000. OAS
funding of the proposal would be far preferable to another US contri-
bution since it would strengthen the multilateral credentials of the
IAHRC and avoid the procedural problems which endangered ac-
ceptance this year of our special contribution.
b. Program of Annual Visits. The IAHRC should use much of the
money, members, and staff to schedule an annual visit by a member-
or-staff team to almost every OAS member country. Obviously, visits
to countries from which there are few if any complaints would be
largely pro forma. If such a visit became an annual practice (at least
while the present high level of human rights violations continues), the
nations that are serious violators could not refuse to receive or coop-
erate with the investigating team on the basis that they are being sin-
gled out unjustly. We have checked with the Legal Adviser’s Office and
confirmed that the US can and should cooperate with an IAHRC inves-
tigation of human rights complaints in the United States and such con-
stituent territories as Puerto Rico and possibly the Canal Zone.
c. Annual Investigations of Human Rights Complaints Against Cuba.
For reasons of equity and to counteract the argument of right-wing
governments that left-wing violators were being ignored, we would
encourage an annual investigation of human rights complaints against
Cuba. Of course, a visit to Cuba by the IAHRC would presumably be
impossible as long as Cuba remains a non-participating member of the
OAS.
d. Annual Debate on Human Rights Situations. We would push
strongly for debate on the human rights situation in each country re-
ported on in appropriate OAS bodies, especially in this June’s annual
General Assembly. Our OAS delegate would take care to acknowledge
improvements, as well as to denounce violations.
e. Educational Programs. We will push and flesh out a program of
Inter-American education in the human rights area which we plan to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
propose at the next meeting of the Inter-American Education, Science,
and Cultural Council.
f. Attention to Terrorism. Since mounting terrorism has recently con-
tributed to worsening human rights situations, we would support
broadening the mandate of the IAHRC to investigate the link between
abuses of human rights and terrorism. Such an initiative would appeal
to the conservative Latin American regimes and thus contribute to mul-
tilateralizing support for the IAHRC.
g. Affirmative Reaction Program. A promising approach to the
human rights problem, which we could recommend informally to the
Commission, would be to emphasize the more positive features of the
Commission’s role to study and recommend to member states innova-
tive procedures that safeguard human rights, rather than concentrating
on its potential to isolate and shame offending regimes.
h. Unresolved Issue. Should the Commission appear to be devel-
oping into a tribunal, able to make judgments and level sanctions on in-
dividual governments, present support for strengthening its investiga-
tive machinery would wane. The dilemma is how to make the Com-
mission a powerful instrument to monitor human rights performances
without raising the spectre of political interference in the name of
human rights. Southern Cone States are acutely sensitive to US pres-
sure to clean house and are likely to react to that pressure by spreading
the idea that our concern with human rights is just another version of
“Yankee interventionism” aimed at disrupting Latin solidarity.
i. Pending Questions. Should the State Department submit informa-
tion concerning violations to the IAHRC? Should the US lobby strongly
for the ratification of the American Convention on Human Rights? If
the OAS threatens to narrow the mandate of the Commission, or to
emasculate it by other means, should the US counter, either by threat-
ening to reduce its budgetary contributions or to withdraw from the
Organization? etc.
j. High-Level Speeches. The Department will be providing language
on human rights for the President’s speech before the OAS Permanent
Council, April 14. You may also want discussion of human rights in
your speech before the OAS General Assembly this June.

Human Rights
Action Being Taken
—The Deputy Secretary is asking ARA to pursue the above pro-
posals and report to the HRCG by May 1.
7. Security Assistance
The problem of relating security assistance to human rights has
both a procedural and a substantive aspect: we must ensure early intro-
duction of human rights considerations into our decision-making and
must weigh our special responsibility to respect human rights in coun-
tries receiving security assistance or buying arms from the US against
other American national interests. See Tab 4 for elaboration of these
procedural and substantive guidelines.

Action Being Taken
—The Deputy Secretary is asking PM and T, with assistance from
D/HA, H, and S/P, to draw on the “Program for US Use of Security As-
sistance to Further Human Rights” (at Tab 4) for presentation of a de-
tailed six-month action plan to the HRCG by May 1.
8. Protection of US Human Rights
The US should take several steps to put its own human rights
house in order. In addition to prompt ratification of the relevant UN in-
struments, we should:
—Visa Policy: Proceed with new legislation and more flexible ad-
ministration of US visa policies which can eliminate political tests for
visitors—which reduce US influence among foreign intellectuals and
present us with needless vulnerability in the CSCE.
—Refugee and Asylum Policy: Encourage legislation and necessary
administrative action to expand our refugee and asylum policies in
order to permit entry into the United States of more victims of repres-
sive regimes.
—Protection of American Citizens Abroad: Strengthen our repre-
sentations on behalf of American citizens adversely affected by repres-
sive measures in foreign countries.

Actions Taken
—Interagency study on visas, chaired by SCA, completed March

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Deputy Secretary is mandating D/HA—assisted by SCA, H, L,
S/P, and other concerned bureaus—to assure follow-up on Executive
Branch action, legislation, and necessary administrative action to
modify Section 212 (a) (28) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, ex-
pand refugee and asylum policies and protect US citizens abroad.
9. Public Diplomacy
In the best of all worlds, promotion of human rights should stand
on its own merits and speak for itself. We can, however, maximize im-
pact and understanding for US policy on human rights by taking the
following actions:
—Mandate representation by USIA on the Department’s Human
Rights Coordinating Group. Both PA and CU already participate.
—Authorize preparation of human rights action plans by CU, PA,
and USIA and subsequent review by the HRCG. See Tab 5 for illustra-
tive outlines of such programs by CU and USIA.
—PA should be tasked with preparing a plan which helps you and
other senior-level officials of this Administration explain US policy on
human rights. That plan should include projection of major speeches to
be made (with an eye for optimal timing and impact vis-a`-vis other
contemplated measures on human rights) and preparation of materials
for mailing to important opinion leaders/groups and use by State De-
partment employees speaking throughout the United States. A special
effort should be made to encourage influential US intellectuals to speak
out in behalf of human rights.
—Authorize one member of the D/HA staff to be the point of coor-
dination for those elements of the foreign affairs agencies dealing with
human rights via press/media statements, programs for information,
cultural or academic exchange, etc.

Actions Being Taken
—S/P is drafting a speech on human rights as a possible presenta-
tion for your “Law Day” appearance in Georgia, April 30.
—The Deputy Secretary is asking CU and USIA, with the coopera-
tion of other concerned bureaus, to draw on the action program out-

30.

Memorandum for the Record
Washington, March 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Meeting with Ms. Tuchman and Mr. Kimmitt on Intelligence Support in the
Human Rights Field
As requested, I delivered to Tuchman and Kimmitt ORPA’s pro-
posed schedule of analytical studies in the human rights field and ex-
amples of reporting and analyses that the Agency published in the last
month. We then covered the following subjects:
1. As regards to ORPA’s proposed schedule on human rights-
related work in progress, Tuchman stated that she hoped that two
studies could be speeded up. Specifically, she asked that the study enti-
tled Soviet Perceptions of Dissidence and the Helsinki Accord be available
by the end of April and similarly that the study entitled Soviet Policy and
Tactics for Belgrade also be available by the end of April. She explained
that these issues would come up at the NATO Summit in early May
and that it would be very important to have in hand these two studies
in order to prepare for the discussion of the human rights issue at the
NATO Summit. She also asked that the study entitled Impact of the U.S.
Stand on Human Rights be made available as soon as possible. In dis-
cussing this proposed schedule, Tuchman also asked that I provide her
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
with the names of the action officers on each study, which I agreed to
do.
2. Status of PRM on Human Rights—Tuchman reported that after
much discussion Brzezinski has decided that what was needed in the
first instance was a joint State/CIA report updating and describing the
human rights situation in each country where there is evidence of
major violations. She said she hoped to get out a notification on the
need for this study within the week and there would probably be a
two-week deadline for completion. On the basis of the response to this
requirement the NSC Staff will then draft a PRM calling for a longer
range study of the policy implications and options.
3. The Effect of Congressional Legislation Requiring Public Reports from
the State Department on the Status of Human Rights in Countries Receiving
Military Assistance—Ms. Tuchman commented that this legislation
passed in 1976 had been ill-conceived and was causing more problems
than it solved. She expressed the hope that on the basis of the Adminis-
tration’s performance in this field that Congress could be persuaded
next year to remove this requirement.
4. In the course of the discussion it became apparent that Tuchman
and Kimmitt are closely following DDO reporting on reactions to the
President’s human rights policy. Tuchman specifically noted that the
reporting on Eastern European reactions has been good, but that she
was puzzled by the lack of reporting from Soviet sources of reactions
within the Soviet Union. She asked me to look into this problem and to
let her know whether sufficiently high priority was being assigned or
whether there was some other explanation for the lack of such re-
porting. I said I would do so.

Cord Meyer, Jr.

Human Rights

31.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance and
Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal
Washington, April 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Decision-Making on Human Rights Issues as They Relate to Foreign Assistance
We are bound to be faced with a large number of issues involving
the interrelationship between human rights and our foreign assistance
program. It would be helpful to set up a small interagency group to ex-
amine our bilateral and multilateral aid decisions as they relate to
human rights, to provide guidance regarding specific decisions on bi-
lateral and multilateral loans and to ensure proper coordination of a
unified Administration position. This group should be chaired by a
representative of the Secretary of State and in addition to a repre-
sentative of the Secretary of the Treasury should include officials of the

32.

Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President
for National Security Affairs (Aaron) to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, April 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
I am increasingly concerned that we are all over the lot on this
issue. Note the attached item from this morning’s intelligence sum-
mary. I believe the only answer is a Special Coordinating Committee
Working Group on the human rights issues. It would handle both sub-
stantive activities relating to human rights and the coordination of our
legislative effort. It should therefore consist of both a substantive of-
ficer from each agency and a legislative liaison person. I suggest we
chair but an alternative would be to have State do it. My concern with

33.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, April 13, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Administration Position on Human Rights Amendments to
International Financial Institution Legislation
Summary: Recent Congressional actions have placed the Adminis-
tration in a difficult position on human rights. The House has taken a
strong position, adopting the inflexible language of the Badillo Amend-
ment by voice vote on April 62 despite Administration support of the
more flexible Reuss Amendment. History could repeat itself in the
Senate unless the Administration voices its strong support for the more
flexible Humphrey language4 and its clear opposition to inflexible
Badillo-Harkin language.

We face a real dilemma: while we do not like any of the amend-
ments, we must voice support for the more flexible amendments
(Humphrey, Reuss) or we will appear to be weakening our strong
human rights position.

In the House we did voice our support for the Reuss Amendment.
However, we did not at the same time voice our opposition to the in-
flexible language of the Harkin and Badillo Amendments. (The Harkin
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Amendment, which is law, directs the U.S. Executive Director in the
Inter-American Development Bank to vote against extending interna-
tional financial assistance to countries that engage in consistent human
rights violations unless such assistance directly benefits “the needy
people in such countr(ies).” The Badillo Amendment closely parallels
the Harkin language, extending the Harkin provisions to all IFI’s.)
The Senate will be considering this issue next week in Committee.
Senator Humphrey is sponsoring language that closely parallels the
Reuss language, allowing greater flexibility for the Administration
than the Badillo Amendment. Senator Humphrey believes that his lan-
guage will pass the Senate only if it receives strong Administration support.
NSC, State, AID, Treasury and Export-Import Bank repre-
sentatives met on April 11, to discuss ways to improve our increasingly
weak and defensive posture on the Hill. There was consensus at the
meeting that the major reason for the defeat of the Reuss language and
the adoption of the Badillo Amendment was that the Administration
never adopted a strong clear position during the debate.
There was also consensus at the meeting that the Humphrey lan-
guage is far preferable to the Badillo language and that in order to
achieve success in the Senate, the President will personally have to voice
both his support for Humphrey and his opposition to the Badillo-Harkin ap-
proach.

Attached at Tab A is a Treasury paper which outlines the proposed
Administration position on Human Rights amendments, citing argu-
ments for the Humphrey amendment and against Badillo-Harkin
language.

Human Rights
Recommendation
That you approve the strategy outlined above which will require
you to voice support for the Humphrey Amendment and opposition to
Badillo-Harkin language in some forum which will be determined in
the near future.

Tab A
Paper Prepared in the Department of the Treasury
Washington, undated
Administration Position on Human Rights Amendments
(1) The Badillo Amendment undermines the ability of the United
States to promote human rights objectives effectively in the international
financial institutions.

(a) Its automatic “no” votes destroy any negotiating flexibility on
our part.

(b) Therefore, neither donor nor recipient countries have any in-
centive to work with us on improving the human rights situation.
(c) Furthermore, virtually all loans would go ahead over our objec-
tions, thereby revealing the ineffectiveness of such an automatic ap-
proach for all to see.

(d) The result is that we would be locked into a sterile, ineffective
position.

(e) Indeed, we can become isolated in our efforts and thereby re-
duce our effectiveness in mobilizing support from other nations for
better human rights conditions.

(2) By contrast, the Humphrey Amendment would enable us to
significantly advance the cause of human rights.

(a) Our ability to support, expedite, or oppose specific loans and
bank policies would give us considerable negotiating leverage.
(b) For example, we could “ransom” some prisoners or reduce
other offensive practices by calibrating our positions on particular
loans—even if the offending country maintained some offensive
practices.

(c) We could work with other donor countries, getting their sup-
port for our initiatives in return for our taking positions “less offensive
to the integrity of the institutions.”
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
(d) In short, we could work effectively to advance our interests
with both donor and recipient countries—since we would have a major
bargaining chip in the use of our “voice and vote.”
(3) The Badillo approach is also undesirable because it undermines
the integrity of the institutions. Indeed, both donor and recipient coun-
tries have expressed to us the view that it would represent “unilateral
amendment of the bank charters.” Our major policy interest in en-
hancing the role of the banks would be set back severely if Badillo were
adopted.

(4) Furthermore, the automaticity of the Badillo approach ignores
other U.S. policy objectives which can be promoted through our posi-
tion in the banks. The timing and intensity of our efforts on human
rights must constantly be weighed against other U.S. objectives and
therefore calibrated carefully. Badillo permits no such flexibility.
(5) Advancing our human rights concerns in the development
banks must be seen in the context of overall U.S. policy toward human
rights. The issue is how to advance our human rights objectives most
effectively.

(a) It is completely appropriate to adjust levels of military assist-
ance and security supporting assistance for this purpose.
(b) It is also appropriate to amend our levels of bilateral economic
aid.

(c) Diplomatic initiatives must be a major part of any overall
approach.

(d) Policy in the development banks must therefore be calibrated
in light of these other channels, and our other objectives toward the
banks.

Human Rights

34.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, April 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Attached Memorandum on Human Rights
As per your request at your luncheon, April 2, we have redrafted
the S/P–D/HA Action Memorandum of March 252 to proceed as a
memo directly from you to the Secretary.

We have adjusted the previous draft in accordance with your com-
ments and suggestions. At the same time, we have preserved most of
the original thrust and text which you approved.

35.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President
Carter
Washington, April 15, 1977
SUBJECT
International Financial Institutions Authorization Bill
Summary
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee will mark-up the interna-
tional financial institutions (“IFI’s”) authorization bill on April 19. The
issue for your decision is whether we should (a) vigorously support the
human rights language reported by Senator Humphrey’s Subcom-
mittee on Foreign Assistance and (b) oppose the Badillo Amendment
which requires the U.S. to vote against any loan to countries where
human rights are violated. I recommend that we do so, and make your
views known through a letter to Humphrey (draft at Tab 1). The rec-
ommended approach has been approved by Humphrey.

Background
On April 2, 1977, you wrote Congressman Henry Reuss a letter ap-
plauding his Committee’s action in adding a human rights title to legis-
lation authorizing U.S. participation in the IFI’s. As you will recall, the
Reuss approach provided broader discretion than the restrictive
Harkin Amendment. On April 4 the House adopted two Badillo
(e)) severely restricts U.S. discretion by requiring that we vote against
any loan to a country where human rights are violated unless such
assistance is directed specifically to programs which serve the basic
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
human needs of the citizens of the country in question. A second, and
potentially useful, Badillo Amendment (Section 602) requires the Secre-
taries of State and Treasury to initiate international consultations “to
develop a viable standard for meeting basic human needs and the pro-
tection of human rights,” and a mechanism to reward those who seek
to achieve those standards.

Meanwhile, on the Senate side, Humphrey’s Subcommittee has re-
ported Reuss-type language (Tab 3) to the full Senate Foreign Rela-
tions Committee which will mark-up on April 19. Our latest indication
is that Humphrey will go all out for passage of this language, provided
the Administration supports him. The full Committee is likely to
adopt Humphrey’s language. Prospects on the floor are uncertain,
however. There is a substantial possibility that a coalition of liberals
and anti-IFI conservatives will succeed in attaching Badillo-type lan-
guage to the bill.

I think the Humphrey language represents a positive approach
which permits us to maximize our influence for human rights within
the banks and with the recipient governments. By contrast, I believe the
Badillo language represents too wooden an approach to the problems it
addresses and that the Administration should not support it. Although
the Badillo Amendment contains an exception for assistance specifi-
cally directed to basic human needs, we believe that the practical diffi-
culties of interpreting and applying that exception on a case-by-case
basis would be enormous and the exception would ultimately prove
counter-productive. An elaboration of the arguments against the Ba-
dillo Amendment is set forth in a Treasury paper under Tab 4.
Your strong support of Humphrey’s language and explicit opposi-
tion to Badillo-type amendments will not necessarily guarantee success

Human Rights
on the Senate floor. However, I think that this is the right position and
that, even if we fight and lose, our human rights commitment will look
stronger than if we stand aside.

I believe that endorsement of the second Badillo Amendment pro-
viding for consultation may improve the prospects of winning, and I so
recommend. Senator Humphrey agrees, and this point is incorporated
in the draft letter to him.

I think the most effective means of presenting your position will be
a letter to Senator Humphrey, copies of which will go to the full Com-
mittee. I also urge that your position be presented to the leadership at
breakfast on Tuesday, April 19.

Recommendation
That you send to Senator Humphrey the letter attached under Tab
1, copies of which would be sent to all the members of the Senate For-
eign Relations Committee as well as to the Speaker.

That you state your position at the leadership breakfast next
Tuesday.

36.

Memorandum From the President’s Counsel (Lipshutz) to
President Carter
Washington, April 17, 1977
SUBJECT
International Financial Institutions Authorization Bill
Reference is made to the April 15 memorandum from Cyrus Vance
to you regarding this matter. I recommend strongly that you withhold
action on his two proposals until you have reviewed observations
which both Frank Moore and I wish to make. Further, I suggest that
you meet with representatives from Treasury, State and NSC, along
with Frank, myself, (perhaps) Senator Humphrey, and such others as
you deem advisable; at such a meeting all points of view can be fully
aired and debated.

I personally wish to present a perspective in this matter which, in
several ways, is different from that presented heretofore. I believe that
Frank Moore will emphasize other factors of importance.
1. Should we oppose the substance of the “Harkin Amendment,”
(i.e., mandatory action on our part based upon carefully described con-
ditions and according to properly established procedures) we well
might undermine much of our credibility in our espousal of Human
Rights as a fundamental cornerstone of our foreign policy.
As I understand the situation, we have only a few means of imple-
menting this policy: speaking out consistently (which we certainly are
doing); diplomatic actions (which I understand we also are doing);
overt physical actions (which we properly have discarded); and finan-
cial leverage (which is the subject of this pending legislation).
I was concerned to note in staff memos prepared for Zbigniew and
forwarded to you, a statement that “. . . we do not like any of the
amendments . . .” (Harkin, Badillo, Humphrey, Reuss). The perception
which I received from this was that we should give only lip service and
diplomatic efforts to the goal of Human Rights.
2. We can support the substance of the Harkin Amendment—man-
datory action—and still retain:
Human Rights
a. A clear definition of what constitutes a consistent pattern of dep-
rivation of these rights (torture; inhumane or degrading treatment or
punishment; prolonged detention without charge; flagrant denial of
the Right to Life, Liberty, and the Security of Person; and providing
refuge to individuals committing international acts of terrorism.)
b. An established and fair procedure for ascertaining facts, for re-
buttal, and for removing valid charges against a proposed borrower, all
in advance of voting against a loan application.
c. Adequate flexibility to protect our national interests and further
our foreign policy goals. The Harkin Amendment still would have a
“needy peoples” exception available for the President to use at his op-
tion. Bilateral agreements would be available. And of course in “impor-
tant” or “urgent” matters, Congressional-Presidential action always is
available.
3. A number of statements made in memoranda advocating oppo-
sition to the Harkin Amendment are presented as though they were un-
questionable conclusions of fact. Actually, several of them are no more
than arguable opinions and should be considered as such. Examples
are:
a. Treasury memo of April 14: “. . . no real economic pressure since
other governments will not vote with us and most loans will be ap-
proved . . .” (except IDB FSO, which is subject to U.S.A. veto).
“. . . automatic ‘no’ votes would eliminate any negotiating flexi-
bility on our part, reducing any incentive . . . to work with us on im-
proving human rights situations . . . sterile, ineffective position . . . iso-
lating ourselves from other governments . . .”
[But, note: Zbig refers to “our voice and vote” as a major bar-
gaining chip.]
b. Same Treasury memo: “. . . (such human rights violations con-
siderations) are inconsistent with the IFI charter requirements that
lending decisions shall be made only on the basis of economic consider-
[Note: If this is accurate, then presumably the U.S.A. could never
consider Human Rights violations relative to a loan application—
whether our vote was mandatory or discretionary under our law.]
c. Same Treasury memo: “Badillo approach . . . undesirable . . . it
undermines integrity of the institutions . . . would represent unilateral
amendment of the bank charters. Our major policy interest in en-
hancing the role of the banks would be set back severely . . .”
[Note: the foregoing statement contains three “conclusions” stated
as “facts”: “. . . it undermines integrity . . .”; “. . . unilateral amendment
. . .”; and, “our major policy interest . . .”]
Finally, the Treasury memo points out what percentage of loans in
the past would not have been approved had there been such a law on
the books. Its representatives pointed out that Congress would be
sorely tempted to reduce appropriations to these banks if we elimi-

37.

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, April 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Call to President Regarding Lipshutz Opposition to the IFI’s Bill
Zbig’s office tells me that he spoke to the President this morning
about Bob Lipshutz’s opposition to the Humphrey approach to the IFI’s
bill. The President said he would re-read Lipshutz’s memo. Zbig sug-
gests that it is important for you to “weigh-in” with the President
today, if possible.
sets forth a number of arguments which appear to favor Administra-
tion support for the Harkin Amendment. Apart from the substance, the
timing of Lipshutz involvement presents important procedural and
credibility problems. He began asking questions after the President’s
press conference remarks endorsing the Humphrey approach (Tab 2).
Human Rights
A reversal by the President on this issue would be harmful in his rela-
tionships on the Hill; the delay may already have been costly. On the
substance, I am setting forth below a point-by-point rebuttal of Lip-
shutz’s arguments (using his paragraph numbers and letters).
1. Lipshutz suggests that opposition to Harkin might “undermine
much of our credibility in our espousal of human rights as a funda-
mental cornerstone of our foreign policy.” This is erroneous because
the reason for opposing Harkin is not that the Administration should
moderate its position on human rights, but rather that the Harkin
Amendment will prove weak and ineffective and thus will impede the
Administration’s efforts to promote human rights. Lipshutz observes
that a recent Brzezinski memorandum5 casts aspersion not only on the
Harkin Amendment, but also on the Badillo, Humphrey, and Reuss
Amendments, and deduces from this that Brzezinski would have us
“give only lip service and diplomatic efforts” to human rights. What-
ever Brzezinski’s position may have been, it was made quite clear in
your memo to the President of April 15 that we enthusiastically favor
the Humphrey language and also favor the second section of the Ba-
dillo Amendment6 (requiring the Secretaries of State and Treasury to
initiate international consultations) (Tab 3). Thus, we are proposing far
more than “lip service.”
2. (a) Lipshutz states that the Harkin Amendment permits us to re-
tain a “clear definition of what constitutes a consistent pattern of depri-
vation of human rights.” To the extent that a “clear definition” is fea-
sible, the Humphrey Amendment affords the same opportunity.
2. (b) Lipshutz argues that the Harkin Amendment does not really
tie our hands because it will be possible for us, before voting against a
loan application, to ascertain through an established and fair proce-
dure, the facts pertaining to human rights charges against a prospective
borrower. This view rests on an unduly optimistic assumption about
the speed and certainty with which facts may be gathered and deter-
heart is with the Harkin amendment because I want to do everything I can to assure a
maximum amount of human rights commitment around the world. But I think that to
give us the authority within the lending institutions to use our best judgment and to ne-
gotiate for an easing off of human rights restraints before a loan is made is the best ap-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
mined. In any event, application of Harkin would require us to develop
a “black list” which would have many undesirable overtones.
2. (c) Lipshutz also argues that the “needy people” exception in
the Harkin Amendment provides adequate flexibility, but it seems
clear that the process of interpreting and applying that exception on a
case by case basis would be difficult and time-consuming11 and would
be likely to lead to erratic results. For example, would money for com-
pletion of a factory producing construction materials (undertaken
perhaps with prior IFI loans) come within the exception? Similarly,
Lipshutz’s argument that Harkin does not rule out bilateral agreements
or “Congressional-Presidential action” as to “important” matters
suggests that Lipshutz himself sees the need to avoid the Harkin
strait-jacket.
3. Lipshutz next selects a number of excerpts from the draft Treas-
ury memo that was attached under Tab 4 of your memo of April 1512
and argues that they represent “opinions” rather than “facts.” It should
be noted that the Treasury memo was only a draft prepared hurriedly
the day before your memo to the President and your memo did not
vouch for all of the Treasury arguments. Nevertheless, I will comment
briefly on Lipshutz’s points, in case the President raises them.
a. Lipshutz claims some inconsistency between arguing, on the
one hand, that most loans will be approved over our veto and that “no”
votes will eliminate negotiating flexibility and, on the other hand, that
using our “voice and vote” for human rights as provided by the Hum-
phrey language is, according to Brzezinski, “a major bargaining chip.”
Perhaps Mr. Lipshutz sees some inconsistency between these argu-
ments, but I certainly do not.
b. The Treasury paper contained a statement that most donor and
recipient nations would view automatic “no” votes on human rights
grounds as inconsistent with the IFI charter requirements that lending
decisions should be made only on the basis of economic considerations.
Lipshutz attacks this as proving too much, in that it would also prevent
us from even using our voice and vote for human rights. It is not clear
where the argument leaves Mr. Lipshutz since if in fact human rights
considerations may not be taken into account, then it would avail us
nothing to have the Harkin Amendment on the books.

38.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, April 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
I. Major Actions So Far and How They have been Decided
1. Repeal of the Byrd Amendment2—This decision was formally
reached in PRM–4, enjoyed unanimous interagency support, was well
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
lobbied on the Hill (with a particularly crucial effort by Andy Young)
and was successfully achieved well ahead of schedule.
2. UN Speech—This was an NSC initiative. The human rights lan-
guage including the specific proposals was entirely drafted here by
Tuchman and later approved by State. It is worth noting that in State’s
original draft of this speech there were no human rights initiatives, and
very little attention paid to the issue at all.
3. International Treaties—The proposal to sign and seek ratification
of the four international treaties was suggested by me in a memo-
randum to you on January 24th, and soon thereafter urged by Andy
Young in his first meeting with the President after the Inaugural. The
President delegated responsibility on this to Lipshutz who has held
several State/Justice/NSC meetings to decide on a course of action.
Several weeks ago, State and Justice lawyers reached agreement on lan-
guage for reservations, but there is disagreement between Lipshutz
and the agencies on whether to use one general reservation (“subject to
the laws and Constitution of the United States”) or whether to take the
more usual diplomatic course of specific reservations. Mondale is ap-
parently now involved in discussions with Congress on which ap-
proach would be preferable politically, and a final decision is still
pending. However, the substantive work is done, and these treaties
could go forward to the Hill within a few days of a final decision.
Human Rights
Within the last few weeks, Bob Pastor was responsible for the initi-
ative in adding the Inter-American Treaty to the original four and this
has been announced as policy in the OAS speech. Work is now pro-
ceeding on the specific reservations required.
4. Security Assistance—The issue of cuts in security assistance be-
cause of human rights violations came up during the early budget re-
view. Within the State Department cuts were considered for such major
violators as Indonesia, Iran, South Korea, and a few African nations.
However, the formal department position recommended cuts only for
Uruguay (which Congress had already cut by law) Argentina, and a
small cut for Ethiopia. OMB favored additional cuts, and you and the
President were involved in the decision not to propose additional cuts,
both because of a disinclination to shoot from the hip, and because this
Administration had not yet protested human rights violations to any of
the other governments.

Pursuant to other requirements of the same law, country-by-
country reports on the human rights status in 82 nations have been pre-
pared and submitted to Congress. Both the preparation (which is
done largely through Embassy channels) and publication of these re-
ports has caused substantial consternation and resentment in many of
the violating nations. They object to US unilateral judgments on their
behavior.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
5. Economic Assistance—No cuts were proposed in development
assistance for FY ’77 because of human rights violations. Christopher
testified on this issue in the Senate. There has been little controversy.
6. Sakharov Letter and White House Meeting with Bukovsky—You are
better informed on this than I, my impression is that these decisions
were made entirely within the White House.
7. UN Human Rights Commission Meeting in Geneva—The US dele-
gation was headed by Allard Lowenstein. I don’t know who was re-
sponsible for his appointment, but it was a good one, notwithstanding
Brady Tyson’s remarks on Chile (Lowenstein did not see or approve
Tyson’s remarks). Lowenstein took the unusual course of not as-
suming at the beginning that our efforts would be doomed to failure,
and succeeded remarkably well in energizing the meeting and
changing its tone. There were two votes on which even such traditional
clients as Cuba and Syria refused to support the Soviet position lim-
iting human rights investigations. Lowenstein has real potential in this
area. He is completely unfettered by the pervasive defeatist attitude at
State and is both deeply committed and realistic. His talents should be
made use of.
8. Planning for ECOSOC and the 1977 UNGA—So far only State has
been involved. Their proposals center on trying to avoid a reversal on
issues which we won at Geneva and to begin efforts to enact the Presi-
dent’s proposals made in the UN speech. State has developed a pro-
Human Rights
posal which seems to me a good one, that there be a second month-long
meeting every year of the UN Human Rights Commission, and that the
second meeting be held in New York. This would partially implement
two of the President’s proposals, and appears to be a good compromise
position that might gain acceptance. However there has been little inte-
gration of human rights objectives with other kinds of objectives for
this meeting.
9. International Financial Institutions—This has recently blossomed
into the issue of greatest concern. Basically what happened was that in
the House, the Administration, understandably unwilling to respond
to its first Congressional test by opposing a human rights initiative,
took a wishy-washy position. During the course of both Committee
markup and Floor debate, the Administration never expressed its op-
position to the Harkin language although it did support a rather convo-
luted compromise amendment which Chairman Reuss introduced and
pushed through Committee. The House took the very unusual step of
dropping the Committee’s proposed amendment and adopting substi-
tute language (Badillo-Harkin) by voice vote.

During the past week, a series of interagency meetings have been
held to develop a strategy in order to avoid a repetition of the House
defeat in the Senate. Senator Humphrey is a much more enthusiastic
supporter of the more flexible language than was Reuss. However, the
Administration has weakened its position by a series of changes in po-
sition of which Humphrey’s staff (which favors the stricter language) is
fully aware. The amendment was unanimously adopted in Committee,
but there is consensus among all departmental Congressional liaison
offices and friendly Hill staff, that success in the Senate will depend on
a vigorous Administration lobbying effort and clear opposition—such
as was expressed by the President in last week’s press conference—to
the Harkin approach. So far, no Administration representative has
made a compelling case, mustering the real arguments, in opposition to
the Harkin amendment. One problem has been that Derian really be-
lieves in the Harkin approach. However I think that’s now resolved.
If the Humphrey language succeeds on the Senate Floor, the cru-
cial fight will be in Conference. The key determinant will be who gets
appointed as House Conferees. My suggestion to Christopher, which
he likes, is that the Administration should make every effort to try to
get Congressman Fraser appointed. He is the most widely known and
meetings. Efforts are underway to try to consolidate those gains and to identify and
lineup possible supporters. This effort—to preserve what we just won—may undermine
efforts to move ahead on the proposals the President made in his UN speech.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
respected member on this issue, and apparently supports the Adminis-
tration’s position. If Fraser got appointed and agreed to argue the Ad-
ministration’s case, we could get at least a split House vote in Confer-
ence and come away with either the Humphrey language or a watered
down Harkin. All of this however demands a vigorous, coordinated
and well-handled Administration lobbying effort, such as we have not
yet seen.

This issue has importance far beyond the IFIs. This language is
now in both the military and economic assistance acts. If it gets added
to the IFIs bill, there will be efforts to also include it in trade, monetary
and food for peace legislation. If we lose it now these efforts are very
likely to succeed.

II. Pending Actions
1. International Treaties—Decision needed on general vs. specific
reservations. Immediately thereafter these should be sent to the Hill so
that the President can go a little on the offensive, prodding Congress
for action on these treaties in order to demonstrate their seriousness on
this issue.
2. Coordinated Planning for ECOSOC and UNGA—As described
above, more work is needed, particularly in integrating human rights
with other objectives.
3. Decisions on and implementation of Visa study.
4. Planning for CSCE Review Conference.
5. Congressional lobbying on Harkin.

III. Principal Actors
The major actors on this issue so far have been the President, your-
self, Andy Young, Patt Derian (Coordinator for Human Rights and Hu-
manitarian Affairs at State), and Warren Christopher, to whom Vance
has delegated the authority for the interagency group created in re-
sponse to your memorandum. Also, Fred Bergsten has been actively
involved in the IFIs issue. Various assistant secretaries at State, notably
Holbrooke and Todman (ARA) have testified on this issue as it affects
their regions.

Both Derian and Young are pretty unpredictable. Derian has been
talking to all the fanatics in Congress and in the NGOs, and has there-
fore absorbed a pretty lopsided view of things. Christopher is just get-
ting into this, and it is difficult to assess either his interest or feelings on
it. Bergsten is tough and clear on the IFIs issue. Assistant Secretaries at
State often confuse the issue through testimony which serves their in-
Human Rights
terest but directly conflicts with what other witnesses are saying. For
example, during testimony on economic assistance to Korea and the
Philippines, Holbrooke said that cuts in the program “would not lead to
an improvement in the human rights situation”, implying that such an
approach was “self-defeating”. This was just after Vance had testified
in support of military assistance cuts, on the grounds that they would
cause an improvement.

No one is in a leadership position on this issue. Derian is not in a
position to do so, either bureaucratically or personally. Perhaps Chris-
topher is, but I have some doubts. Most important, no one has taken
any steps to recruit the potential supporters in Congress—particularly
Fraser, who has just published a good piece on this issue in Foreign
Policy (Tab B)19—note the last paragraph. It could be enormously
helpful for you to ask him to come in, and to begin to establish a close
working relationship with him. He is a thoughtful and intelligent man
who has been involved in this issue for years. He would be more
effective in making the Administration’s case in the House than ten
lobbyists.

IV. Broader Issues
At this time my judgment is that the Administration’s policy on
human rights amounts to: “the President is deeply committed to pro-
moting human rights wherever possible”—and nothing more. There is
no agreed conception of how human rights fits into the fabric of foreign
policy, its trade-off value vis-a`-vis other issues (economic cooperation,
national security, etc.), no idea of how to present and defend a policy
that is not 100% moralistic (in fact there appear to be some who favor a
totally pure policy). Nor is there a strategy for stopping the Congres-
sional bandwagon or breaking up the ultra-left/far-right coalition that
was responsible for our defeat in the House. It is important to note that
it was conservatives who want no foreign aid who gave the Harkin lan-
guage the necessary votes.

Beyond a recognition of his deep personal commitment, there is
also considerable uncertainty both within the Administration and
among his supporters in Congress over what the President really
wants. He has taken several different positions. For example, at a recent

39.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
98034. Inform Consuls. Subject: Secretary’s Human Rights Speech.
For Ambassador from Acting Secretary.

Limited Official Use; Immediate. Drafted by Grose; cleared by Janeway, Neidle, and in
S/S, and in substance by Robert Oakley, Thurber, Holly, Seeyle, Derian, Todman, and
Hartman; approved by Christopher.

Human Rights
Georgia Law School. This is not only his first major speech in office, it
is also comprehensive administration statement of the President’s de-
termination to place human rights considerations at the center of US
foreign policy.
2. This speech should be given broad distribution to public and
press (where possible) and to host country officials at all levels. Posts
may wish to supply high-ranking contacts with full text at time of de-
livery or shortly in advance. Department will obviously be interested in
receiving reactions.
3. Speech indicates policy will be implemented by positive steps,
such as encouragement through public statements and economic assist-
ance, or other measures, such as public or private expressions of con-
cern and withholding aid when necessary. Mission representations can
emphasize our interest in seeing practical results.
4. Human rights considerations will enter into our overall foreign
policy, but policy implementation will be flexible, depending on details
of each specific case.
5. While entire speech obviously merits careful review, high points
are:
A) Human rights are defined as:
1) The right to be free from governmental violation of the integrity
of the person, such as torture, etc;
2) The right to the fulfillment of such vital needs as food, shelter,
health care and education; and
3) The right to enjoy civil and political liberties, such as freedom of
thought, etc.

B) Our policy is to promote all these rights. While there may be dis-
agreement on the priorities these rights deserve, we believe that, with
work, all of these rights can be complementary and mutually
reinforcing.

C) US policy will be implemented on case-by-case basis, according
to sets of criteria and questions spelled out in text.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
D) We will seek implementation through multilateral agencies as
well as in bilateral relations. Secretary specifies that it is not our pur-
pose to intervene in the internal affairs of other countries, but as the
President has emphasized, no member of the United Nations can claim
that violation of internationally protected human rights is solely its
own affair. Our policy is to be applied within our own society as well as
abroad. We welcome constructive criticism, at the same time as we
offer it. Declassify upon receipt.

Christopher
40.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, May 2, 1977
Procedure for Implementing Human Rights Policy in the
International Financial Institutions (IFIs)
Issue for Decision
The existing inter-agency procedure for reviewing individual IFI
loan proposals does not provide adequate lead time to implement a
consistent coherent human rights policy in the IFIs. In our judgment a
new procedure is required. I recommend you write Mike Blumenthal
expressing concern about the present procedure and suggesting a new
one be established.

Background/Analysis
The National Advisory Council on the international monetary and
financial policies (NAC) reviews each IFI loan proposal from an eco-
nomic policy perspective before the Secretary of the Treasury provides
instructions to the Executive Director. This review occurs approxi-
mately one week before formal Board action although informal Board
discussions may take place a day or two after the review. As we saw in
the case of the recent export credit to Brazil, this review often occurs too
late for us to give thorough inter-agency consideration to human rights
Official Use. Drafted by Winder. Handwritten notations on the first page of the memo-
randum read: “OBE” and “6/28.”

Human Rights
aspects of the proposal. In addition, it is far too late for us to influence
the progress of the loan in the Institution if we have reason to do so on
human rights grounds.

The problem of a timely review of IFI loans from a human rights
perspective is becoming increasingly acute. The President has written
Senator Humphrey expressing support for the position that we should
use our voice and vote in the IFI to attempt to influence human rights in
developing countries. Over the next 60 days, the World Bank Board of
Directors will consider over 100 loan proposals, many of which have
human rights implications. Therefore, we need a mechanism for sys-
tematic reviewing of these proposals at an early stage.
In our view, what is needed today is a new inter-agency mecha-
nism which would review individual IFI loan proposals well in ad-
vance of the time they are submitted to the Board of Directors for ap-
proval. We are now working with Treasury to devise a system to
ensure that we receive timely notification of all pending loan proposals.
The NSC Human Rights Working Group which you chair would in our
view be an appropriate vehicle for reaching decision within the U.S.
Government on the human rights aspect of IFI loans.

As part of the new procedure, we would suggest a Subgroup of
your Working Group, chaired by the Department at the Office Director
level. This Subgroup would have responsibility for examining each
loan proposal to see if an inter-agency consensus exists that there are no
human rights grounds for delaying or opposing the proposal. If such a
consensus could not be reached, the Subgroup would refer the pro-
posals to your Working Group for decision. We in EB would be happy
to chair this Subgroup should you so decide. We follow the IFIs closely
and have a strong institutional link with the Treasury Department. Fur-
ther, we have no particular bias with regard to human rights situations
in any particular country.

In addition to this procedure, we clearly need a series of country
strategy papers which will enable us to examine individual IFI loans in
context of our overall human rights policy, vis-a`-vis that country, and
in the light of other measures we may be taking to promote human
rights.

Recommendations:
1. That you sign the attached letter to Treasury Secretary
Blumenthal.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2. That you establish a Subgroup of your Human Rights Working
Group which would have the responsibility of examining individual
IFI loan proposals.

41.

Memorandum From Jane Pisano of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)
Washington, May 6, 1977
SUBJECT
Interagency Group on Human Rights
Substituting for Jessica Tuchman, I attended a meeting today of the
interagency group chaired by Warren Christopher. Treasury, State,
DOD, AID, and NSC were represented. Virtually 80 percent of the dis-
cussion was about specific loans which will be considered by IFI’s next
week.

42.

Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, May 11, 1977
IMPACT OF THE US STAND ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Initial international skepticism about the seriousness of the Carter ad-
ministration’s commitment to the fostering of human rights has been dispelled
by presidential statements and US initiatives in bilateral relations and inter-
national forums. Considerable confusion and suspicion over US motives per-
sist, however, and despite recent statements by Secretary Vance and other offi-
cials there still is apprehension over the lengths to which the US may be
prepared to go in pursuit of human rights objectives. This memorandum
surveys reaction to the US stand. A regional listing of significant develop-
ments is provided at annex.

43.

Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to
President Carter
Washington, May 12, 1977
I have just reviewed the proposed ten goals for foreign policy sug-
gested by Zbig2 and would like to make the following points. The pro-
posals make a good deal of sense to me and I think will be of great
value in guiding our policies and measuring our success. I believe they
ought to be stated in public very generally, because they are ambitious
goals and it will be difficult to fully succeed on all of them within the
four-year time span.

I think it is important that our pursuit of human rights stand on its
own ground. We pursue that course not for other political reasons, but
because we believe in human rights. In Objective 4, we say, “We should
match Soviet ideological expansion by a more affirmative American
posture on global human rights,” and on Objective 7, we propose
progress on human rights “in order to stem continental radicalization
and to eliminate Soviet-Cuban presence from the Continent.” Both for-
mulations suggest that a major motivation for our espousal of human
rights is based on a tactical advantage against the Soviet Union. I think
Human Rights
that is true, but I believe the basis of our support of human rights
should be that we would espouse them and support them even if it
were an asset to the Soviet Union, which, of course, it isn’t. I think that
human rights, if pursued in a sophisticated but committed fashion,
could be the most important contribution that the Carter Presidency
will make to foreign policy. I think it is already showing fruits and I
think you are the first President to be able to pursue this policy effec-
tively without being charged with hypocrisy either personally or in
terms of the American society.

I note the attached editorial in this morning’s New York Times,3
which is beginning to question our commitment. We cannot permit
that to happen. (“Hands have no tears to flow”)
The last phrase in Objective 10 worries me because, unless defined,
it sounds like Viet Nam. It reads “to develop capabilities, to deter or
counter the Soviet military intervention in the third world . . .” Of
course we must. I am not arguing with the objective here, but I do think
we should not mechanically pursue a global policy to counter Soviet in-
tervention. Sometimes that intervention is more of a trap for them and
an asset to us. As we have shown in Zaire, if we are careful, others will
do it and, as we involve ourselves too much in some of these disputes,
we undermine the capability of the indigenous forces to defend them-
selves. We look negative.

On page 6, we cast our definition of human rights by a way of
remedies to nudge or force violating societies to improve, and I have no
objection to that, but I think an equal part of our effort should be to
honor societies which are making progress on their own, for example,
Spain, Portugal, India, Peru. That aspect of our human rights policy is
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
I find the analysis of so-called “regional influentials” to be very in-
teresting, but the separate analysis does not deal with the status of
human rights and how the violation of those principles by some of
those countries affects our relations, which I think is the really tough
point. Unless we include that aspect in the approach, I fear we will be
pursuing improved relations and implying a disregard for human
rights at the same time—for example, Brazil.

44.

Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

45.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, May 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights PRM
Attached at Tab A is a human rights PRM2 which has been the sub-
ject of substantial interagency—and intra-NSC—discussion. After pre-
liminary meetings, several concerned agencies were asked to submit
drafts of a human rights PRM. These were coordinated and a redraft in-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
corporating many of their ideas was produced and debated at a
meeting of about a dozen NSC staff members.

The resulting PRM is intended to elicit a review that would pro-
vide a sound theoretical and analytical base for a human rights policy,
while at the same time avoiding the risk of philosophical debates. More
specifically, the review will define (for the first time) exactly what our
objectives are in pursuing this policy. It will attempt to deal with the re-
alities imposed by existing law, and provide us with the basis for de-
ciding whether such legislation can in fact be honestly implemented. It
will evaluate the full range of policy tools available to the government
(both unilaterally and in multinational forums) and will analyze their
pros and cons. It will review important national security tradeoffs, and
will propose a strategy for improving Congressional relations on
human rights. Finally, the study will examine bureaucratic obstruc-
tions to pursuing a successful human rights policy, and will propose
bureaucratic changes (reorganization, policy guidance needed in the
field, etc.) that appear necessary.

Recommendation:
That you approve issuance of the human rights PRM at Tab A.

Human Rights
46.

Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–281
Washington, May 20, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Attorney General
The Secretary of Commerce
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The United States Representative to the United Nations
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, U.S. Information Agency
SUBJECT
Human Rights
The President has directed that the Special Coordination Com-
mittee undertake a review of U.S. policy with respect to human rights.
The review should:
1. Define U.S. objectives in the area of human rights, including,
where appropriate, the timeframe for achieving such objectives.
2. Identify what constitutes “a consistent pattern of gross viola-
tions of internationally recognized human rights”, listing those nations
which currently fit this definition.
3. Evaluate actions which the U.S. could take to improve human
rights conditions. Consideration should be given but not limited to the
following:
a. Diplomatic actions, public statements, and various symbolic
acts.
b. Changes in levels of security and economic assistance and food
aid—as both sanctions and incentives.
c. Initiatives in International Financial Institutions of which the
U.S. is a member.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
d. Use of overseas radio, and later television, broadcast facilities.
e. Improved access into the U.S. for refugees and dissidents, with
an evaluation of the relevant sections of the Immigration and Natural-
ization Act.
f. Substantive and procedural initiatives the U.S. could take in
various international forums.
4. Review national security aspects of U.S. policies on human
rights, including consideration of their impact on: U.S.–Soviet de´tente;
friendly states and allies; and other areas of major strategic concern
such as the PRC and the Koreas.
5. Propose actions which can be taken to give authority and bu-
reaucratic access to those charged with the responsibility for inte-
grating human rights considerations into U.S. foreign policy, including
in U.S. missions abroad.
6. Develop a strategy to improve the Administration’s relations
with Congress in this area.

The review should be completed by July 1, 1977, and should be no
longer than 30 pages.

Zbigniew Brzezinski

47.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, May 23, 1977
SUBJECT
Signing of the American Convention on Human Rights
In your Pan American Day speech, you made two specific com-
mitments—to sign and seek the ratification of Protocol I of the Treaty of
Human Rights
Tlatelolco3 and of the American Convention on Human Rights. The
most prevalent reaction to your speech by Latin Americans was
whether you would follow up on your promises, and this will un-
doubtedly be a question Mrs. Carter will hear on her trip. Therefore, I
would recommend that you try to sign both treaties before or during
her trip.

The Mexicans will be bringing Protocol I with them for their Cab-
inet meeting in Washington on Thursday, May 26, and it would be ap-
propriate to sign it with Mrs. Carter present, before your flight to St.
Simons Island.

48.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter
Washington, May 23, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Policy on Human Rights
This memorandum (1) provides a brief status report on measures
being taken here to assure that our human rights policy is effectively
implemented and (2) requests that you approve a means for inter-
agency coordination on human rights.
1. To implement our human rights policy, we have organized a
broadscale effort involving all relevant bureaus of the Department as
well as all U.S. posts abroad. As part of this program, we have directed
the following:
Human Rights
—Specific proposed courses of action with respect to each country,
with consideration to be given to each of the available approaches to
encourage recognition of human rights.
—Strategy papers and action plans on how best to use security
assistance, bilateral economic aid, and U.S. participation in interna-
tional financial institutions to promote human rights.
—Action plans on more creative use of public diplomacy (e.g.,
through USIA’s efforts) to further human rights.
—Action plans for using multilateral institutions to promote
human rights.
—More effective cooperation with the Hill and the growing
numbers of human rights lobbies.

In addition, I have directed circulation throughout the Department
and to all U.S. posts abroad of important statements on human rights
made by you and senior Administration officials, including of course
the Law Day speech. I have also appointed Warren Christopher as
Chairman of the Department’s Human Rights Coordinating Group
which oversees all major human rights decisions within the State De-
partment, AID and USIA.
2. To enlist fullest possible support for our human rights policy,
coordination throughout the Executive Branch is necessary. Many deci-
sions in this area require collaboration with, for example, the Depart-
ment of Defense, the Treasury, and the National Security Council.
In one particular area—decision-making on human rights issues as
they relate to foreign assistance—interdepartmental coordination is al-
ready being provided by an interagency group formed pursuant to an
NSC memorandum of April 1. That memo specified that the group
should be chaired by my representative, and earlier this month I desig-
nated Warren Christopher as Chairman.

I believe that the coordination should now be broadened to in-
clude Executive Branch efforts on all fronts. The State Department is
prepared to take the lead, if you agree.

Recommendation
That you direct the State Department to coordinate Executive
Branch efforts affecting the promotion of human rights abroad.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

49.

Memorandum From the Deputy Coordinator for Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Schneider) to the
Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(Derian)
Washington, May 23, 1977
SUBJECT
PRM Meeting
1. Primary Goal:
Retraction of PRM on basis that all or virtually all objectives are
now in process of being resolved.
2. Strategy:
(a) Define interface between on-going activities and PRM;
(b) Emphasize overall coordination will be hampered by inter-
fering in process already set in motion by NSC April 1 memorandum
calling on State to establish inter-agency committee2 (in place).
(c) Recommend reporting by inter-agency committee on weekly
basis of actions undertaken—but by agency representatives to their re-
spective agencies based on D/HA summary of inter-agency meetings.
3. Interface between on-going activities and PRM:
(a) First objective is “Define U.S. objectives in the area of human
rights, including, where appropriate, the timeframe for achieving such
objectives.”
RESPONSE: The Deputy Secretary was charged by the Secretary
with following up on the NSC Memorandum of April 1. On that basis,
country action plans are currently being drawn up which focus on spe-
cific U.S. objectives. These plans, as well as objectives in such func-
tional areas as International Organizations (UN, ILO, etc.) are soon to
be available. Those objectives, spelled out along with summary of cur-
rent conditions, will be provided through the inter-agency committee
Human Rights
to other departments. The directions include requiring, in the case of
(b) Identify what constitutes “a consistent pattern of gross viola-
tions of internationally recognized human rights”, listing those nations
which currently fit this definition. The proverbial “hit list”, it is the
single area in the PRM where no formal action has been undertaken.
However, at the same time, it should be noted that D/HA has been
in touch with the authors of the language and with legal scholars to
provide a tentative analysis of the words involved.

(c) Evaluate actions, etc.:
1. “Diplomatic actions, public statements, and various symbolic
acts.”
RESPONSE: All of these elements are contained in the directions
previously submitted by D/HA to regional bureaus for consideration
in preparation of country action plans,4
2. “Changes in levels of security and economic assistance and food
aid—as both sanctions and incentives.”
RESPONSE: Again, specifically cited in directions to Bureaus in
preparation of country action plans. Inter-Agency Committee and
Arms Export Control Board now engaged in developing procedures for
consideration of existing programs, loans, grants and sales under those
programs, and future budget proposals.
3. “Initiatives in International Financial Institutions of which the
U.S. is a member.”
RESPONSE: Inter-Agency Committee has not begun to deal with
current loans in IFI’s but to establish procedure for early action within
IFI’s to link loan activity to promotion of human rights.
4. “Use of overseas radio, and later television, broadcast facilities.”
Preparation of specific human rights action plans by USIA, CU and PA
will be completed for consideration by Coordinating Committee and
by Inter-Agency Committee.
5. “Improved access into the U.S. etc.”: Previously mandated and
recommendations submitted. Being considered by White House. Al-
though, if the last recommendation from State was negative on
amending the law, perhaps this can be viewed as the basis for a new
evaluation.
6. “. . . international forums.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
RESPONSE: Being undertaken by IO with results to come before
Coordinating Group in State and then Inter-Agency Committee.
4. “Review national security aspects, etc.”:
As it relates to “friendly states and allies” part of the country action
plans. Similarly, as it relates to Korea. PRC action up in the air.
5. “Develop a strategy . . . relations with Congress . . .”:
RESPONSE: Initially undertaken through the Inter-Agency Com-
mittee as it related to IFI’s and through SAPRC with regard to security
assistance. H in process of preparation following Christopher to Vance
memo, although actual tasking memo not yet approved.

50.

Memorandum for the Record
Washington, May 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Initial Meeting of Interagency Working Group for PRM–28 (Human Rights),
1. Cord Meyer, SA/DDCI, and [less than 1 line not declassified] rep-
resented CIA at a 24 May meeting at EOB of an Interagency Working
Group to prepare PRM–28 (Human Rights). The meeting was tempo-
rarily chaired by Ms. Jessica Tuchman, Chief of NSC’s Office of Global

51.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
Posts
124544. From Deputy Secretary for the Ambassador. Subject: Pri-
ority Attention to Human Rights.
1. In his speech at Notre Dame, the President reaffirmed that our
commitment to human rights is “a fundamental tenet of our foreign
policy.” To insure that the priority which the President and the Secre-
tary place on human rights is fully reflected at your post, I request that
you continue to give human rights matters your personal attention and
you direct the Embassy’s work on human rights. Your personal in-
volvement will insure that appropriate attention is given (a) to analysis
and reporting on human rights practices; (b) to compliance with new
and existing legislative provisions, particularly those bearing on our
foreign assistance program; and, (c) in countries that share our respect
for human rights, to encouraging international cooperation to protect
and promote basic rights.
2. To support your efforts, basic documents in this field will be
pouched to you shortly. A follow-up cable will contain general guid-
ance on our agenda for action on human rights and request specific
post contributions to our overall action program.

Vance
Human Rights

52.

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to the Assistant Secretary of State for
International Organization Affairs (Maynes)
Washington, May 30, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Policy on Human Rights: Actions to be Taken
I have sent the attached memorandum (Tab 1) to the Secretary
outlining a broadscale effort to implement our human rights policy as
effectively as possible. That effort, which involves all relevant bureaus
of the Department as well as AID, USIA and all U.S. posts abroad, is
premised upon the comprehensive statement of policy set forth in the
Secretary’s Law Day speech (Tab 2). That policy was recently ampli-
fied by the President in his speech at Notre Dame4 where he identified
our basic commitment to promote the cause of human rights as the first
of the cardinal premises on which our foreign policy rests.
In a related development an interagency policy review is under
way under the aegis of the Special Coordinating Committee (SCC) of
the NSC. I will chair the SCC for the purpose of this review, which is
designed to produce a concise paper and specific policy recommenda-
tions for the President. The review will further develop and refine the
policies already enunciated by the Administration. The May 20 memo-
randum from Dr. Brzezinski setting out the terms of reference for the
review is attached at Tab 3.

As you will see from my memorandum to the Secretary, one of the
principal components of our effort is the development of an “Agenda
for U.S. Action on Human Rights at the United Nations.” I would like
you to undertake preparation of such an agenda for submission to the
Human Rights Coordinating Group.

The agenda should encompass consideration of at least the
following:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
(i) determining before the convening of each new session of the
General Assembly and each major UN conference the priority human
rights issues for special U.S. attention;
(ii) consulting early and often with close allies and, when possible,
with non-aligned and third world nations, to identify human rights
issues of shared concern and forge appropriate coalitions;
(iii) seeking ways to eliminate the racism-zionism issue, and trying
to assure even-handed study and statements on country and area
human rights situations so that not just a few countries are singled out;
(iv) following up on the President’s proposals for strengthening
the HRC by more frequent meetings, by returning the Commission to
New York, and by increasing its mandate with the appointment of a
UN Human Rights Commissioner, and also to take steps to preserve
the Commission’s procedures for dealing with private complaints on
human rights.

Please do not feel constrained to limit your proposals to these five
areas.

Paragraph 3(f) of the memorandum requesting the PRM seeks an
evaluation of substantive and procedural initiatives the U.S. could take
in various international forums to improve human rights conditions.
The agenda I have requested above will clearly be of major assistance in
preparing a response to paragraph 3(f). Since paragraph 3(f) is not lim-
ited to the UN, however, I would appreciate it if you would prepare a
draft response to paragraph 3(f) setting forth any substantive and pro-
cedural initiatives you would recommend that the U.S. take in the UN
as well as any other international forums to improve human rights
conditions.

I think it is important to note, as you prepare your paper, that in
his Law Day speech the Secretary (1) specifically defined the human
rights which are the subject of our policy, (2) set forth in detail the ques-
tions to be considered as we determine whether and how to act with re-
spect to human rights, and (3) stated that once we choose to act, the
means available range from quiet diplomacy in its many forms,
through public pronouncements, to withholding of assistance.
In addition to the above described action agenda, I would like you
to prepare, in consultation with AID, and with clearance from D/HA
and S/P, a status report on the observance of women’s rights as well as
an action plan designed to foster greater observance of such rights. You
may wish to consider the following in your paper: cooperation with
U.S. women’s organizations; greater emphasis on women’s rights in
the implementation of current U.S. legislation on development assist-
ance; ways to follow-up on International Women’s Year.

Please have your staff contact Mr. Schneider of D/HA (Room 7802,
x21181) for further details on substance, for information on format and

Human Rights
procedures, and, as needed, for copies of tasking memoranda sent to
other bureaus in connection with this effort. Your papers should be
submitted by close of business June 15, except that I would like your
draft response to paragraph 3(f) by close of business June 7. A Human
Rights Coordinating Group meeting will be scheduled after June 15 to
discuss your proposals.
53.

Note From the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher) to
Secretary of State Vance
Washington, June 6, 1977
Cy:
I plan to meet this week with the bureaus and agencies in the De-
partment to discuss questions and problems they may be encountering
in responding to the tasking memos they have received, which are re-
ferred to in the attached report.

To keep pressing forward but also to be coherent and responsible
is a difficult balance, especially with a PRM in the works. I want to be
sure the bureaus and agencies have an opportunity to express their
concerns.

Warren
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Attachment
Briefing Memorandum From the Coordinator for Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to Secretary of
State Vance
Washington, June 1, 1977
Status Report on U.S. Policy on Human Rights: Actions Being Taken
Since May 3 the following actions have been taken in accordance
with the memorandum from the Deputy Secretary.
1. Communication of Policy to All Posts
A. The Atlanta Law Day speech was dispatched to all posts. Am-
bassadors and Embassy personnel informed the highest level of host
governments of the speech and of U.S. human rights policy and re-
ported on the reaction.

B. A cable has been sent to the posts directing the Ambassador to
take personal responsibility for human rights reporting and for as-
suring Embassy personnel awareness of our human rights policy de-
velopments and of recent legislative and international legal develop-
ments in the human rights field.

C. The results of the policy review memorandum process now un-
derway will be communicated to the posts at an appropriate time.
2. Action with Respect to Individual Countries
A. All regional assistant secretaries have been requested to submit
draft reports on human rights conditions and appropriate recommen-
dations for achieving human rights improvements. Each region is cur-
rently preparing three draft reports for submission by June 15 with the
remainder due on July 1. Bureaus will both prepare draft reports for
comment by individual posts and in other instances permit posts to
prepare the initial report for review and comment by the bureaus.
Human Rights
B. This process of defining conditions, obligations, and recommen-
dations in accordance with the directives enunciated in your Law Day
speech and the President’s Notre Dame speech6 appears the best way to
avoid the concept of a country “hit” list since it will provide positive in-
dividual human rights strategies for each country rather than a pariah
list.
3. Coordination of Policy
A. The State Department continues to maintain overall direction of
the human rights policy coordination within the executive branch. The
Interagency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance,
which the Deputy Secretary chairs, met several times with full repre-
sentation from other agencies to consider issues involving human
rights and the International Financial Institutions.

B. A special coordinating committee, which the Deputy Secretary
is chairing, has been designated by the NSC to complete a policy re-
view memorandum (PRM 28) on human rights and foreign policy. The
Department is taking the lead in developing a response to the PRM
with initial drafts due June 7, committee review by June 15 and final re-
view by June 22.

C. Internally the HRCG, which you previously established and
which the Deputy Secretary chairs, has met to review action on
human rights and IFIs prior to their consideration by the Interagency
Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance.

D. An ad hoc working committee which D/HA and EB co-chair
has been formed to provide initial recommendations to the HRCG and
ultimately to the interagency committee, on bilateral and multilateral
assistance issues relating to our human rights policy. In addition to
co-chairing this group, D/HA also provides staff support to the HRCG
and the inter-agency committee and acts as secretariat for those
entities.

E. In the area of security assistance policy, D/HA has been named
a full member of the proposed Arms Export Control Board and its
(Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1980 Human
Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D180, IAGHRFA—History & Organization)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
various working groups. Policy guidelines can be discussed in this set-
ting prior to further consideration of human rights and security assist-
ance issues within the HRCG and the interagency committee.
F. D/HA has cooperated with the Foreign Service Institute in orga-
nizing the first seminar on human rights and will collaborate with the
institute in future efforts to strengthen the understanding of our
human rights policy within the Department and receive the counsel of
on-line foreign service officers as to how best to implement that policy.
4. Economic Assistance
A. AID will be submitting drafts of its “New Initiatives in Human
Rights” program as part of its response to the PRM, with a final report
by mid-June.

B. D/HA has met with the representatives of several other indus-
trial nations, to discuss ways of cooperating on human rights. The con-
sultation process will be continuing and will be bolstered by the recom-
mendations from appropriate posts on how to accomplish this goal.
C. AID is drawing up a program covering what has been done and
what will be done to promote women’s rights.

D. With regard to multilateral programs:
(i) a procedure ensuring long lead time notice for IFI loans is near
completion with the previously mentioned ad hoc working committee
as the first source of screening for human rights considerations.
(ii) EB is developing a paper on the implementation of our human
rights policy through the IFI’s. A summary draft will be completed by
June 7 as part of the PRM exercise.

(iii) the implementation of our human rights policy in the IFIs has
gone forward at the same time as we have responded to upcoming
loans in the various IFIs. In two instances (Ethiopia and Benin), we
have abstained on World Bank votes on human rights grounds; in two
other instances (El Salvador and Argentina) we have indicated that
human rights considerations would likely produce a negative vote and
suggested the appropriateness of a delay in considering the loans. In
the case of El Salvador, the delay was requested by that government.
Our Embassy reported that the IFI action had engendered the first clear
recognition on the part of the GOES of our seriousness in seeking
Human Rights
human rights improvements. In the case of Argentina, our concern
was communicated by the Secretary of Treasury at the IBD annual
meeting. No final decision by the Argentine government in this
matter has yet taken place.

In several other instances, demarches have been made to indicate
that we are considering human rights factors as we evaluate IFI loans in
keeping with the President’s stated intention of using our voice and
vote in the IFI’s to promote human rights. In the case of Paraguay, the
demarche produced a promise on the part of that government to re-
spond favorably to the IAHRC request to visit Paraguay. The formal in-
vitation, however, has not yet been offered. Other instances in which
general demarches were made include Malawi and the Philippines.
Other demarches are in process for Indonesia, Guatemala and
Romania.

These actions have given substance to the Administration’s human
rights policy in the IFIs and thereby improved the chances for the
success of our legislative strategy. However, continuing evidence on
this policy is clearly necessary if the legislative strategy is ultimately to
be successful.
5. Security Assistance
As noted, the Arms Export Control Board is now in operation with
D/HA participation and initial efforts to define policy guidelines are
underway. In relation to our effort and in conjunction with the PRM, a
summary statement will be available June 7. In addition, D/HA, in ful-
filling its legislative requirements, has continued to advise on arms
transfers to countries with human rights problems. The reports now
being prepared for each country also will discuss ways in which secu-
rity assistance programs can be modified in order to help implement
our human rights policy.
6. Cooperation with the Congress
H has been actively engaged in security assistance, State Depart-
ment authorization, IFI activities, and economic assistance legislation.
In addition H has worked closely with other bureaus and the White
House in pressing for the consideration of the Genocide treaty. The
Deputy Secretary opened the Senate ratification hearings on the
of a U.S. veto of an IDB loan to the Government of El Salvador had signaled a “new GOES
attitude on human rights.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

54.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, June 8, 1977
OUTLINE—PRM 28 RESPONSE
I. Objectives:
A. The United States human rights policy must be consistent with
existing international obligations, domestic law and our nation’s heri-
tage. It must be reflected throughout the executive branch and be prem-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ised on an understanding of the task and the need for a long-term com-
mitment to produce results. The overall goal is to promote the
observance of internationally-accepted standards of human rights
throughout the world.
1. Specific objectives (the time frame for the attainment of these ob-
jectives will depend greatly on individual country circumstances, and
on the degree of coherence and persistence of U.S. human rights
advocacy).

(a) Promotion of rights of the person in all countries. The initial ob-
jective should be focused on countries with whom we have the greatest
degree of involvement. Failure to see human rights improvements ulti-
mately will jeopardize those bilateral relations.

(b) Promotion of civil and political liberties. The encouragement of
and identification of U.S. with democratic countries and those moving
in that direction is a legitimate goal, and one which has direct relevance
to the enhancement of rights of the person.

(c) Promotion of such basic needs as food, shelter, health care, and
education. This objective can be sought most effectively through posi-
tive support and international action.

(d) Achievement of greater international awareness and concern in
improving human rights conditions.

(e) Reduction in the level of U.S. association with regimes which
engage in gross violations of human rights of their citizens. It will dem-
onstrate our own commitment to human rights goals, maintain public
confidence in the thrust of our foreign policy, and, hopefully, influence
the nation involved and other states as well.
1—Lessening our identification could reach a halt to all assistance
and support if a country rejects pleas for improvements and moves
along a path of institutionalizing its repressive features.
2—Disassociation involving full cut-offs of assistance would occur
where any country reached the threshold defined as being engaged in
“a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized
human rights.” “Consistent pattern” would be defined in terms of pe-
riod of time, regular nature and trend. “Gross violations” would focus
on those rights of the person cited in current law—and derived from
United Nations Resolution—“torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment, prolonged detention without charges and
trial, and other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty, or the security
of person.”

Human Rights
3—In making that determination as well as in examining the con-
ditions in countries which may not reach that level, similar questions
would be asked in each case: the kind of violations or deprivations, the
extent, the pattern, the trend, the degree of government control and re-
sponsibility and the willingness to submit to outside investigation.
(f) To demonstrate by the closeness of our relations, including spe-
cial treatment in our assistance programs, our readiness to support
those countries which preserve respect for human rights.
(g) Work toward the development and strengthening of interna-
tional institutional protection of human rights through the ratification
of relevant international covenants and treaties by the U.S. and other
nations.

(h) Promote international humanitarian programs with the goal of
easing conditions of political refugees.

(i) Develop public understanding and support for our policy
through the involvement of non-governmental organizations and close
collaboration with the Congress.

(j) Ensure that other nations know clearly our human rights policy
and seek to obtain the broadest support for that policy from other
democratic nations.

II. Strategies for pursuing policy objectives:
A. Available mechanisms to implement a human rights policy:
1. Symbolic acts such as public statements and personal visits rep-
resent an important declarative aspect of the policy, particularly as it
relates to general goals.
2. Diplomatic actions should be an integral part of individual
country strategy. These actions essentially are preliminary contacts set-
ting the stage for an understanding by the host government of the im-
plications of failing to improve human rights conditions. Later, such
demarches can provide signals as to U.S. current sense of human rights
conditions.

(a) Defining ahead of time the likely sanctions and incentives re-
lated to human rights objectives permits other governments an early
opportunity to respond privately to our concerns.

(b) The existence of statutory restrictions on economic and security
assistance on human rights should be communicated as an indication
of broad support for overall human rights policy.
3. Foreign assistance as leverage:
(a) Security Assistance (including grant MAP, FMS sales, training,
size of U.S. military personnel complement in country, and commercial
arms license approval) generally should be the first area of aid to a gov-
ernment to be reduced. Such assistance is usually viewed as linking the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
U.S. most directly with a repressive regime. So far as possible, in light
of 502B, the reduction of assistance should continue over a period of
months during which the government is clearly placed on alert and
aware of the linkage between human rights concerns and security
assistance.
1—Interface between security assistance policy and human rights
policy must be communicated fully to each government. Gradual ac-
tion to reduce the level and kind of assistance is desirable.
2—Commercial arms licenses for repressive regimes should be
used along with all other security assistance programs to communicate
our human rights concerns.

(b) Economic Assistance:
1—Bilateral AID programs should be determined in light of
human rights factors. At the same time, efforts should be made to re-
spond positively to governments which act to improve human rights
conditions. Additional efforts to ensure expansion of “New Initiatives”,
furtherance of human rights, and establishment of women’s rights
agenda.
2—Multilateral assistance:
a) Within the International Financial Institutions, the United States
can promote its objectives by insuring a concern for human rights con-
ditions, particularly as they relate to rights of the person, at every level
of the IFI’s operations. Concern for these rights in the IFI’s is not only
called for by the President’s policy, but it also is the likely outcome of
the current IFI authorization legislative process and is consistent with
the broad development purpose set forth in IFI charters.
(c) There is no other effective way to demonstrate U.S. willingness
to risk costs in support of human rights objectives than to reduce or end
its bilateral assistance to a consistent violator.

(d) It also is a way of inducing greatest pressure within a regime
for change. The benefits of continued repression thus are outweighed
by the negative consequences of reduced U.S. assistance, the possibility
of similar action by other countries, and the criticism of international
public opinion.
4. Greater use of overseas radio, television broadcast facilities and
other educational and cultural exchange both to convey information on
the human rights activities of the Administration and to report on inter-
national human rights developments.

(a) CSCE compliance with cultural, journalistic and educational
exchange should be emphasized.

Human Rights
(b) Expanding information in developing regions can both educate
and promote greater human rights observance.
5. Initiatives to promote refugee relief:
(a) Improved access into the U.S. for refugees and dissidents by in-
creasing conditional entry numbers and conforming definition of ref-
ugee to UN non-discriminatory language, both involving legislation.
(b) Additionally, we might submit legislation to remove any nu-
merical limitation on refugees the President could admit under a parole
where he is responding to a legitimate international appeal or where an
emergent refugee situation is of special concern to the U.S.
6. Initiatives in international organizations:
(a) Coordinate effort to obtain a United Nations Commissioner for
Human Rights.

(b) Promote human rights in U.N. specialized agencies.
(c) Strengthen independence and increase resources of United Na-
tions and Inter-American Human Rights Commission.

(d) Promote creation of African Human Rights Commission.
III. Competing Interests: National Security Considerations:
A. The national security interests of the U.S. may be affected by de-
cisions to promote human rights where the end result is less identifica-
tion with a country engaged in human rights violations.
1. Close identification with a repressive regime during this period
also may risk longer term alienation of U.S. from the people of that
country and any following government identified with democratic
principles and human rights.

B. US-Soviet de´tente:
1. The overriding importance of nuclear arms control to both the
Soviet Union and the United States, as well as the human rights related
goal of avoiding nuclear war would argue against linking this issue to
specific human rights improvements.
2. A similar argument would not hold in relation to other aspects
of de´tente, such as improved economic relations, expansion of trade
and commerce, or non-contentious relations. Linkage in these areas,
privately applied, could be feasible and fruitful.

C. Friendly states and allies:
1. Emphasizing human rights concerns with such states in few in-
stances could produce significant impacts on U.S. national security
concerns. In fact, the failure to demonstrate those concerns in the cases
of Greece and Spain may have produced a threat to maintenance of U.S.
military bases in those countries.
2. Emphasizing those concerns with friendly states and allies who
are not human rights violators (Western Europe) could promote
greater cooperation and joint action in this area.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
3. Emphasizing those concerns with Israel would complicate rela-
tions with that country. However, it also might produce some human
rights improvements.

D. Korea: Failure to improve human rights situation would pro-
duce Congressionally mandated reductions in U.S. identification with
the current regime. Current planned withdrawal of U.S. troops prob-
ably diminishes leverage available in influencing improvement. How-
ever, the converse also is true in that the removal of troops places
greater importance on maintenance of remaining security assistance.
E. PRC: At least the initial stages of the normalization process
probably are inappropriate to press for major human rights improve-
ments. Any hope of achieving such improvements awaits further ac-
tion in the normalization process.

IV. Internal Organization of Human Rights Efforts:
A. D/HA within the Department of State is charged by law with
coordinating human rights activities for the Secretary of State.
B. Within the federal government, the Inter-Agency Committee on
Human Rights and Foreign Assistance, chaired by the Deputy Secre-
tary should continue to function, although expanded to involve all
human rights considerations affecting U.S. foreign policy. In defining
objectives, U.S. missions abroad are vital to help define the objectives
and the tactics to achieve them. Initial action in this area already is
underway.

C. Crucial is full Presidential support for policy implementation
within executive agencies.

V. Congressional Relations:
A. Key strategy must be to demonstrate credibility of policy, to in-
volve the Congress in helping to develop policy and involve the
Congress in the review of implementation.

B. Early and thorough involvement in establishment of policy and
implementation would avoid confrontation.

C. In-depth and frequent briefing of congressional staff also
should be part of the strategy.

55.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Deputy Secretary
of State (Christopher)
Washington, June 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights and the IFIs
From our experience thus far I strongly believe we need the fol-
lowing to improve the process by which we make human rights deci-
sions in connection with IFI loan proposals:
1. timely written reports on the human rights situation in the bor-
rowing countries in question,
2. specific criteria for judging performance and changes in the
human rights situation in offending countries, and
3. a system for coordinating with other countries concerning U.S.
action on human rights and foreign assistance.

Concerning (1), above, the recent case of Benin made it clear that
we need up-to-date reports on the status of human rights conditions
before making a decision on how the United States should vote, and on
any other necessary actions. In the Benin case we abstained on two IDA
credits in May, apparently on the basis of a human rights report made
in January of this year. I believe we should have an up-to-date written
report on the human rights situation (including an indication of sources
classification marking. Katz transmitted Bergsten’s memorandum to Christopher under a
June 21 action memorandum and requested that Christopher approve a response to
Bergsten indicating that the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance
(IGHRFA) would, at its June 24 meeting, consider the procedural issues Bergsten raised.
Handwritten notations on Katz’s action memorandum read: “OBE Per Steve Oxman

56.

Memorandum Prepared by Representative Donald Fraser
Washington, June 10, 1977
Other issues.
1. There is a need for up-to-date reporting on human rights condi-
tions. It would be desirable to make an annual report on all countries,
not just on those countries to which military equipment will be sold.
Raw data, of course, need not be published. Such reports provide an
opportunity to show positive change without making a direct link to
U.S. efforts.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2. The coordinators office needs strengthening with additional per-
sonnel. In addition, full-time human rights2 offices are needed in the re-
gional bureaus. They continue to be part-time now.
3. Attendance at political trials at the level of a political officer is
needed. The Embassies should be informed of such a policy.
4. With respect to our participation in the international financial
banks, if discretion is left to the Executive Branch in pursuing human
rights concerns (which I favor), is the government developing diplo-
matic approaches prior to consideration of loan applications by serious
violators to ensure discussion of the human rights factors in the staffs’
papers and the Boards’ deliberations?
5. In the past, the U.S. has supported and cooperated with the
Southern African Program of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights
Under Law. The Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs has given
grants to the International Commission of Jurists. These actions have
been helpful. The Department’s affirmative position on the UN Trust
Fund and on the proposed defense and aid program for Chile have also
been good, but I’m told the results have been poor.

(a) Could the Department look at the possibilities for initiating a
worldwide UN legal defense and aid program5 with voluntary (in-
cluding US) contributions?

(b) Could the Department also examine possibilities of creating a
U.S. Commission which could administer a modest amount of public
funds in support of programs that strengthen the role of the private
sector working in human rights field. Such funding might provide for
conferences on the subject of human rights, fellowships for human
rights studies abroad, and studies of special human rights problems.

Human Rights

57.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the President’s Assistant for
Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat)
Washington, June 10, 1977
SUBJECT
The Genocide Treaty
I understand that the Genocide Treaty is in pretty serious trouble
on the Hill, and will not be ratified without strong help from the White

58.

Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for
International Development (Gilligan) to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, June 13, 1977
SUBJECT
U. S. Policy on Human Rights
Attached are the contributions to PRM 28 which you requested
from A.I.D. These are:
—Action Plan for Expanding A.I.D.’s Human Rights Initiatives
(Tab A)
—Status Report on the Observance of Women’s Rights (Tab B)
—Use of Economic and Food Assistance to Improve Human
Rights Conditions (Tab C)
The last paper has been coordinated with State/EB as you
requested.

These possibilities for additional action in pursuit of the Adminis-
tration’s human rights objectives are appropriate for consideration at
this point. No decisions should be made on them at this time, however,
since their respective pros and cons cannot be reflected in a contribu-
tion of this length. Each should be more thoroughly and openly dis-
cussed, and coordinated with proposed action in other areas, to fully
develop information on which final action can be based. I assume such
interagency discussions will be part of the PRM 28 process as it has
been for earlier PRMs.

John J. Gilligan
Tab A
Paper Prepared in the Agency for International
Development
Washington, undated
NEW INITIATIVES IN HUMAN RIGHTS
The A.I.D. program provides support for selective initiatives spe-
cifically addressed to human rights concerns, in the context of eco-
Human Rights
nomic development. The kinds of initiatives which we have said we
contemplate include, but will not necessarily be limited to:
(a) Cooperative programs with leading international or regional
institutions, such as the International Commission of Jurists and the
Inter-American Human Rights Commission, which are specialized in
dealing with serious human rights violations;
(b) Programs designed to help the urban poor and rural poor to
have effective access to the rights and protections which are provided
for them under law and under development programs—including ar-
rangements for local advocacy and for nonformal education aimed at
providing the poor majority with knowledge of their rights and of gov-
ernmental processes which affect them; and
(c) Sponsorship of studies and conferences regarding human
rights problems and their relationship to development.
The emphasis is to be on the various categories of human rights
recognized in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as they relate
to each other.

Each A.I.D. regional bureau has proposed to follow a strategy to fit
the particular circumstances and needs of the countries it is concerned
with. LA has stressed legal aid and “public interest” law. NE empha-
sizes the need for a better understanding of local social, cultural, and
political conditions. ASIA stresses the work of voluntary groups, such
as the Asia Foundation. AFR intends to encourage studies and confer-
ences, with emphasis on African participation, which focus on
problems related to the development in multi-ethnic societies, the
human rights aspects of local and traditional values, and the human
rights consequences of economic and political change.
In actions taken to date:
—A.I.D. sponsored a one-day meeting at Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity of scholars, foundation officials, human rights activists, and of-
ficers from the Executive and Legislative Branch on the relationship be-
tween economic and the other categories of rights. The deliberations
are summarized in the April issue of War on Hunger. A.I.D. also funded
a conference sponsored by the State University of New York at Albany
and the Irish Institute for Public Administration on the roles which leg-
islative bodies play with respect to the various categories of human
rights. A report on that meeting is available.
—A.I.D. is sponsoring a program of studies by scholars in various
countries on non-totalitarian approaches toward economic growth
with equity. We are contributing to a program of research on local po-
litical leadership and development programs and progress. Antedating
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the new initiatives, it has supported a program for technical assistance
to representative assemblies in developing countries, but this support
is scheduled to end in 1977. We have also distributed a collection of re-
ports dealing with Human Rights and Economic Development.
—A.I.D. supports a major American Society for International Law
study of the role of public interest law as an instrument for economic
and social development. We have helped a legal aid program in Chile
and expect to do the same in other countries.
—We have supported conferences on social and political struc-
tures and rural equity in Afghanistan and Yemen.
—We are providing money for some leaders in the World Peace
Through Law organization to visit African countries for the purpose of
surveying the need for “paralegal” services. A proposal to support a
conference on human rights to be sponsored by the Rwanda Govern-
ment is pending.

Some of the private voluntary organizations assisted by A.I.D. have
been doing work that is relevant to the new initiatives. A.I.D.’s latest re-
port to Congress mentions legal aid and probation reform projects sup-
ported by the Asia Foundation.

A.I.D.’s human rights policy for the future will be the subject of a
discussion of A.I.D.’s Senior Staff scheduled for June 10. There are a
number of options which are to be considered; we will inform the
Deputy Secretary of any specific results of that meeting.
Tab B
Memorandum From the Coordinator of the Women in
Development Office, Agency for International Development
(Fraser) to the Deputy Assistant Administrator for
Intergovernmental and International Affairs, Agency for
International Development (Butler)
Washington, June 6, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights: AID Response to PRM 28
Women’s rights are necessarily a part of human rights both be-
cause women are half of humanity and also because women have fre-
quently been considered second class citizens legally, socially and
economically.

The Women’s Rights Movement has its roots in the U.S. Civil
Rights Movement beginning with the abolition of slavery, running
Human Rights
through the demands for suffrage and reasserting itself following the
Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s. Legislation frequently includes
both the terms race and sex. When it does not there is often parallel leg-
islation. Likewise, many private and voluntary organizations are be-
coming increasingly interested in women rights. The AID Women in
Development Office is seeking contact and response to requests from
both the traditional women’s groups and the newer women’s rights
groups concerning the women in development issue. The women in
development sections of the Foreign Assistance Act both current and
pending6 are responses to the women’s rights movement within the
U.S. and International Women’s Year.

The AID Action Plan
1. Meetings, seminars and conferences with experts and other in-
terested persons at home and abroad on the general issue of women in
development and on the specific elements contained in the World Plan
of Action for the Decade for Women.
2. Concentration on the Five Year Minimum Goals as set forth in
the U.N. World Plan which include:
a. A marked increase in literacy and civic education of women
through primary, secondary and vocational training to the highest
level of education;
b. Participation in policy and decision making by women;
c. Recognition of the economic value of women’s work, both in tra-
ditional work (home and child care which is uncompensated) and in
that work inside and outside the home done for cash or in exchange for
goods or services;
d. Increased provision for health education, sanitation, nutrition,
family education, family planning and other welfare services.
3. Constant monitoring of all programs, projects and activities.
This monitoring to be in accordance with the current legislation, with
implementation to include:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
a. Evaluation by Bureaus and Missions of current and proposed
programs:
—to assure that women’s needs, interests, concerns and ef-
forts are not overlooked or ignored;
—to determine whether and how AID programs promote the
Five-Year Minimum Goals in the World Plan of Action.
AID will provide operating units with simple, objective criteria for
use in this assessment.
b. Allocation of funds in which central AID administrators inform
the appropriate operating units of the nature and extent of efforts re-
quired to assure that programs provide sufficient emphasis on
women’s rights.

Tab C
Paper Prepared in the Agency for International
Development
Washington, undated
USE OF ECONOMIC AND FOOD ASSISTANCE TO IMPROVE
HUMAN RIGHTS CONDITIONS
Economic assistance and food assistance are potential tools for
pursuing our human rights objectives. Both have strengths and weak-
nesses in this regard.
—Economic assistance is perceived to be immediately responsive to
policy control—the presumption is that we could cut direct financial
assistance to governments pursuing policies of which we disapprove.
A distinction should be made between development assistance, which
is intended to benefit the poor majority, and security supporting assist-
ance which is extended for political reasons. Manipulation of develop-
ment assistance programs to achieve short-run political leverage, how-
ever, is not consistent with sound development programming since it is
aimed at the needy, who may be those suffering most from denial of
human rights. Security supporting assistance could and should be
more responsive to short-run political considerations.
—Food assistance under PL 480 Title I is more amenable to short-
run manipulation, in that it may technically be seen as balance-of-
payments assistance. Such use runs the considerable political risk,
however, of appearing to deny food to hungry people in order to
achieve U.S. political objectives. (The domestic purposes of the pro-
gram may also argue against sharp increases and decreases.) Title II,

Human Rights
which is programmed specifically for humanitarian purposes, ought
not to be considered for human rights leverage.

Economic Assistance
A.I.D.’s legislation requires that it be sensitive to human rights
considerations in the design and implementation of its programs. Sec-
tion 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act requires a denial of all develop-
ment assistance under the Act to governments which engage in con-
sistent patterns of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights, unless the assistance directly benefits the needy people of that
country. Section 502B declares that no security assistance shall be pro-
vided to a government that engages in a consistent pattern of gross vio-
lations of internationally recognized human rights, except under ex-
traordinary circumstances.

A.I.D. currently:
—reviews ongoing and proposed projects in each country which
may be a serious violator of internationally recognized standards of
human rights.
—ensures that such projects will directly benefit the needy people
of the country.
—submit assistance proposals for such countries to the Inter-
agency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance for dis-
cussion of overriding political considerations.
—ensure, in developing its proposals for projects in developing
countries in which there is a serious question about human rights, that
full consideration will be given to the impact of the program on the im-
provement of human rights in that country.
—constantly examine the implementation of its programs in all
countries to ensure that they are supportive of the Administration’s
human rights objectives.
—review annually, on a country-by-country basis, its total pro-
posed levels of bilateral development and supporting assistance to en-
sure that these levels are fully compatible with the Administration’s
policy of positively promoting a commitment to human rights.
The strengthening of sound development policy which is neces-
sary to reach the needy people of developing countries however, re-
quires long-range planning. A.I.D.’s internal procedures require keen
sensitivity to human rights issues, and the process described above
should serve to ensure built-in responsiveness. Therefore, we hope that
development assistance would not be used to send short-term signals
of approval or disapproval except in extreme cases. Further, while re-
ductions in development assistance in reaction to flagrant violations of
human rights may be appropriate in extreme cases, sudden increases
would be much harder to implement productively. Positive incentives
should thus be limited to instances of longer-term steady improvement

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of human rights conditions rather than specific individual actions. Sup-
porting assistance is more political in nature; this means that sudden
changes are less disruptive but also that there may be overriding polit-
ical arguments against using it to pursue human rights objectives.
Nonetheless, there are possibilities for additional action which
could be considered.
—Automatic cutoff of development and security supporting aid to
flagrant violators. This should be reserved for extreme cases only. It
would not preclude humanitarian assistance to meet disasters.
—Increase development and/or security assistance to reward pos-
itive steps. It is difficult to programmatically justify short-term re-
sponses in development assistance.
—Respond to longer-term human rights trends by raising or low-
ering programmed aid levels. This is more consistent with sound use of
development resources. Could be coupled with demarches in capitals
to explain this policy.
—Develop projects specifically directed to enhancing the respect
for rights.
—Consult with other donors to achieve coordinated action. This
would require considerable time and effort, but could be effective over
the longer term.

A.I.D. will continue to reflect, in its development assistance policy,
continuity and perseverance of support of the respect for human rights,
including the fulfillment of such basic human needs as food, shelter,
health care, and education. A.I.D. will continue to examine the appro-
priate mix of these possibilities for additional action.
Food Assistance
The new food aid legislation pending in Congress9 contains a pro-
vision that no Title I assistance be provided to any country which en-
gages in a consistent pattern of gross violation of internationally recog-
nized human rights, unless the agreement directly benefits the needy.
An agreement will not be considered to directly benefit the needy
unless either the commodities themselves, or the proceeds from their
sale, will be used for specific projects or programs which the President
determines would directly benefit the needy.

The following are some additional measures which the Adminis-
tration might consider for using food aid to promote human rights, to-
gether with discussions of their possible usefulness and drawbacks:
—Publicize U.S. intentions to include human rights considerations
in food aid programs. Instruct Ambassadors and Chiefs of Mission to
inform host governments. Make the point in speeches and statements
by senior officials.

Human Rights
Discussion: This initiative would help to underscore to our mis-
sions abroad and to foreign governments the U.S. intention to incorpo-
rate human rights considerations in programming food aid; the effort
should increase host countries’ sensitivity to human rights problems.
This is a low-cost course of action; we see no serious disadvantages.
—Use food aid agreements to seek human rights reform on a
case-by-case basis. Specify during negotiations what human rights ac-
tions would be required to obtain food aid. Indicate that progress
would be considered a positive factor in future food aid decision-
making, while regression or continued violations would be regarded
negatively.

Discussion: This procedure would give the U.S. considerable lev-
erage to seek improvement of human rights conditions. This leverage
would be hard to exercise discreetly, however, in a way which avoids
forcing the recipient nation to acknowledge publicly it is a human
rights violator. Not every case would lend itself to pressure through
food aid. Failure to reach agreement on a food aid program due to
human rights issues would adversely affect bilateral relations and
could lead to charges of U.S. intervention.
—Reduce or eliminate food aid programs in countries which we
believe have performed poorly in the human rights area.
Discussion: The problem with a sanctions approach is that it creates
animosity without providing a positive incentive for a country to im-
prove its human rights performance. When American food aid is with-
drawn, needy people may suffer badly. While there may be regimes
whose human rights performance is so repugnant as to require with-
drawal of American food aid, in general it would appear desirable to
avoid this action.
—Include human rights self-help measures in appropriate PL 480
agreements.

Discussion: Self-help development measures are currently in-
cluded in each PL 480 agreement. The principle could be extended to
human rights measures. These provisions would have to be carefully
drafted to avoid giving unwarranted offense. This would be difficult to
enforce and could result in limited bilateral tension, but is an option. It
would be more useful in communicating concern than in securing ac-
tual progress.
—Shift our food aid programs to countries with favorable human
rights performance. Announce that we will give priority to such coun-
tries and provide food assistance on more favorable terms.
Discussion: This proposal is the most forthcoming and would spe-
cifically make human rights performance a key criteria in program-
ming food aid. Many would question such a criteria when food needs

59.

Briefing Memorandum From the Coordinator for Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to Secretary of
State Vance
Washington, June 16, 1977
Status Report on the Main Issues of Congressman Fraser’s
Memorandum
1. Annual Reporting of Human Rights Conditions in All Countries.
Congressman Fraser recommends that we publish annual unclassified
reports on human rights conditions in all countries. Background: We are
required by law to send annual reports on human rights conditions in
all countries which receive security assistance. The reports we sub-
mitted this year were unclassified. Their publication took place among
cries of outrage from some of those eighty-two countries which consid-
ered themselves our friends and allies. It was widely perceived by
press, public and some other nations as an example of our uneven ap-
Human Rights
plication of the Administration’s human rights policy. In an effort to
avoid this difficulty in the future and, as a result of his own interest in
human rights conditions of all countries, Don suggests what amounts
to universal reporting. (Note: we are now in the process of preparing
human rights evaluations of all countries which will include problems,
trends, our objectives, resources, tactics and plans. These will be used
as a basic resource for decision making in the implementation of the
human rights policy. There is no thought of making these evaluations
public or of submitting them to any branch or agency of the gov-
ernment.) Positive Aspects: World-wide unclassified reporting would
eliminate criticism that we were concentrating on some countries and
avoiding human rights problems in others. It would widen public un-
derstanding of human rights conditions throughout the world.
There is pending legislation which will expand our reporting to in-
clude all countries which receive any kind of assistance from this gov-
ernment. A strong case could be made for such a practice because the
citizenry has a right to know what kind of countries are receiving aid.
Objections: I am not confident that universal public reporting
would further our ability to gather allies willing to work with us on im-
proving human rights practices in the world. My guess is that universal
dismay would be the most positive reaction we could expect. We have
endeavored to avoid sanctimony and a holier than thou stance; such re-
porting would require us to spend months assuring everyone that we
do not feel that we are better than all other nations.
2. Human Rights Personnel. Two additional officers and one support
staff person are being recruited now. By June 30, all geographic Bu-
reaus will have designated full-time human rights officers and func-
tional Bureaus will have designated near full-time officers.
3. Attendance at Political Trials. I am sending a memorandum to all
geographic Bureau Assistant Secretaries with an inquiry about present
practices and their views on methods we might use to establish a
common procedure.
4. Discussions of Human Rights Factors in staff papers and broad deliber-
ations of the IFI’s. I believe diplomatic approaches prior to consideration
of loan applications are essential for long-range success; we address the
question of how to achieve this in PRM 28. We are examining the possi-
bility of having the Inter-American Human Rights Commission and the
UN Human Rights Commission report directly to the IFI’s on human
rights conditions. Secretary Blumenthal and Under Secretary Cooper
plan to talk with World Bank President McNamara in the near future

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
about ways in which human rights concerns can be factored into the
operations of that bank.
5. Legal Defense and Aid Programs: (a) We support initiation of a
world-wide legal defense and aid program with voluntary (including
US) contributions. I will start exploring ways in which we can act with
L, CU, IO, H, Don’s staff and others in and out of government, in-
cluding the Lawyers’ Committee and the International Commission of
Jurists. (b) U.S. Commission for Human Rights: CU funds a wide range of
programs and projects to domestic organizations and groups, many of
which are directly involved with human rights or have human rights
concerns. It is their view that “a U.S. Commission for Human Rights
would act as a layer between the funding source and the programming
organization, and would divert resources now going directly to the pri-
vate organizations. In light of the President’s desire to reduce the
number of advisory commissions, CU believes the establishment of a
U.S. Commission for Human Rights is not necessary at this time, since
its proposed activities are already being carried out by the institutional
funding mechanisms in CU.” Possible Recommendations: Don Fraser is
undoubtedly aware of CU’s many programs and projects; he is prob-
ably aiming for a tighter focus and a more coordinated effort. There is a
possible alternative to be found in the proposal of Hodding Carter and
Joe Duffey for a State Department-sponsored international group in
each state with an over-all board at the national level. I will discuss
ways and means we might employ, though I believe that Don is
thinking more in terms of a subsidy to groups like Amnesty Interna-
tional and Freedom House. Will explore in more detail with him.
Country Situations
Note: Appended at Tab A are responses prepared by the appro-
priate Bureaus on countries mentioned by Congressman Fraser in his
memo. Below are extremely brief comments of my own.
1. South Korea. Don has heard the case we make for Korean in-
volvement. His memorandum conveys his continued dissatisfaction
with our policy. My suggestion is to abandon the practice of re-
sponding to each assertion and instead to outline in some detail the
specific steps we have taken. It is also important to make a special effort
to keep him informed on a week-to-week basis, if necessary, of new
representations and initiatives related to Korea. This week, we might
inform him that our “yes” vote on a World Bank Korean loan was ac-
companied by a public statement by the U.S. Executive Director of our
human rights concerns in Korea.

Morocco with military assistance and some may view that aid as giving
comfort to Morocco/Mauritania claims over the disputed territory. Al-
geria is harboring refugees/guerrillas/terrorists and this is the nub of
the problem. While we cannot ignore refugee needs, the Sahara is a
mess we would do well to stay out of, but I am not sure we can.
3. The Caribbean and Central America. Don suggested we find some
“institutional means . . . to make sure that the U.S. is especially sensitive
to the problems of these near-by countries.” Completion of the country
evaluations should provide a firm basis for a series of steps we might
take to be of positive assistance and should surely heighten our sensi-
tivity as well.

60.

Memorandum From the Director of the United States
Information Agency (Reinhardt) to the Deputy Secretary of
State (Christopher)
Washington, June 16, 1977
SUBJECT
USIA Human Rights Action Proposals
In response to your memorandum of May 30, I am attaching
USIA’s Human Rights Action Plan. Our objective is to insure that our
programs fully support U.S. policy. We will refine our efforts as the De-
partment develops its own regional and country-specific plans this
summer.

Our Deputy Director, Charles Bray, will be the USIA repre-
sentative on the Department’s Human Rights Coordinating Group, at
least through the early stages of the effort and until the organization of
public diplomacy is clearer.

While we advance a large number of programmatic ideas in the at-
tached, we are sensitive to the need to assure that they are carefully at-
tuned to the evolution of global policy and specific-country situations.
I plan to send copies of the attached proposal to Public Affairs Of-
ficers in selected countries abroad where human rights is a sensitive
issue. Not only do I want their comments on the proposal itself but I
want them to begin thinking now about specific plans for USIS support
of the Department’s human-rights plan for their country.
Human Rights
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the United States Information Agency
Washington, undated
USIA HUMAN RIGHTS ACTION PROPOSALS
—objectives, themes, treatment—
The purpose of the USIA plan of action is to organize Agency re-
sources for a sustained effort in the human rights field. This plan will
be coordinated with the Department’s human rights plans for indi-
vidual countries as they are developed.

Salient features of the Agency proposals are:
A. Objectives
The basic objective of the plan is to advance human rights. Special
attention will be given to:
—Increasing global understanding of, and support for, US policies
relating to human rights;
—Strengthening understanding of the universality of basic human
rights as defined in the UN Charter and the UN Declaration of Human
Rights;
—Providing support and encouragement, where appropriate, to
individuals and groups abroad who are actively involved in promoting
human rights;
—Creating an international atmosphere more conducive to ex-
tending and promoting human rights;
—Describing challenges and responses to human rights issues in
the United States.

B. Themes
The following broad thematic categories will be given major
emphasis:
—The policies of the Administration reflect historic American
concerns.
—The American record in strengthening human rights, while im-
perfect has relevance to similar efforts in other nations.
—Human rights are a multilateral concern. Positive achievements
within individual countries can reinforce each other in assuring a more
humane world order.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Human rights include economic and social as well as political
rights.

C. Treatment
Human rights are an integral part of Agency information output,
not the subject of a separate “public relations” campaign.
Programming will be reasoned rather than strident. It will empha-
size human rights achievements but will not hesitate to address repres-
sive practices by foreign governments.

In coverage of U.S. human rights developments, our case will ben-
efit in the long run by balanced reporting of both achivements and con-
tinuing problems.

Posts will evaluate local perceptions of human rights and take
these factors into consideration in their programs on this subject.
While bilateral efforts will be made to foster human rights in spe-
cial cases, multilateral approaches may stand better chances for
success.

In USIA programming, care will be taken to assure that human
rights are considered in the overall context of U.S. political, economic
and social goals.

USIA will be sensitive to the fact that, in some instances, human
rights can be advanced more effectively through quiet diplomacy than
through appeal to public opinion.

The following are specific responses to the subject raised in
Deputy Secretary Christopher’s May 30 memorandum to Director
Reinhardt:
a. Proposals for providing information and guidance on human rights to
all USIS field offices.

We shall use a multi-media approach in explicating U.S. policy
and promoting human rights. This includes a full range of print and au-
diovisual materials, together with speakers. Guidance will be tailored
to statements and actions by U.S. or foreign officials, and to significant
events (e.g. CSCE developments, UN Human Rights Commission
meetings, etc.).

We shall periodically explore with field posts their perceptions of
local human rights situations, and then develop supplemental pro-
grams which are responsive to these conditions.
b. Recommendations of specific steps USIA might take in particular
countries to promote human rights.

The following specialized projects will be proposed to support
USIS posts in individual countries on the human rights issue. These
proposals are illustrative, not exhaustive, of the possibilities open to the
Administration via USIA’s programming potential abroad.

Human Rights
1. USIA will provide a phased series of videotaped interviews or
direct video statements by the President, Secretary of State, other
cabinet-level officials, and Assistant Secretaries of State. These would
provide an essential overview.
2. Agency elements and State/CU should cooperate in the conduct
of at least one, and possibly more, International Visitor projects on an
appropriate human rights topic. The projects and visitors would be se-
lected on the basis of their potential for tangible follow-up programs
(seminars, workshops, symposia, etc.) and other activities overseas.
3. The Agency will provide directories of major American and in-
ternational human rights organizations to USIS posts and libraries for
reference or for presentation to indigenous organizations.
4. We will continue Agency/CU efforts to foster inter-personal
communication among officials, opinion leaders and professionals in
the human rights field. Three major programs including speakers and
media support will be conducted by USIS posts in the coming year:
(a) Human Rights Aspects of U.S. Foreign Policy: e.g. the impact of
human rights concerns on bilateral relations; the relation of human
rights to arms sales, aid, technology transfer, etc; origins of U.S. foreign
policy emphasis on human rights (national beliefs, traditions, Congres-
sional interest, public interests groups).

(b) U.S. Challenges and Responses in the Human Rights Field, e.g.: civil
rights—voting, political participation, the legitimacy of opposition,
peaceful transfer of power, equal opportunity, minority rights,
freedom of expression and movement; civil liberties—freedom of
information, privacy, legal representation, habeus corpus; “human
fulfillment”.

(c) Human Rights Questions and Economic Development e.g.: the ques-
tion of whether economic mobilization can occur without suppression
of political freedoms and individual rights; North-South issues of dis-
tribution of wealth.
5. The Department and USIA should issue guidelines and provide
whatever support necessary for Missions to encourage foreign leaders
and internationally respected individuals to speak out in support of
human rights.
6. The Agency, through its Washington and New York Press
Centers, will organize a series of tours for foreign journalists resident in
the U.S., including official briefings on human rights concerns and
American responses.
7. An international conference on human rights should be proposed
for September–October 1978 or in 1979. It would provide a focus for
strengthening international understanding of human rights questions,
reinforcing commitments to human rights progress, and providing for

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
followup programming overseas by US Missions with Agency and CU
support.

The Conference should be structured to maximize constructive ex-
changes of experience and views in the human rights field, and to mini-
mize polemical or political confrontations.
8. Establish a Human Rights Alert Service, which would use Agency
radio and press facilities to call attention to human rights abuses and
progress where and as they occur.

In order to ensure that the U.S. effort is fully implemented in the
field, the Department should consider establishing a human rights
coordinating committee at overseas missions. The committee would
consist of representatives from the embassy’s substantive elements in-
cluding USIS. Its purpose should be two-fold: (1) report on the status of
human rights issues in the host country and (2) recommend programs
designed to increase understanding of U.S. human rights policies
(public affairs goal) and, equally important, encourage promotion of
human rights in the host country (political goal). USIS posts would
designate a human rights officer who would be a member of the mis-
sion’s human rights committee. This officer would help identify target
audience members and organizations committed to strengthening
human rights (e.g. religious groups, the bar, labor unions, political
parties). The USIS human rights officer would also plan and implement
public affairs efforts involving human rights.

To take advantage of audience data gained in this way, posts will
be asked to broaden their audience lists to include human rights
opinion leaders to be reached with program materials and through per-
sonal contact.

Specific Agency actions in particular countries will be determined
by the political and other factors in the Department’s human rights
plan of action for each country. Pending the issuance of these plans, the
following approaches could be taken regionally:
LATIN AMERICA
In Latin America, the Agency will attempt to make our policies
better understood, particularly in view of the bilateral disputes that
have arisen over human rights between the United States and many
governments in the hemisphere.

Because Latin American posts continue to have regular access to
mass media outlets, the Agency will rely heavily on the press, radio
and television to influence opinion leaders and the public at large. This
is particularly useful in countries where the United States is engaged in
human rights questions with authoritarian governments and where we
may not be able openly to sponsor lectures and seminar discussions on

Human Rights
the subject. Paradoxically, the media in these countries are generally
free to report and comment on human rights issues.

Despite potential local difficulties, posts in Central America,
Mexico, Argentina, and Brazil have asked for speakers on human rights
while USIS posts in Guatemala and Paraguay have asked for exhibits
demonstrating the historic U.S. commitment to human rights. USIS Ca-
racas proposes a television co-production with Venezuelan national
television on the Administration’s human rights policy.

In addition to these field proposals, the Agency will: (1) produce a
television and radio series dramatizing human rights causes out of
Latin American and world history; (2) publish a 12-page insert on
human rights in the regional edition of the Agency magazine Horizons;
(3) publish human rights-oriented books for the Agency’s book transla-
tion program for general distribution and introduction into school cur-
ricula; (4) recommend that high-ranking USG officials who travel to
Latin America be available as voluntary speakers for human rights pro-
gramming; (5) produce a radio and press series to create greater recog-
nition and prestige for international and private organizations devoted
to human rights, with emphasis on the work of the Inter-American
Human Rights Commission.

AFRICA
African nations tend to applaud human rights concepts in the ab-
stract but many fail to put them into practice. Most African countries
are quick to condemn human rights violations elsewhere but are reluc-
tant to make a public denunciation of misdeeds in other OAU
countries.

Given such sensitivities, USIS programming in Africa must be
carefully handled in order to avoid the appearance of preaching and
charges of interference in local affairs. One approach will be to call on
State/CU resources to arrange two-way exchanges of persons in fields
of key importance to human rights, particularly in law and jurispru-
dence. Amnesty International and the American Civil Liberties Union
should be utilized, both as resources for these visitors and as sources of
speakers for overseas programming.

A second approach will be to publicize, especially through the
Voice of America and through post programming in individual coun-
tries, the efforts of African countries such as Botswana, Mauritius and
Gambia which have good human rights records.

Finally, through consultation with field posts, other media
products will be developed to further human rights goals. Exhibits, if
discreetly done, are an indispensable tool in closed societies such as
Guinea and Somalia, where they are often the post’s most effective in-
formation resource.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
EUROPE
USIA’s approach to promoting human rights in Europe must take
into account political realities on that continent.

In the communist states, we are obviously restricted in what we can
do but not in what we say. Our most important medium is in VOA. We
know, for example, that our international radio programs have been
welcomed by human rights groups in communist societies. Indeed, our
unjammed broadcasts often have had an immediate and direct effect on
the governments of these countries. Western publicity about and sup-
port for these activities have reinforced the resolve of human rights
leaders in the USSR and Eastern Europe. They also appear to have had
some restraining effect on the authorities. We should continue to
broadcast human rights and to reject charges that this is interference in
the internal affairs of other countries.

In Western Europe, our objectives should be to 1) gain support for
U.S. human rights policy, and 2) attempt to motivate the Europeans to
become more involved in promoting human rights elsewhere. We can
do so by strengthening and/or initiating ties with those European insti-
tutions and organizations which are concerned with human rights.
This includes those European youth organizations whose views are
similar to ours in the human rights field. Our aim should be to en-
courage the exchange of ideas and information between like-minded
people and organizations so that we can support each other’s efforts.
We should also strengthen U.S.-European parliamentary links where
the subject of human rights could be discussed. This is of particular im-
portance in view of the European Community’s plan to hold direct
elections to the European Parliament in 1978. The CU exchange pro-
gram should support this as one of its primary objectives.
It has been our experience that when we coordinate a particular
policy with our European allies we not only get their support, but we
are often able to project a common policy. For example, NATO is the
forum where we have coordinated western CSCE strategy including
Basket III initiatives. There is another forum where we could pursue a
common human rights policy—the OECD. It is an organization com-
prising most of the western industrial world plus Japan where we now
coordinate aid to LDCs and carry on the North-South dialogue. At a
forthcoming OECD ministerial meeting, the U.S. will propose further
cooperation on member-states’ unemployment policies—a subject
which impacts on human rights.

Human Rights
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
The following projects for East Asian countries merit special
attention.

Philippines—The major human rights issue in the Philippines in-
volves political detainees. The Mission’s basic tool so far has been quiet
but firm diplomacy, avoiding high profile public dialogue in favor of
subtle but unequivocal pressure. The post has a program scheduled on
the legal aspects of human rights and will follow-up with speakers,
films and press items. Here again the key to programming is to avoid
preaching and to depict candidly both the successes and failures of the
U.S. efforts to protect human rights.

Indonesia—As in the Philippines, the major concern is political de-
tainees. The post will continue to follow a low profile approach while
discussing the issues with influential contacts and disseminating the
statements of U.S. officials. It will also organize meetings and seminars
for American experts who can underscore the fundamental strength of
our commitment to civil liberties.

The following specific USIS programs and supporting actions are
planned:
—Preparation of background papers by Embassy and USIS of-
ficers for press and electronic media representatives on the future
thrust of US foreign policy. These will emphasize human rights as a key
element in our policy.
—Developing library collections for “outreach” programming,
documenting the fundamental concern Americans have for human
rights, as well as the successes and failures of our efforts.
Korea—One of this post’s major program objectives addresses the
human rights issue. Seminars and discussion programs planned under
this objective will seek understanding of how American values are
formed and expressed and establish a dialogue with Koreans on
common values. ROKG sensitivities and policy guidance by the Mis-
sion will be taken into account in program planning.

U.S. concerns and pronouncements on this issue will be fully re-
flected in VOA Korean language broadcasts. The post will publicize
such programs with the primary audience in advance of the broadcasts.
Similar programs will be made available for broadcast through the
U.S. Armed Forces radio stations, which have a substantial Korean
listenership.

Because there are definite limits within the ROK to a full discus-
sion of U.S. concerns on this issue, consideration will be given to orga-
nizing special seminars or symposia in the United States to which key
Koreans will be invited to participate. This approach will only be effec-
tive if the scope of discussion is not confined to the problems of one

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
country. Multi-country participation and a broad-gauged discussion of
the issues are more likely to improve understanding of the U.S.
position.

NORTH AFRICA, NEAR EAST AND SOUTH ASIA
Countries in this area have such varying perceptions of human
rights that both the frequency and type of program approach must be
tailored to each country. For example, a wide range of programs about
human rights for diverse audiences would be fruitful in India, but only
carefully chosen programs involving outstanding experts before small,
selected audiences are acceptable in Iran. On the other hand, in Algeria,
programming opportunities are rare, and even then limited to subjects
related to economic or social rights.

In Iran the recent human rights dialogue between U.S. political an-
alyst Ben J. Wattenberg and Iranian government officials apparently
struck a positive chord. However, this type of programming may not
be as well received by similar audiences in other NEA countries.
Examples of specific program proposals for this area are:
—expansion of USIA’s book programs to include outstanding
works (foreign and domestic including translations) on human rights
subjects;
—expansion of CU’s International Visitor program to involve
more human rights activists; foreign journalists’ tours of the U.S. orga-
nized around human rights themes;
—more speaker and seminar programs focused on salient aspects
of human rights that have relevance in specific countries or groups of
countries in this geographic area.
c. Proposals for using the Voice of America, the Press Service (IPS) and
other functional arms of the Agency to increase popular attention to human
rights.

Agency print, radio and film/videotape will continue to report of-
ficial policies, statements and other activities of Administration offi-
cials and members of Congress to overseas audiences. The Agency’s
media services will also increase coverage of national and international
human rights events such as the signing of the American Convention
on Human Rights, U.N. Human Rights Day and the CSCE meetings in
Belgrade.

Agency media will also report on private domestic and interna-
tional organizations which monitor and advocate human rights (Am-
nesty International, ACLU, NAACP, etc.), as well as statements and ac-
tivities by prominent American scholars, writers and scientists.
Examples of this are the recent protests by the National Academy of
Science over the arrest and torture of a group of physicists in Uruguay,

Human Rights
and protests by Saul Bellow and Arthur Miller concerning the harsh
treatment of writers in many countries for their human rights stand.
The Voice of America will produce a series honoring human rights
statesmen and stateswomen in American history. Included will be Jus-
tice Oliver Wendell Holmes; Charles Houston, the late black lawyer
and leader in the civil rights struggle; Eleanor Roosevelt, Ralph Bunche
and others. Such programs will illustrate the historical basis of human
rights in the U.S. The Voice will produce a “VOA Forum Series” of
twenty half-hour programs treating human rights. Examples of pro-
gram themes will be important Supreme Court decisions dealing with
human rights and the concept of due process in the 14th amendment.
Prominent jurists and civil rights activists will be featured speakers for
the Forum series. The Voice will also schedule prominent American
and foreign speakers for interviews and panel programs.
The Press and Publications Service (IPS) will commission articles
and acquire byliners by American and non-American scholars on the
origins and record of human rights in the United States. IPS will pro-
duce an illustrated pamphlet on the origins and development of human
rights in the U.S.

Special articles on human rights will be placed in Agency publica-
tions such as Problems of Communism, Horizons, Dialogue, Economic Im-
pact, and Economic Portfolio. The March–April 1977 issue of Problems of
Communism featured a review-essay of six books entitled “De´tente and
Soviet Dissidents” by Sovietologist Harvey Fireside.

Problems of Communism has developed a distinguished world-wide
reputation. We will consider initiating a new publication, perhaps to be
entitled Problems of Democracy, which could afford distinguished Amer-
ican—and foreign—political philosophers, politicians, humanitarians a
forum in which to explore the ideas, values and processes which lie be-
neath both liberty and democracy.

For selected audiences, the Agency’s Film and Television Service
(IMV) will continue videotape coverage of official statements. It will ac-
quire commercial films and videotapes, feature films, network specials
and documentaries. Examples of acquired commercial productions are
the two recent NBC programs on human rights—the recent Soviet-
American debate at Georgetown University6 and the documentary on
the Belgrade CSCE meeting. For more general television audiences, the

61.

Telegram From the Department of State to All American
Republic Diplomatic Posts
140421. For Ambassador from Luers. Subject: Human Rights Eval-
uation Reports.
1. The Department is undertaking a broad scale effort to imple-
ment the administration’s human rights policy as effectively as pos-
sible. One of the principal components of this effort will be the develop-
ment of specific proposed courses of action with respect to each
individual country. It is not repeat not the Department’s intention to
compile a country “hit list,” but these human rights evaluation reports
(earlier called human rights country action plans) will enable us to de-
termine where we should concentrate our attention. The Bureau has
been requested to submit these reports to D/HA not later than July 1,
except those for Brazil, Colombia and Peru, which should be submitted
by June 15 if possible.
2. D/HA originally intended to prepare a cable for worldwide dis-
tribution setting forth the background for the effort and providing an
outline of the required report format. On June 8 however the decision
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Lister; cleared in draft by Schneider and Devine; ap-
proved by Luers. Repeated to USCINCSO.

Human Rights
was taken to leave action up to each individual bureau. This cable will
therefore set forth the background for this effort, the required format
for reporting, and the specific action requested of each post.
3. Background. In his Law Day speech at the University of Georgia
April 30 (copies have been forwarded to each post), the Secretary spe-
cifically defined the human rights which are the subject of our policy,
and set forth in detail the questions to be considered as we determine
whether and how to act with respect to human rights. Further, he
stated that once we choose to act, the means available range from quiet
diplomacy in its many forms, through public pronouncements, to with-
holding of assistance. Evaluation reports should focus on all of the
means of action he indicated. Both bilateral and multilateral ap-
proaches and all forms of economic and military assistance should be
considered, especially possibilities for carrying out our policy through
the U.N. and the international financial institutions.
4. Evaluation reports should, in a concise manner, describe the cur-
rent condition of human rights, the extent of violations, their intensity
and the most recent instances, and give recommendations for both
short and long-term strategies to improve the human rights situation.
The following format should be used.

Outline for evaluation reports:
A. Condition of human rights in (appropriate country).
1. Respect for the integrity of the person, including freedom from:
a. Torture
b. Cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment
c. Arbitrary arrest or imprisonment
d. Denial of fair public trial
e. Invasion of the home.
2. Respect for civil and political liberties
a. Freedom of thought, religion, assembly
b. Freedom of movement within a country, foreign travel and emi-
gration policies
c. Democratic processes assuring the freedom to participate in the
political process.
3. Recent trends in governmental policies relating to the fulfillment
of basic needs for food, shelter, health care and education.
“strong objections” to the proposed cable, Oxman pointed out that Lamb had received
several telephone calls “expressing opposition on the grounds that the cable seeks to rate
countries’ human rights performance on some kind of a scale.” He added: “I don’t think
that is an accurate description of what the original cable does, and I certainly don’t think
my redraft seeks such a rating.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secre-
Tasking Memos)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
a. Policies designed to respond to the needs of the poor and pol-
icies which tend to ignore the needs of the poor.
b. Corruption of such a nature that significant resources are di-
verted toward the nation’s elite and away from the majority of the
population.
4. Describe the level of the government’s responsibility for the
foregoing human rights record, including the extent to which positive
human rights measures are articulated as public policy or violations
condoned as public policy because of security or other justifications.
Evaluate the genuineness of those justifications.
5. Describe the willingness and past record of the government re-
garding independent, outside investigation of alleged human rights
violations.

B. Analysis and recommendations
1. Identify legitimate objectives over the next three, six, twelve
months in relation to improving conditions in (fill in appropriate
of (a) importance, (b) feasibility, (c) U.S. leverage, (d) likely interna-
tional support and (e) provide options and recommended actions (e.g.,
quiet diplomacy, IFI loans, security assistance, EXIM bank credits, etc.)
in terms of their usefulness and likely consequences.
2. Identify principal reactions in the host countries, pro and con, to
the new U.S. human rights policies and Embassy actions and proposed
actions in support of those policies, including reactions of the gov-
ernment, opposition leaders, church and the most influential private
and intellectual groups and the general public.
3. Evaluate reactions in 2 above in terms of the implications for
positive and negative changes in the human rights conditions.
4. a. Where a human rights record justifies U.S. actions, evaluate
the impact of those actions on other U.S. interests in that country, i.e.
political, economic, security, diplomatic (influence of the host country
on U.S. interests in the region).
b. Where the human rights record is good or encouraging, indicate
the likelihood of the host government’s supporting U.S. efforts to pro-
mote human rights through governmental and non-governmental
organizations.

End outline.
5. Action requested: A few ARA Embassies have already received
copies of the above outline by pouch. They are preparing to cable in
first drafts, or have already done so. However, first drafts for most
countries will be prepared in the Department and then cabled to posts
for comment and suggestions. The first draft for Brazil, prepared by the

Human Rights
Desk, will be cabled to Brasilia upon clearance with D/HA and S/P.
The drafts for Colombia and Peru, based largely on the drafts cabled in
by Bogota4 and Lima, will be reviewed and cleared here, and will then
be cabled back to the field for still further review and comment.
6. All messages on human rights should include SHUM in the
TAGS
line
to
ensure
distribution
to
interested
offices
in
the
Department.
7. Assistant Secretary Todman’s personal comment and guidance
on the above are being provided by separate cable.
Christopher
zilian human rights report had been pouched for delivery to the Political Counselor on
gram 7203 from Brasilia, August 31, the Embassy transmitted suggestions for revision.
bassy revise the draft evaluation report prepared in June. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770406–0099) The Department request to the Embassy in
Bogota has not been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
62.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Congressional Relations (Bennet) to the Deputy Secretary
of State (Christopher)
Washington, June 18, 1977
SUBJECT
Congressional Strategy on Human Rights
Human rights represents the Carter Administration’s most dra-
matic foreign policy departure. Sustaining this leadership will require a
strong constituency on Capitol Hill which understands and supports
the Administration’s efforts and opposes excessively specific legisla-
tion. We are fast approaching the time when general statements of sup-
port for human rights will not be accepted as a comprehensive policy,
and our credibility will be brought into question. We must be in a posi-
tion to explain each specific human rights-related action as fully as pos-
sible in terms of country-by-country plans.

I. Ongoing Human Rights Issues
1. International Financial Institutions
As you know, we have been trying to shape acceptable language
which will permit us to deal with human rights concerns in the IFIs
without harming their overall structure. We may succeed this year in
avoiding language mandating a negative vote on human rights of-
fender countries.

ACTION: We must demonstrate that we will use our voice and
vote in a consistent manner in the IFIs to gain the credibility to protect
the IFIs from further attacks in the future.
fidential. Drafted by Swift. Wisner initialed the memorandum on June 18. Additional no-
tations read: “WC” and “Copy to SO.” Christopher also initialed the memorandum.
the Senate passed H.R. 5262, whereupon House and Senate conferees began drafting
the Senate debate over H.R. 5262, Humphrey challenged an amendment introduced by
Hatfield and Abourezk, which was based on the Harkin–Badillo language, asserting that
its rigidity “would be of less real use” than the more flexible language adopted by the
SFRC during its markup session. The Senate did approve an amendment on June 14,
sponsored by Dole, which directed U.S. representatives to the IFIs to vote against any aid
to Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. (Spencer Rich, “Hill Steps Into Human Rights Debate,”

Human Rights
2. Security Assistance
The Authorization Bill will be through both Houses by the end of
June, and the main shape of the Appropriation Bill has already been
drawn. This legislation came upon us too quickly this year and our ef-
forts to deal with it have been very much of a fire-fighting operation.
Our policy guidelines on how we were to apply the 502(b) human
rights provision were unclear, especially in Latin America, and this,
coupled with the momentum for human rights in Congress, has caused
cuts in programs for Latin American countries. In Asia, however,
where our policy toward Korea, Philippines, and Indonesia is clearer,
we have been able to gain the Congress’ trust for the time being.
ACTION: We should start planning now for what we will be pre-
senting to Congress for FY 79. Human rights offender countries in
which we have no security interest will find themselves under heavy
attack not only on grant MAP but also on FMS credit and training next
year unless we can demonstrate that progress has been achieved in
human rights and we convince the Congress that our efforts bring re-
sults. The most vulnerable will be offenders in Latin America (in-
cluding Argentina, Brazil, etc.) and Indonesia and Thailand.
3. Economic Assistance
Congress this year, with AID’s agreement, has tightened the
human rights reporting requirements for bilateral economic aid. This is
our first concrete signal that Congress plans to pay far greater attention
to bilateral economic assistance in the future. To date, efforts to cut eco-
nomic aid have not been supported by the liberals as long as the aid is
for the needy.

ACTION: We can expect far greater attention next year, however,
to the needy criterion which AID has applied rather loosely. The
warning signs are also flying that for gross violators even economic
programs may not be exempt. AID’s review of the total U.S. AID effort,
due August 15, must deal thoroughly with human rights consider-
ations, particularly if the Administration is to achieve increases in total
U.S. assistance.
4. UN Covenants
The President has made four UN covenants an important part of
his overall human rights initiative. We are moving ahead energetically
on the Genocide Convention and would hope to see a vote on the meas-
ure prior to the end of this session. We are currently trying to ascertain
whether we have the votes to ratify the Convention and we expect to be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ready to make that determination in the next two or three weeks. The
SFRC will consider the Convention in executive session on June 21, and
may report it to the floor at that time. Majority Leader Byrd is expected
to hold up consideration of the Treaty until we can assure him that we
have the votes to (1) invoke cloture and (2) ratify the Convention.
The President has given his personal endorsement to three other
human rights treaties in his speech before the United Nations on March
17. No decision has yet been made as to when to forward these
covenants to the Senate. There is some thought being given to signing
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights at the
United Nations when the General Assembly convenes in September.
The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination was signed by the United States in 1966, but Senate ap-
proval was not sought by previous Administrations and it has yet to be
transmitted to the Senate. Final decisions as to the wording of reserva-
tions to these covenants have not been made.

The President personally signed the American Convention on
Human Rights at the Organization of American States headquarters
several weeks ago. Preliminary work has begun on reservations to this
Convention and a number of legal implications are being analyzed.
One controversial provision of the Convention is a ban on abortion.
ACTION: H feels that a major effort should be made to gain Senate
approval of the Genocide Convention during this session. We should
be in a better position to determine whether we can move quickly on
this Convention within the next few weeks. We do not expect any se-
rious consideration of the other conventions during this session, but the
Administration should be prepared to submit them in the fall.
5. Problem Countries
a. Korea—Our policy toward Korean human rights is well under-
stood on the Hill and our determination to withdraw troops6 has
disarmed those who would like to attack our security assistance pro-
gram—i.e. Don Fraser. Troop withdrawals and the security of Korea
are at present of more concern on the Hill than human rights. We can
assume, however, that once anxiety over troop withdrawals dies down,
human rights considerations will come to the fore again.
Human Rights
b. Philippines—Major efforts by EA in both the House and the
Senate this year have saved our Philippine military assistance program
from significant cuts on human rights grounds. Unless there is major
progress in the human rights situation, we can expect further attacks
next year against the Philippine program and against any base agree-
ment which requires congressional approval of funds.
c. Indonesia/Thailand—These are the most vulnerable countries
in East Asia as the U.S. has no major security interests in either country.
EA has done a good job this year of explaining our position on hu-
man rights in both countries. Some improvements in the human rights
field must occur if we hope to continue to preserve our security
relationships.
d. Latin America—Unless there are major human rights improve-
ments in most of the Latin American offender countries in the coming
months, we will probably see the end of all forms of military assistance
to these countries in FY 79. The principal targets this year have been Ar-
gentina, Brazil, Uruguay, Chile, Nicaragua and San Salvador. How-
ever, we can assume that Paraguay and Haiti, and perhaps Guatemala,
will join the list next year. ARA must begin now to develop a more
finely tuned and credible human rights policy towards security assist-
ance in all recipient countries. One option would be to eliminate all mil-
itary assistance in Latin America, with the exception of modest training
programs.
e. Africa—Congress still has a certain myopia as far as African
human rights are concerned, and this has protected Africa from the sort
of attack faced in Latin America. The questions of Rhodesia, South Af-
rica and Namibia are the main ones as far as Congress is concerned at
the moment. We should expect increasing attention to human rights
conditions in other parts of Africa.
f. Iran/Israel—Congress has avoided these two topics. We should
press ahead with efforts in both countries so that we are in a good posi-
tion to show that we have made real efforts should trouble arise.
6. U.S. Human Rights—Visa Policy
There are pending in the White House several proposals to liber-
alize our visa policy.

The President has not decided which option to accept but is under-
stood to be leaning toward the McGovern amendment which would
human rights abuses in the Philippines, Holbrooke asserted: “However, we don’t believe
that security or economic assistance should be reduced because of the human rights
problem. As I have noted, the Philippines has strategic importance, not only for our own
country but also for nations friendly to the United States in the region, and thus we

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
remove the Secretary from the decision process in requesting from
the Attorney General waivers of ineligibility for aliens excludable
under the Immigration Act because of political affiliation. A decision
on this matter awaits consultation with the two Judiciary Committee
Chairmen, Rodino and Eastland, by the Secretary and the Attorney
General.

Regarding expanded refugee and asylum policies, the Eilberg leg-
islation includes an expanded definition of refugees which the Admin-
istration supported, but the bill effectively eliminates the parole au-
thority and requires mandatory consultation for the admission of
refugees by class.

Administratively, we are expanding our program for African ref-
ugees with enlarged assistance in the educational field.

II. Techniques for Dealing with Congress
1. Have Clear Positions on Specific Issues
As a basis for orderly policy and rational presentation to Congress,
we must develop clear policy lines which combine general objectives
and specific courses of action for each human rights issue and each
country which violates human rights. We are in the early stages of such
a policy development process. It should be completed as soon as pos-
sible and implemented before we begin the next round of authorization
and appropriation battles early next year. This will make our job with
Congress much easier. As we take our positions to Congress on each
substantive issue which arises (for instance, amendments to IFI legisla-
tion) talking points should be drawn up and given wide distribution.
Consideration should be given to the issuance of an Administration
policy statement or letter on the issue which can then be used as the
basis for calls on individual Congressmen by high and mid-level of-
ficers from concerned government organizations. Leaders of various
interested groups on the Hill should be contacted and offered briefings
McGovern amendment, which sought to relax visa provisions for non-immigrant vis-
itors. In late August, the Department of State announced that an official of the French
General Confederation of Labor, which had been described as Communist-run, had been
granted a visa to attend an American labor conference scheduled to take place in New
York in September. (Graham Hovey, “French Labor Leader is Granted U.S. Visa,” The
89–236, also known as the Hart–Cellar Act after Senator Philip Hart (D–Michigan) and
Representative Emmanuel Cellar (D–New York), abolished the national origins quota
system established by the Immigration Act of 1924 and overturned many of the restric-
tions contained within the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 (McCarran-Walter

Human Rights
on the various issues and problem countries at their convenience. This
activity should be done on a routine, ongoing basis so that information
flow becomes normal and is not seen as a one-time blitz on some partic-
ular special interest. We have begun doing this on some of our current
issues but it has been on an ad hoc basis. We hope to regularize this in
the future but it will mean earlier identification of problem areas and
development of clear policy directions.
2. Regular Bureau Contacts with Congress
The bulk of H’s time in human rights questions is spent dealing
with major bills on the Hill or fore-fighting human rights problems re-
lated to countries such as Korea, Argentina or Iran. We believe the De-
partment’s credibility on human rights and other matters could be built
up through some direct contact by substantive regional and desk of-
ficers with Congressmen interested in their areas. Special efforts should
be made to keep Members informed on human rights questions.
Strengthening of informal contacts at the desk levels would give
working-level FSOs an exposure to Hill thinking and develop relation-
ships of trust which might head off problems before they occur.
3. Contacts with Non-Governmental Agencies
H agrees that we should develop our relationship with the inter-
ested Non-Governmental Agencies (NGOs) which can be of immense
help to us with their influence in the Congress. (It should be kept in
mind, however, that we sometimes find ourselves differing with these
groups on matters of substance.) D/HA already meets with these
groups frequently and on a regular basis. H feels that rather than dupli-
cating D/HA’s work we should tag on to some of their activities. We
are in the process of coordinating this with D/HA now.
4. SCA Matters
In order to keep the human rights coordinating group fully in-
formed of legislation on visa, refugee and asylum problems, H feels it
might be worthwhile to institute a brief monthly report on ongoing ef-
forts in this field. This would be in addition to the normal coordination
which occurs daily.

63.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Dubs) to the Coordinator
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian)
Washington, June 23, 1977
SUBJECT
PRM on Human Rights: Comments/Suggestions
NEA’s comments and/or recommended changes to specific
items in the first draft PRM2 are contained in the attachment to this
memorandum.

The first draft of PRM 28 on Human Rights is a good beginning. It
does not, however, present any options, or choices, or suggested
courses of action for Presidential decision. For example, the PRM could
pose the option of using or not using economic—as distinguished from
military and supporting—assistance as a lever to promote human
rights. This would provide an opportunity to alert the President to
some of the negative consequences which could flow from the denial of
economic assistance that is destined for the poor and hungry.
Under Section I, the legal basis for U.S. involvement in attempts to
improve the human rights condition of mankind is not spelled out. L
should be asked to prepare a short brief on this subject.
In identifying U.S. objectives in the area of human rights, the state-
ment to the effect that all governments manifest an interest in the
growth of human rights is not completely true. Many states are pri-
marily interested in economic and social rights and give personal, civil
and political liberties a low priority.

Section I, page 5, talks about changing other societies. We do not
believe that this should be an objective of U.S. foreign policy. While we
are dedicated to improving the human rights condition in various so-
Human Rights
cieties, we assume that we still want a pluralistic world in which there
is room for societies which are not modeled after our own.
The objective to make “pariahs” out of “gross violators of human
rights” raises the question as to whether goals are best achieved in in-
ternational relations through ostracism or through having a presence
by means of which some influence could be exerted. Moreover, seeking
to normalize relations with human rights violators such as Cuba, the
PRC and Vietnam would be excluded if we took the position that we
should treat them as “pariahs”.

Some further effort should be made to define what comprises “a
consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized
human rights” together with some examples. However, care must be
taken not to adopt too rigid or legalistic an approach which could re-
strict unduly the USG’s flexibility in dealing with human rights
problems on a world-wide basis.

In this connection, it would be most useful to provide a list indi-
cating which countries have and which have not signed the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as well as the various covenants dealing
with economic and social rights, civil and political rights, etc. If a nation
has signed and ratified the various covenants, etc. this fact should make
it more vulnerable to international criticism if it is guilty of violation in
the human rights area.

In discussing carrots or sticks to be used in encouraging improve-
ment in the observance of human rights, (page 26), care must be taken
to ensure that by cutting off food aid, for instance to an offending
country because of its use of torture or ill-treatment of political pris-
oners, the punitive action does not result in the starvation or depriva-
tion of food to thousands of innocent hungry people who are helpless
victims of their own government.

Security Assistance as either a carrot or a stick may also have its
pitfalls. A recommendation to cut off or lower security assistance levels
to a particular country must take into account during the decision-
making process the effects such an action might have on other imme-
diate interests such as, for example, the search for a peace settlement in
the Middle East.

The suggestion to emphasize “our human rights concerns in all
training programs that we conduct for foreign military personnel”
(page 31) could easily be interpreted by a country as a roundabout at-
tempt to “destablize” its government by the encouragement of “sub-
version” among its military personnel.

Our recent experience in the International Labor Conference (June

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
what is “politicization” or what is not, ours is a minority viewpoint.
Voting for loans or abstaining from voting in IFI’s will be, and is, re-
garded as a political act. Our use of political criteria on IFI loans may
come back to haunt us should the Egyptians move from expressing
concern about our policy in the IFI’s to taking advantage of it in an ef-
fort to deny IFI loans to Israel on human rights grounds. The Egyptians
have used international organizations in the past to further their for-
eign policy efforts vis-a`-vis Israel. Since most of the world community
believes that Israel does violate human rights in the occupied terri-
tories, our effort to address human rights questions in the IFI’s may
place us in an akward and embarrassing position in the future.
If we do continue to use the IFI’s as an instrument of human rights
policy we should concentrate our fire on gross offenders where we
have substantial multilateral support, e.g. Uganda. We suggest a cold,
hard look at the possible future consequences of this policy be taken be-
fore any recommendation is made to the President.

In connection with the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination (page 56), it should be noted that the USG has, thus far,
declined to take part in the Decade because of the equating of Zionism
with racism. The draft PRM states that we should consult with key Af-
rican delegations at the 1977 UNGA in an effort to reach advance un-
derstandings for the avoidance of the Zionism-racism issue at the
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination to be
in August 1978. Before even attempting this, it should be remembered
that Africa also includes such radical states as Algeria and Libya and

64.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, June 30, 1977
SUBJECT
PRM 28 on Human Rights
I understand that Steve Oxman now has the dubious privilege of
producing a coherent draft PRM on human rights. My staff tells me that
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
he and Matt Nimetz have already done an impressive job in assembling
disparate materials from throughout the Executive Branch.
Even though I know that another draft is now in preparation, I do
want to share some of my concerns about work done so far. (I should
note also that we did not get a chance to see the first draft that was sent
for interagency comment, which was also not cleared elsewhere in the
Department. Whether or not S/P plays the role it is supposed to on
PRM’s, it will be very important that the Assistant Secretaries affected
be involved.)

The latest draft, we believe:
—Does not provide a clear consensus on what we mean by human
rights or a clear sense of where differences exist. There is, in fact, a divi-
sion between those who favor the broad approach outlined in the Sec-
retary’s April 30 speech and those who opt for stress on crimes against
the security of the person. That philosophical and practical diver-
gence—from which operational decisions obviously flow—is not iden-
tified for the President.
—Still does not relate our human rights policy to our overall for-
eign policy objectives. The result is a discussion which skirts the key
issue of costs and benefits for the Carter Administration. What will
pressing for promotion of human rights mean in the short- and
long-term for certain bilateral relations, security interests, dealings
with the Congress, etc.? Conversely, how might a well-managed
human rights program in fact reinforce goals in the North-South
Dialogue?
—For those areas where there are serious splits of opinion, such as
the use of security assistance or of the international financial institu-
tions, what are the choices? The discussion of these contains a short list
of belatedly inserted options. There is, however, no evaluation of those
options pro and con or indication of which Department supports what
and why.
—In yet other areas, such as those treating public diplomacy and
bilateral economic assistance, there are allusions to ambitious pro-
grams to promote human rights. In neither case, however, is there a

Human Rights
suggestion about a price tag. Do AID, USIA, CU, and PA plan to reallo-
cate from among present and projected resources to emphasize human
rights or to request substantial budget increases?
—More money suggests the need for Congressional concurrence.
There is no flag raised for the President on the need to launch consider-
able campaigns on the Hill—both to achieve the kind of appropriations
potentially implicit in an expanded basic human needs component to
US policy on human rights or for such stalled objectives as Senate ratifi-
cation of the UN human-rights-related Covenants and Conventions.
—Finally, there is no indication of follow-up. Although parts of the
PRM allude to agendas for action, there is no discussion of what need
there may be for “new initiatives” and specific action by various
agencies of the Government.

Before the final text is sent to the White House, you may want to
raise this subject at an 8: staff meeting and request all concerned As-
sistant Secretaries of State to give this document their personal atten-
tion. Further, it may be necessary and worthwhile to defer dispatch
until all relevant bureaus and offices register their views more clearly. I
feel strongly that PRM 28 must address the kinds of issues I have noted
if we are to have a final product which both reflects broader policy con-
cerns and provides a concise basis for Presidential decision.
65.

Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of
Politico-Military Affairs (Gelb) to the Deputy Secretary of
State (Christopher)
Washington, July 7, 1977
PRM on Human Rights
In response to your request, we have reviewed the draft Human
Rights PRM2 with a view to developing comments on the main sub-
stantive points. On the whole, we found it a commendable effort to deal
with a complicated subject.
fidential. Drafted by Ericson.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Our three principal comments revolve around one central issue,
which the draft itself acknowledges is all but intractable. That issue in-
volves how much weight to give human rights in comparison to other
factors when we make our foreign policy decisions. We all acknowl-
edge that our commitment to human rights is, as the PRM states, a fun-
damental tenet of our foreign policy. But the assumption that it should
drive all other considerations still pervades the paper. Specifically, in
three sections of concern to PM:
—the section on specific objectives (pp 21–23) assumes that certain
specific objectives have already been identified and that others will
emerge as the result of a detailed analysis of the “human rights situa-
tion in other countries and the possibilities for international action.”
There is no reference to a process whereby these objectives would, be-
fore adoption, be weighed against other specific foreign policy objec-
tives in the areas concerned. We feel the PRM should outline such a
process, and should not assume that the USG will be committed to un-
named specific objectives without further review.
—We recognize that the relationship between security assistance
and human rights is among the most difficult of all, involving as it does
a potential conflict between two of our fundamental foreign policy
tenets. The suggested approach—the option addressed on pp 55–56 of
the draft—would have us not provide security assistance to any
country unless 1) it is essential for our national security that the assist-
ance be given, or 2) the recipient country has or is clearly developing a
good human rights record. We believe this option is so fraught with
possibilities for error that it should be discarded. Who would make
these determinations? And on the basis of what criteria? Would the cri-
teria involve consideration of whether the security assistance relation-
ship with a particular country is essential or would it involve the type of
materiel to be provided? Would it mean an abrupt cessation of all secu-
rity assistance to all countries which could not meet the conditions
specified? Does it mean that human rights and our national security are
the only factors to be considered in determining whether we should
have a security assistance relationship with a given country? In sum,
these criteria go much farther than those already established by the
President’s new arms transfer policy (which includes human rights
considerations), are too stark and restrictive to be practical, and would
deprive the President of the freedom of maneuver he requires in the
foreign policy field. We therefore suggest elimination of the text begin-
States “will give continued emphasis to formulating and conducting our security assist-
ance programs in a manner which will promote and advance respect for human rights in
recipient countries.” PD/NSC–13 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, volume XXVI, Arms Control.

Human Rights
ning with the words “In view” on line 13 of page 55 through the option
on page 56.
—Of particular concern in this context is the statement on page 121
that “when the Arms Export Control Board (AECB) is unable to reach a
consensus on particular policies, programs or transactions because of
differences concerning the effect on human rights of the proposed ac-
tions, it will refer the issue to the Interagency Group on Human Rights
and Foreign Assistance. This will ensure overall coordination of our
human rights policy as it relates to foreign assistance.” We have many
objections to what appears less a proposal than a statement of estab-
lished procedure. It seems to be based on the premise that human
rights considerations should have primacy over all others in security
assistance matters and would give final jurisdiction to a body on which
several of the agencies most directly concerned with security assistance
are not represented. There exist ample assurances that human rights
considerations will be factored into the proceedings of the AECB at
every step and will be fully reflected in the recommendations which
that Board (which is an advisory, not a decision-making body) will
make to the Secretary. We therefore recommend strongly that the last
two sentences of the paragraph at the top of page 121 be deleted.
I am attaching a list of other specific suggestions, keyed to perti-
nent sections of the text, for your consideration.

66.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, July 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Recognition of Improvements in Human Rights
The following is based on a conversation I had with the President
this morning:2
1. As you know, the Argentine Government has stated its intention
to release 342 political prisoners. The President would like you to ac-
knowledge this and express his gratification to the Argentine Govern-
ment when they have released the prisoners.
2. At the same time, the President would like the State Department,
on background to the press, to acknowledge this action by the Argen-
tine Government and express the President’s gratification.
3. The President would like it to be a matter of policy to acknowl-
edge and express gratification for improvements in human rights once
it has been determined that these improvements are real rather than
cosmetic. This should be done not only with the Government con-
cerned but, on background, with the press.

Zbigniew Brzezinski
Confidential.
the White House. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No
record of this conversation has been found.

Human Rights

67.

Memorandum From the Global Issues Cluster of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, July 13, 1977
SUBJECT
Evening Report
Daily Activities
Tuchman started a marathon day of meetings at Rand Corporation
briefing for ERDA on nuclear fuel cycles—economic analysis of various
possible cycles.

Tuchman attended the second plenary of the human rights PRM to
hear comments on the second draft. Most agencies felt that this was a
great improvement over the first draft. Defense, however, hated it,
found the security assistance sections “totally unacceptable”, and the
rest of the draft “unbalanced”. I felt that most of the relatively unim-
portant things were improved, but that all the important issues remain.
I made the points that: (1) there is no discussion of objectives3 and that
is absolutely central to everything else (the PRM defines the objective
as: “to encourage the respect that governments accord to human
rights” and leaves it at that; (2) it essentially considers democracy (or
the approximate content of the Bill of Rights) as a basic human right,
boils down to—“we have to do everything on a case-by-case basis”. I

68.

Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of
State (Nimetz) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)
Washington, July 15, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
I have been giving considerable thought to your suggestion that I
write an analytical introduction to PRM–28 in defense of the human
Human Rights
rights policy, particularly in light of our last interagency meeting on the
PRM.

It is my view that this PRM is not an exercise in which the human
rights policy ought to be re-argued as if we were writing on a clean
slate. I know there are some who want to take a fresh look at the policy.
Jessica Tuchman of the NSC staff holds this view. I do not believe this is
a credible alternative. The President articulated a human rights policy,
not once, but consistently. The Secretary has spoken with authority on
the subject. Decisive actions have been taken in its name. Reactions
have occurred around the world. History, as it were, has been made.
I happen to believe that including human rights as a significant
factor in foreign policy decisions is correct, on moral grounds, on stra-
tegic grounds and on domestic political grounds. But whether or not
one agrees with the basic thrust of the policy, the fact remains that it is
firmly imbedded as a part of this Administration’s over-all foreign
policy. To re-argue it now, or even to suggest, in a fundamental policy
document that is bound to receive wide circulation, that the policy is
open to question would have very detrimental effects. It would cer-
tainly be seen by the Soviet Union, and the rest of the world, as a tre-
mendous victory for Moscow and a weakening of the American Presi-
dent’s resolve under pressure. It would cause consternation among our
friends abroad, who have adjusted to our policy, and to supporters of
the human rights policy in the Congress and throughout the country. It
would cause bureaucratic havoc in the Department where bureaus are
now beginning to work human rights factors into their daily work pro-
gram. It would be a foreign policy and political disaster.
What is needed now is refinement of the policy so that day-to-day
decisions can be made effectively. I believe that everyone who has
thought seriously about this matter recognizes that human rights can
never be the fundamental goal of our foreign policy, which must be
rooted firmly in our national security interest. But it should be one of a
number of important concerns around the world to be pursued over
the long term. Like environmental concerns or economic development
interests, the sooner we transform “human rights” from an ideological
crusade to a series of working level problems, the better we will all be.

69.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, July 20, 1977
SUBJECT
PRM–28—Human Rights
Attached at Tab A2 is the table of contents of the third draft of
PRM–28. It runs to 32 pages single spaced. The following are the major
problems I have with it.
1. What is to be taken as a given?

In previous sessions, I stated my own feeling that we should ap-
proach the PRM exercise in the spirit that nothing done or said so far
should be considered dogma. The first two drafts constantly resolved
tricky issues by a simple appeal to authority: referring to public state-
ments of the President and the Secretary of State as the last word. I ar-
gued that we would not have been asked to do this review in the first
place if a thorough analysis (even one that raised difficult questions)
was not wanted. This draft finally does face this problem head on—but
not at all in the spirit I had intended:
Human Rights
“In order to be useful, this study takes as its starting point the
human rights policy articulated consistently by the President since his
inauguration. It does not inquire whether we should have such a
policy. The fact is that decisive actions have been taken to advance this
policy both by the President and in his name. The Secretary of State has
spoken with authority on the subject. Reactions have occurred around
the world. History, as it were, has been made.”
This means that all major statements—in particular the Secretary’s
Law Day Speech—are now taken as carved in granite.
2. Objectives
The PRM states that our “overall” objective is to “increase the re-
spect that governments accord to the human rights enumerated
below”. I suspect that the choice of “overall” instead of “long range”
was deliberate. It suggests a broad vagueness appropriate to what is
provided. This section represents probably the most serious failure of
the PRM—and also the most difficult set of questions to answer. What
are we really after? Is it to change totalitarian systems to democracies? To
improve the social and economic welfare of the billions of impover-
ished people of the world? To increase domestic support for foreign
policy in general? To make ourselves feel good? etc. These are not
simple questions but I suspect that a careful effort to analyze them
would dictate quite different policy choices for the short term as well as
the long.

The PRM also lists six “intermediate objectives”. Of the six only one
is substantive—“seek a rapid end to patterns of gross governmental vi-
olations of the person”. All the rest are entirely procedural: —“heighten
international awareness”; “attract international support”; “promote
and strengthen international institutions”; etc. Again, we should be
thinking in much more concrete terms.
3. The Definition of Human Rights
Vance’s Law Day speech set forth three categories of human rights.
State now regards these as inviolate. Let me quote them since this is a
key point:
“First, the right to be free from governmental violations of the integrity of
the person: such violations include torture; cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment and punishment; arbitrary arrest or imprisonment; denial of
fair public trial; and invasion of the home (‘the First Group’).
“Second, economic and social rights: the right to be free from gov-
ernment action or inaction which either obstructs an individual’s ef-
forts to fulfill his vital needs for food, shelter, health care and education

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
or fails adequately to support the individual in meeting basic needs
(‘the Second Group’).

“Third, the right to enjoy civil and political liberties: freedom of
thought, of religion, of assembly, of speech, of the press; freedom to
take part in government (‘the Third Group’).”
The First Group should be those which are universally applicable.
To my mind therefore it should not include the last two items. Denial of
a fair public trial is not tantamount to a denial of justice, and invasion of
the home is of questionable meaning and applicability to certain so-
cieties—particularly Asian. Both these two items belong in Group
Three.

More fundamental, is the question of whether the Third Group of
rights can be globally applied. Why do we assume that these rights which
we hold so dear are equally valued in other cultures? The PRM’s ration-
ale does not even pretend to grapple with the issue:
“We do not accept the charge that by promoting these rights we
seek to impose 18th century western ideas on non-western societies
where they have no roots or relevance. These rights have been es-
poused in principle by virtually all governments and are of world-wide
significance as a matter of practice.”
To say that “we do not accept the charge” is not to meet it. And to
appeal to the UN Charter which includes every right that anyone can
think of, does not take us much further. There are major questions to be an-
swered as to where and when and how Group Three rights are relevant and ap-
plicable. They should be addressed.
4. Priority Among the Different Groups of Human Rights
The PRM states only that “the three groups of rights should be consid-
ered equally important”. This is not self-evident. Among other options
are that Group One should be considered primary, or that Groups One
and Two should be considered as equally important with Group Three
being applied only in certain cases.

A related issue is the question of which tools—including both sanc-
tions and incentives—are applicable and appropriate to each of the
three groups. Most sanctions, for example, seem inappropriate to en-
force or punish violations of Group Two rights. But if we do not react to
violations of these rights, are we then relegating them to a lesser impor-
tance? There are many other related questions to be answered.

Human Rights
5. Timeframe and the Scorecard Problem.

The discussion of this issue is cursory to say the least. The draft ex-
plains that we must “concentrate on encouraging the maximum pos-
sible evolutionary movement”. Also, that “realistic timeframes will
differ by country and by the type of human rights violation involved”,
and that Group One improvements can be expected in a shorter time-
frame than Groups Two and Three. That is all.

We are under intense pressure from both Congress and the press
to explain what our expectations are, and when we expect to be ready
for an accounting. When I stress to reporters that meaningful change in
societies occurs slowly, they respond, “yes, but when will you be ready
to be judged on whether this policy has been a success or failure? At the
end of one year, two years, four years, two terms?, etc.” This is obvi-
ously a fair question and one to which we must provide some kind of
answer. The obvious temptation, to which we have already to some ex-
tent succumbed, is to produce a scorecard on shorter and shorter, and
therefore less and less meaningful time-frames. If we are going to
refuse to produce such a scorecard we need a rationale for doing so—
one on which all Administration spokesmen agree.
6. Priority of Human Rights vis-a`-vis Other Foreign Policy Interests
The draft states that “the task of relating human rights policy to
our other foreign policy concerns has been and will continue to be a
case-by-case task”. This is not good enough. In fact I am not really con-
vinced that it is any kind of an answer to this question. The State De-
partment is currently heavily engaged in producing detailed country-
by-country human rights reports and program plans for every nation in
the world. While these will help us make informed judgments, they in
no way contribute to the establishment of guidelines and criteria through
which a consistent policy can be shaped. Moreover, if priority is as-
signed to human rights (vis-a`-vis security interests, economic interests,
proliferation interests, etc.) on a country-by-country basis, the inevi-
table result is a situation in which human rights is the number one pri-
ority in our relations with certain countries (e.g., Argentina) while it is
way down on the list (if there at all) for other countries (e.g., Iran). Can
we live with such a policy? Won’t other nations point it out and resent
it? This needs analysis.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
7. Strategies
In an effort to preserve maximum flexibility, the draft addresses
the possibility of formulating strategies for different types of country, by
dividing the globe into three divisions—western democracies, third
world nations and communist states. The total analysis is three pages.
Obviously, though every country is unique, a great deal more could be
done by way of categorizing nations into groups according to their human
rights characteristics and situations, and suggesting strategies for each.
The discussion of the Soviet Union and of the PRC (which gets one sen-
tence) is totally inadequate.
8. Major Problems in the IFIs
The PRM raises the point that the IFIs’ charters state that they
shall:
“not interfere in the political affairs of any member; nor shall they
be influenced in their decisions by the political character of . . . (the re-
cipient government). Only economic considerations shall be relevant to
their decisions . . .”
Clearly, then, our actions raise the serious question of whether our human
rights policy violates the charters of these banks. The PRM suggests three ar-
guments to counter that possibility. One is a nitpicking legalism and ir-
relevant politically. The second—that the term “economic” might be
taken to include welfare and other social concerns, and therefore
human rights—is weak. The third—that disregarding human rights con-
siderations might not be compatible with the UN Charter, and is there-
fore unwarranted—is highly questionable both legally and politically.
Having gone to the point of raising this issue, however, the PRM does
absolutely nothing by way of answering it.
9. Creating Domestic and Congressional Support
Neither of these is treated, though the Congressional Liaison Of-
fices are working on the latter. We have already seen enough, during
the debates of the IFIs, to know that human rights concerns can lead to
some very counter-productive legislative results. The Left may in-
creasingly restrict our relations with rightist countries, while the Right
does the same against Communist regimes, to the point where our for-
eign policy may be severely hampered. In addition, the putative “pro-
gressive center” is often so split by ethnic lobbying (Jews, Greeks,
Eastern Europeans, etc.) as not to constitute a reliable base of support.

70.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
178340. Subject: Communications on Human Rights Policies.
national Security Affairs sent the following message to the three
Commanders-in-Chief in Europe, the Pacific and Southern Command
and an identical memorandum to the Director of the Defense Intelli-
gence Agency: Quote The President has made clear the commitment of
this government to the support of human rights as enunciated in such
international instruments as the UN Universal Declaration on Human
Rights. Human rights concerns are a key element in our national pol-
icies, and it is important that our military personnel abroad have a thor-
ough knowledge of these policies. The State Department has been
asked to assure that its guidance to our diplomatic missions on the ad-
ministration’s policies regarding human rights is made available to the
unified commands and to US military personnel in attache or security
assistance offices, so that they will have the fullest possible personal
understanding of the government’s position on the issue as back-
ground in their work, and for their interchanges with host country of-
ficers. End of quote.
2. I heartily endorse this proposal. I have asked that outgoing De-
partment messages concerning general human rights policies and
issues be copied to all commands and that messages dealing with re-
gional or country specific human rights issues which may be of interest
be copied to the concerned commanders. Country Teams are requested
to do the same. Moreover, Chiefs of Mission are requested to discuss
appropriate ways of assuring that all members of Country Teams in-
cluding the military components have prompt access to general policy
pronouncements and discussions of human rights issues relevant to
their countries and regions, including those which are received
through United States Information Agency channels. All elements of
the Country Team should be informed on human rights policy in order
to be in a position to respond intelligently to questions on the subject
and to support US policy as appropriate subject to guidance from
the Ambassador. Addressees should also share messages concerning
classified. Drafted by Jones; cleared by Leslie Brown, Holly, Ericson, ARA, Fuerth, Shurt-
leff, Martens, USIA/IOP, DOD/OSD, and Spiegel; approved by Derian. Also sent to
USCINCEUR, CINCPAC, USCINCSO. Sent to Harold Brown for information. Sent to
military addressees for POLAD.

Human Rights
human rights problems and issues in their countries with neighboring
posts as appropriate.

Vance

71.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Deputy Secretary
of State (Christopher)
Washington, August 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights and the IFIs
The purpose of this memorandum is to recommend that the Inter-
Agency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance reexamine,
on a regular basis (say quarterly), the human rights situation in coun-
tries for which we are awaiting responses and results of demarches al-
ready recommended by the Group. My concern is that we will approve
IFI loans to a country even in the absence of some action by the country
to improve its human rights situation.

72.

Memorandum for the Record
Washington, August 2, 1977
SUBJECT
PAID Assessment of Intelligence Production in Support of US Human Rights
Initiatives
NSC staff, together with a representative of the Policy Planning Staff,
Department of State, to obtain their views concerning the adequacy of
Intelligence Community products concerning human rights. Present
Human Rights
from the NSC were Robert Pastor, Latin America, Mike Oksenberg, Far
East, PRC, Mike Armacost, SEA, and Richard Feinberg from the Policy
Planning Staff.
2. (C) As users of Intelligence Community products, these NSC
and State Department representatives rated Community output on
human rights as good to excellent and of considerable value in the for-
mulation of US foreign policies. While expressing general satisfaction
with Community products, suggestions were offered for future pro-
duction along the following lines:
• Evaluations concerning how foreign leaders, both parties in
power and opposition groups, rank the human rights issue in order of
importance against other issues pertinent to the relevant geographic
area.
• Additional reports to assist in determining the degree to which
non-governmental entities may be committing human rights violations
on behalf of foreign governments, such as recent allegations involving
right wing groups in El Salvador.
• Specific information upon which to base evaluations of allega-
tions of human rights violations received from non-governmental
groups such as Amnesty International.
3. Both Messrs. Oksenberg and Armacost expressed concern that
the injudicious use of clandestine collection resources could have nega-
tive overall effects upon US relations with countries targeted for collec-
tion. Both recommend that overt resources be used, to the maximum
extent possible, in satisfying national requirements on this topic, al-
though it was recognized that clandestine collection can provide per-
spective and balance when gaps exist in overt reporting. It was gener-
ally agreed that the Intelligence Community and users of intelligence
products should identify base line information requirements on human
rights with respect to individual geographic areas to conserve clandes-
tine collection capabilities.
4. On the basis of our discussion, there appears to be some dis-
parity in the extent to which NSC and State staff members who support
policymakers have become knowledgeable concerning the structure
and capabilities of the Community through prior work experience or
other means. Selected staff members at the NSC, State, and elsewhere
might usefully be provided with an overview.

[name not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
73.

Study Prepared by the Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Group on
Human Rights and Foreign Assistance
Washington, August 15, 1977
[Omitted here is the table of contents.]

PRESIDENTIAL REVIEW MEMORANDUM/NSC–28:
HUMAN RIGHTS
This study is submitted in response to the NSC memorandum of
May 20, 1977, requesting a review of United States foreign policy with
respect to human rights. The major sections of the study are keyed to
the NSC memorandum.

This study takes as its starting point the human rights policy artic-
ulated consistently by the President since his inauguration. Decisive ac-
tions have been taken to advance this policy both by the President and
by the Secretary of State. Reactions have occurred around the world.
Day-to-day decisions which must be taken to advance the cause of
human rights will require a careful weighing of the circumstances in in-
dividual countries. The study refines the overall thrust of our policy,
evaluates the instruments at our disposal to carry it out, and considers
costs, risks, and tradeoffs.

I. Definition of U.S. Objectives in the Area of Human Rights.
A. Overall Objective.

The overall objective of our human rights policy is to increase ob-
servance of human rights by governments.
1. Definition of Human Rights.

Generally accepted expressions of these rights are found in the
United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, adopted by the United Nations in 1948. To maximize our effec-
tiveness, our policy should be directed to the most fundamental and
important human rights, as set forth below, and should include the
Human Rights
right to enjoy them without distinction as to race, sex, language, or
religion:
First, the right to be free from governmental violations of the integrity of
the person: such violations include torture; cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment and punishment; arbitrary arrest or imprisonment; denial of
fair public trial; and invasion of the home (“the first group”).
Second, economic and social rights: the right to be free from gov-
ernment action or inaction which either obstructs an individual’s ef-
forts to fulfill his vital needs for food, shelter, health care and education
or fails adequately to support the individual in meeting basic needs
(“the second group”). Fulfillment of these rights will depend, in part,
upon the stage of a country’s economic development.

Third, civil and political liberties: these include freedom of thought,
of religion, of assembly, of speech, of the press; freedom of movement
both within and outside one’s own country; and freedom to take part in
government (“the third group”).

The President and the Secretary of State have expressly included
the second and third groups within the general purview of the Admin-
istration’s human rights policy. The rationale and the implications of
including these rights merit discussion.

Incorporation of the second group of rights in our policy has par-
ticular implications for its application to the Third World. A policy
which subordinated these rights would not only be inconsistent with
our humanitarian ideals and efforts, but would also be viewed unfa-
vorably in those countries where the tendency is to view basic eco-
nomic and social rights as the most important human rights of all.
As for the third group—civil and political rights—a policy that ig-
nored them would be so narrow in construction as to sacrifice overall
coherence. It would also be untrue to our heritage and basic values. We
do not accept the charge that by promoting these rights we seek to im-
pose eighteenth century, Western ideas on non-Western societies
where they have no roots or relevance. These rights have been es-
poused in principle by virtually all governments and are of worldwide
significance as a matter of practice. There is no necessary inconsistency
between political and civil rights on the one hand and economic devel-
opment on the other.

Reliable and lasting protection against violations of the first and
second groups can only come with the development of institutions that
protect broadly defined civil and political liberties. To stop the torture
of one person or to alleviate hunger in one family is important. To build
institutions that safeguard against torture and provide a steadily im-
proving standard of living must be our long-term goal. In espousing
the third group of rights, there is a particular need, however, to avoid
parochialism. Our goal is to enhance basic human rights in diverse so-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
cieties; we do not seek to destabilize governments or remake societies
in our image.

The three groups of rights should be considered equally impor-
tant. However, that does not mean that, as a practical matter, they will
be pursued in the same way or over the same time span. In countries
where the first group of rights is denied or threatened, the protection of
those rights has obvious priority, since human life and fundamental
human dignity are threatened. In countries where the first group of
rights is generally observed, but political and civil rights are abridged
or non-existent, our policy should emphasize our support for those
rights. Promotion of economic rights is, for the U.S., primarily a matter
of helping to stimulate economic development. This includes coopera-
tion with and contribution to bilateral and multilateral foreign assist-
ance efforts as well as other measures (e.g., in trade and finance) de-
signed to strengthen the world economy. We should also encourage
other countries to follow policies which will advance their economic
and social development.
2. Timeframe.

In seeking greater respect for all these rights we must keep in mind
the limits of our power and the intractability of the problem. Our ability
to change human rights practices in other societies is limited, even if we
exert substantial efforts. Thus, our expectations must be realistic, and
we must concentrate on encouraging the maximum possible evolu-
tionary movement. There will, of course, be certain exceptional circum-
stances in which we will seek dramatic improvements, as in our efforts
to promote majority rule in Rhodesia.

Realistic timeframes will differ by country and by the type of
human rights violation involved. The timeframes within which to ex-
pect improvements in group one rights should, in general, be consider-
ably shorter than those in groups two and three.

B. Reasons for Pursuing the Overall Objective.

There are sound reasons, based in national interest as well as our
moral tradition and legal obligation, for encouraging an increase in the
respect that governments accord to human rights. Pursuit of this
objective:
(a) helps fulfill a moral obligation that we have incurred by virtue
of our heritage and values and our legal obligations under the United
Nations Charter;
(b) strengthens the rule of law and respect for agreements by pro-
moting the authority of the human rights recognized in the United Na-
tions Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Helsinki

Human Rights
Final Act3 and other international instruments and by furthering the
goal contained in U.S. laws authorizing foreign assistance that our for-
eign policy promote increased observance of internationally recog-
nized human rights by all countries;
(c) substitutes, in determining our attitude toward Third World
governments, a standard based on governmental behavior toward
people for an increasingly outmoded Marxist-non-Marxist standard,
and assists in the philosophical debate with the Soviet Union over the
type of society worth developing;
(d) strengthens domestic support for our foreign policy by re-
flecting the moral and ethical values of our people;
(e) promotes the fundamental long-term American interest in a
world of nations whose systems of government and societies reflect in-
dividual freedom and dignity.

C. Intermediate Objectives.

In order to attain the overall objective set forth above, we should
seek to achieve the following broad intermediate objectives:
(a) heighten international and national awareness of human rights
concerns in order to steadily increase the norms of acceptable conduct
in the human rights field;
(b) attract international support for our efforts;
(c) demonstrate that countries which violate basic human rights do
so at a cost in their standing in the international community. Con-
versely, that countries with positive records or significant improving
performance benefit tangibly and intangibly from their efforts;
(d) promote and strengthen the efforts of international institutions
as well as non-governmental organizations to protect human rights;
(e) ensure that our own conduct measures up to the same stand-
ards we apply to others;
(f) seek a rapid end to patterns of gross governmental violations of
the person, particularly murder, torture, and lengthy imprisonment for
political offenses;
(g) seek to increase U.S. resources available for alleviating human
suffering, particularly with regard to refugees.

D. Specific Objectives.

Achievement of the overall objective and the broad intermediate
objectives set forth above will entail pursuit of specific objectives in
particular countries and international institutions. The identification of
these objectives requires detailed analysis of the human rights situa-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tion, as well as other relevant factors, in other countries and of the pos-
sibilities for action. This effort is presently underway at both the De-
partment of State and posts abroad.

While certain specific objectives are already apparent—such as an
end to the state of siege in Chile, the release of the Myongdong defend-
ants in Korea, majority rule in Rhodesia, increased emigration of mi-
norities from Eastern Europe—others will only emerge after additional
analysis. The pursuit of certain human rights objectives, such as ma-
jority rule in Rhodesia and implementation of the Helsinki Final Act,
will also serve to enhance political and other policy goals.
E. Recognizing the Costs of a Human Rights Policy and Relation to Other
Foreign Policy Objectives.

As the promotion of human rights becomes one of our basic for-
eign policy tenets, we are faced with the task of relating human rights
policy to our other major foreign policy concerns. It has been, and will
continue to be, a difficult task. For we are adding an emphasis on
human rights to an already wide range of policy goals, many of which,
in the nature of things, come into conflict with one another at times.
Day by day, country by country, human rights considerations are
being weighed against other foreign policy objectives, such as the
maintenance of NATO strength and solidarity, strategic arms limita-
tion, peacekeeping in the Middle East, control of nuclear proliferation,
and normalization of relations with the PRC, Vietnam and Cuba.
While there is no necessary inconsistency among these objectives,
they will, on occasion, compete for primacy. Resolution of the conflict
between or among them will depend on the facts of the situation at
hand, which should be addressed with openness and candor. There
will clearly be instances in which efforts to achieve our human rights
goals will have to be modified, delayed or curtailed in deference to
other important objectives. But by the same token, making human
rights a principal goal of our foreign policy means that promotion of
human rights will not be viewed as a lesser objective. Even when other
objectives outweigh human rights, our policies will be implemented in
a manner that promotes human rights to the extent possible.
Human Rights
Adoption of an affirmative human rights policy will carry with it a
variety of risks, choices, tradeoffs and potential costs:
—Our actions and statements regarding human rights objectives
may involve criticism of conditions in another country, which may be
viewed as either offensive or threatening by the government concerned
and, in certain cases, by some segments of the population. The resulting
strain in our relations with that government may have a negative im-
pact on other objectives. The sensitivity of the Soviet Union to our
human rights initiatives represents a manifestation of the possible risks
involved, in this case a strain in crucial East-West relations. Never-
theless, in many countries, positive responses to our human rights ini-
tiatives have occurred, are occurring, or are possible. As they do, rela-
tions will improve.
—Since some Western democracies, while supporting our general
principles have not agreed with us on certain tactics, there is a risk that
certain of our initiatives, if not properly coordinated, could lead to dif-
ferences with our NATO allies. These differences could, of course, be
exploited by the Soviet Union.
—Our criticism of human rights violations may provoke a greater
degree of repression by a government, either because it fears our initia-
tives will encourage dissident groups to act with boldness or because it
wants to demonstrate disdain for our policy. Of course, such a reaction
bears its own internal political cost.
—Our methods may adversely affect multilateral institutions or
ongoing programs, particularly in the economic area, which have their
own U.S.-endorsed objectives. In particular, using our vote in interna-
tional financial institutions to encourage respect for human rights
might lead others to seek to block assistance on other and purely polit-
ical grounds. On the other hand, failure to raise human rights concerns
could jeopardize domestic support for these institutions. More broadly,
we will have to remain alert to possible costs in terms of developing
country cooperation on North-South issues.
—Inevitable inconsistencies in our human rights policy around the
world will expose us to criticism. Allies such as Korea, Iran and the
Philippines, for instance, cannot be immune from some application of
the policy without endangering the integrity of the policy; neither can
powerful adversaries like the Soviet Union. But whatever qualifications
on the application of our policy toward these or other nations we deem
necessary will invite charges that our policy lacks credibility.
—The implementation of our policy is likely to provoke reciprocal
criticism of domestic conditions in this country, not only from commu-
nist nations but also from friends. Our response should be to welcome
constructive criticism, noting that our system provides many remedies
for social and economic ills.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—The pursuit of our human rights objectives will in some cases re-
sult in reduction of security assistance to, and cooperation with, of-
fending governments. In some instances where our own defense pos-
ture is involved, U.S. security interests may be adversely affected.
—The human rights effort could involve significant dollar costs.
While our commitment to a substantial increase in economic assistance
is not solely a function of our human rights policy, it does relate to our
commitment to the enhancement of economic and social rights.
F. Strategies for Pursuing our Human Rights Objectives.
Our human rights objectives obviously cannot be pursued every-
where, at once, and in the same manner. While no two countries’ situa-
tions will ever be identical, there are certain logical groupings of coun-
tries which can be useful for analysis and discussion.
1. Western Democracies.

We should support and reinforce human rights values in the
Western industrial countries (including Canada, Japan, Australia, New
Zealand) and encourage these countries to support our human rights
initiatives. We are now at a historic point at which all NATO and
Western European countries are democracies, and a major effort
should be made to reinforce democratic tendencies, particularly in
countries that have only recently established or re-established democ-
racy, such as Turkey, Greece, Portugal and Spain.
2. Third World Nations.

Efforts should be made to reinforce positive human rights and
democratic tendencies in the Third World, particularly in states that al-
ready have demonstrated good or improving human rights perform-
ance. This support is particularly important with respect to countries
that are vulnerable to external or internal threat, or which face severe
economic problems. We should provide increased symbolic support as
well as increased economic assistance, as appropriate, and cultural, ed-
ucational and scientific exchanges. We should also seek support for
U.S. human rights initiatives by these countries.

Our efforts with respect to Third World nations where a human
rights tradition has been disrupted should seek to encourage return to
former norms and to discourage the arbitrary use of power. In such so-
cieties, the populace may be receptive to various forms of assistance
geared to support human rights values. Educational and cultural pro-
grams directed to human rights supporters might be especially
effective.

In Third World nations where human rights values have never
taken firm root, we should discourage the arbitrary use of power and
promote a more equitable and humane social and economic order. In
some cases, it will be more realistic to expect concrete achievements

Human Rights
with respect to the first and second groups of rights than with respect
to the third.

An important aspect of our policy should be to ensure that our re-
lations with countries that continually violate human rights are correct,
in keeping with our other interests, but not close. The tone we set in our
relations is important to the credibility and thus to the success of our
overall policy.
3. Communist States.

With respect to the communist countries, our human rights effort
should remain firm and consistent but non-polemical. We should rec-
ognize that major changes in communist regimes and their human
rights practices will not take place in the short term; they are only likely
to occur, if at all, gradually as the basic political and social structures of
these countries change. On the other hand, we believe that U.S. and
world opinion and U.S. actions can positively influence trends in the
long term and encourage improvements in limited but important areas
in the short term. We should make it clear that our commitment to
human rights is basic to our foreign policy. This view should be com-
municated to the people of these countries as well as their gov-
ernments. We should emphasize implementation of the Helsinki Final
Act.

Because of its pivotal importance, the Soviet Union is a special case
meriting a separate word. Soviet governmental response to our em-
phasis on human rights has been negative and increasingly sharp, ex-
plicitly suggesting that de´tente is threatened by our policy. To what ex-
tent the Soviet leadership truly feels their system and their hold in
Eastern Europe is endangered is unclear; but their objective appears to
be to bring about a significant decrease in our public advocacy of
human rights, thus reducing its most embarrassing aspects for them, on
the pretext that a “one-sided” U.S. advocacy of human rights and re-
spect for state sovereignty cannot co-exist.

There is no evidence that the U.S. human rights policy has affected
Soviet bargaining positions in important negotiations, even if the
atmosphere surrounding negotiations is tense. Our substantive posi-
tion on arms control has and likely will continue to determine the So-
viet response on this critical issue. Similarly, we believe that the Soviet
Union will continue to pursue its perceived interests in arms control,
trade, scientific and cultural exchanges and other areas of our bilateral
relations, regardless of our advocacy of human rights. The inevitable
strain of a massive arms race, the need to take increasing consumer de-
mands into account, and the potential for unrest in Eastern Europe
means the Soviet Union cannot easily pull away from MBFR or SALT
negotiations, technological transfer agreements or commercial credit
arrangements.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The USSR is continuing efforts to cooperate with the U.S. private
sector, despite the Jackson-Vanik amendment. This indicates that the
Kremlin may implicitly recognize that Soviet economic concerns will
make it difficult to delay forward bilateral movement for long periods
of time because of U.S. human rights advocacy.

With proper management, our security interests and our human
rights concerns both can be accommodated in our relations with the So-
viet Union. In fact, failure to execute an appropriate human rights
strategy with proper balance will detract from the political value of our
human rights policy elsewhere in the world.

The potential normalization of relations with China and Cuba will
place some strain on the credibility of our human rights policy, for in
both cases other considerations are likely to govern in the short term.
As relations are established, we will be expected to take human rights
initiatives. We should now be examining the methods we will utilize to
achieve specific human rights goals. These would probably fall, at the
beginning, in the areas of family reunification and, with respect to
Cuba, the treatment and disposition of political prisoners. We should
recognize that with respect to human rights we will have little, if any,
leverage or influence with the PRC at this stage.
4. Gross Violaters of Human Rights.

Governments that have a consistent record of gross violations of
human rights should be dealt with as special cases, and our policy
should generally be to bring to bear international opinion and con-
certed action by the world community to bring about improvement.
Obviously, this should be done only in flagrant cases after attempts to
encourage evolutionary improvement have been spurned. Even in
such cases, however, there is no necessary reason why formal diplo-
matic relations should not be maintained.

II. Identification of “a Consistent Pattern of Gross Violations of
Internationally Recognized Human Rights.”
The phrase, “a consistent pattern of gross violations of internation-
ally recognized human rights” derives from terminology in Resolution
Act of 1961, Section 28 (a) of the Inter-American Development Bank
Act, and Section 211 (a) of the African Development Fund Act. The gen-
eral purport of all these statutory provisions is that we should not pro-
vide assistance to governments that engage in such conduct.

Human Rights
The legislative history of our statutory provisions does not indi-
cate the meaning Congress attached to the concept of a “consistent pat-
tern,” and there are no judicial decisions interpreting the phrase. By its
terms the language excludes isolated events and incorporates the di-
mensions of time as well as repetition. Thus, frequently repeated ac-
tions over a relatively short period of time would appear to be covered
as would somewhat less frequent but regular violations over a rela-
tively long period of time.

While “internationally recognized human rights” would include,
inter alia, all of the rights in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
it appears from the legislative history that in using the phrase and com-
bining it with the concept of “gross violations,” Congress intended to
cover mainly the right to be free from governmental violation of the in-
tegrity of the person, i.e., the first group of rights discussed above.
Once a determination is made that a country has engaged in a con-
sistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights, certain important questions arise. For example, is the determina-
tion binding as to future decisions with respect to that country? If that
would depend on whether there had been substantial intervening
events, by what standard ought those events be judged? Further,
would a determination as to one country have precedential effect as to
other countries?

These are not easy questions. While answers can no doubt be de-
vised, the questions point up the limitations in the human rights con-
text of requiring uniform actions pursuant to a statutorily-prescribed
standard of conduct. There are vast differences among human rights
conditions in various countries, and what may rise to the level of offen-
sive conduct in one country may not be properly so characterized in the
setting of another country with different circumstances, a different his-
tory, and a different trend. To be realistic and effective, our policy must
take account of such differences. That will therefore be difficult if we
are required to take the same action—e.g., a “no” vote on an IFI loan—
with respect to different countries, even though our own best assess-
ment of the circumstances in such countries might indicate that the
mandated action would be inappropriate or that other actions should
be taken instead.

III. Evaluate Actions Which U.S. Could Take to Improve Human
Rights Conditions.

The range of actions we can take to advance our human rights ob-
jectives is examined below. Of primary importance is the need to eval-
uate the human rights situation in individual countries and to consider
the various policy instruments at our disposal in the light of our own
foreign policy objectives in those countries. These evaluations, which

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
are underway, will apply the factors Secretary Vance cited in his April
30, 1977, Law Day speech as important to the determination of human
rights policy in particular instances.

A. Diplomatic actions, public statements, and various symbolic acts.
Diplomatic exchanges, ranging from informal talks with officials
or government leaders to formal demarches, are a valuable tool.
Through them we can make our human rights policy understood by
other governments and provide notification of the sanctions or incen-
tives that may flow from our policy. As a general proposition, our ac-
tions with respect to the human rights conditions in any country ought
to begin with such approaches.

Diplomatic actions, of course, extend beyond demarches. In fla-
grant cases we may find it advisable and effective to reduce the level of
our presence in a given country.

Public statements can also promote our human rights goals. By
conveying publicly what we have previously said privately, they add
the force of world opinion to our efforts. Statements can be critical of
particular violations or general attitudes, or they can commend posi-
tive conduct or attitudes. Critical statements will be used sparingly
to preserve their effectiveness. A constant stream of criticism of for-
eign governments may cause the U.S. ultimately to be ignored as a
tiresome and ineffective international scold. While public statements
are an extremely important tool, they must be used with skill and
discrimination.

Symbolic acts can in certain circumstances be even more effective
than public statements and may not present the same risks. They can
encourage countries with good human rights records to persist. Invita-
tions to make state visits, Presidential letters, goodwill missions, spe-
cial visitor programs and the like are highly valued abroad. Directing
them to countries with good or improving human rights records will
send a very effective signal.

There will clearly be circumstances in which we should use sym-
bolic acts to identify the U.S. with representatives of human rights or-
ganizations, or with the victims of human rights abuses who seek or
would welcome such identification. We not only demonstrate thereby
our concern and communicate our support, but we may also add an
element of protection to the organizations and individuals involved. Of
course, there will be circumstances in which such symbolic acts on our
part would actually increase the risks to such organizations and
individuals.

B. Changes in Levels of Security and Economic Assistance and Food Aid.
If we genuinely seek to promote economic and social rights, we
should work to meet the Administration’s objective to increase sub-

Human Rights
stantially both bilateral and multilateral foreign economic assistance by
1982.

Where the promotion of human rights is concerned, increases or
reductions in the security and economic assistance (including food aid)
that we provide to individual countries are more decisive and visible
measures than diplomatic actions, public statements or symbolic acts.
However, because of the sensitivity of recipients and the unpredicta-
bility of their reactions, reductions in aid ought not be considered
lightly or until less drastic measures have been taken. Ideally, we
would like to be perceived as working closely with the developing na-
tions that are pursuing equitable growth policies which protect and
promote human dignity. To the extent we are so perceived, our human
rights policy will be strengthened.

Obviously we do not write on a clear slate when we consider re-
ductions in assistance in view of the various statutory provisions which
direct that assistance be used to promote human rights, and except in
certain exceptional cases, be withheld when a consistent pattern of
gross violations emerges.

Our military and economic assistance is generally valued highly
by recipient governments. Thus it is appropriate, circumstances per-
mitting, that we should seek to obtain improved human rights conduct
in return. It should be noted that in many cases aid is extended in re-
turn for other considerations, e.g., in some cases it is called for by base
rights agreements. In other cases, our assistance may be small in
amount and thus easily dispensed with or replaced from other sources.
In such cases our aid may afford us only limited leverage on human
rights issues.

Certain general costs and benefits apply to the use of both military
and economic assistance as sanctions and incentives with respect to
human rights. The benefits include underscoring the seriousness and
determination with which we are pursuing our human rights objec-
tives, avoiding where feasible the inconsistency of providing substan-
tial material assistance to repressive governments, and demonstrating
tangibly that it can be costly to violate human rights and valuable to re-
spect them. The costs include possible damage to U.S. national security
interests, and to our general political and economic interests; disrup-
tion of established assistance relationships; curtailment of activities di-
rectly supporting the second group of human rights; possibly penal-
izing groups of individuals who bear no responsibility for the abuses of
their governments; and the risk that some recipient governments from
whom we withhold assistance may be in a position to retaliate by with-
holding resources that we vitally need.

As a very general proposition, reductions in military assistance
ought usually to precede reductions in economic assistance. Con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
versely, increases in economic assistance ought usually to precede in-
creases in levels of military assistance.
1. Security (Military) Assistance.

Our military assistance is a matter of great sensitivity both to the
governments that receive it and to those segments of the American
public and the Congress who watch it closely as an index of the priority
we place on human rights objectives in relation to our other foreign
policy concerns. Moreover, under Section 502(B) of the Foreign As-
sistance Act of 1961, as amended, we have a legal obligation to ensure
that our security assistance programs are formulated and conducted in
a manner that will promote and advance human rights and avoid iden-
tification of the U.S. with governments that violate human rights.
Perhaps more than any other single factor, U.S. military assistance
is seen as implying U.S. support for the governments that receive it. To
be perceived as supporting a repressive government inevitably exacts
costs in terms of the consistency and the credibility of our human rights
policy. Moreover, some types of arms we provide, finance or license
can be used by a recipient government to carry out or undergird repres-
sive practices. (Although such use is prohibited by U.S. law, our ability
to prevent it is limited.)

A full discussion of the criteria for providing military assistance is
beyond the scope of this study. However, we should remember that
most countries (certainly including our own) believe strongly in the
right to an adequate defense. A careful evaluation of the interests at
stake, and the potential benefits to be gained, is needed in each case.
Where there are vital national security interests at stake which require a
continuing military relationship between the U.S. and the recipient,
and where the recipient’s human rights record is considered to be ac-
ceptable or improving, we should consider sympathetically approving
arms transfers that are consistent in other respects with the President’s
arms transfer guidelines. Conversely, where those factors are not
present, we should view such requests unsympathetically.

Military assistance can be used as a sanction or incentive to pro-
mote human rights by altering the size or functions of our military ad-
visory contingent; by altering the level of training grants; by altering
the quantity of arms transfers; and by altering the types of arms trans-
ferred. Reduction or elimination of military assistance may have little
direct impact on a country’s human rights performance; in many in-

Human Rights
stances the country will be able to turn to an alternate supplier. How-
ever, when a decision is made to reduce military assistance as part of an
overall strategy, with advance warning communicated through diplo-
matic channels, some improvement of human rights performance may
be possible in specific countries. Governments and military forces in
many regions desire close relations with the U.S., and a firm human
rights policy, which demonstrates that benefits such as military assist-
ance are placed at risk in the absence of human rights progress, will be
a continuing element in their decision-making.

Some argue that the strongest signal that could be sent to of-
fending governments would be to alter the relationships that have been
built up over the years between our military and the military of other
countries, some of whom are responsible for repressive practices, by re-
ducing the size of our military contingent and our training (IMET)
grants. They do not believe such action would impair our security in-
terests; indeed, they argue that we do not have legitimate security in-
terests in many of the 57 countries that receive our military assistance.
(46 of the 57 countries receive IMET assistance.) Others believe that re-
ducing our military presence will reduce our ability to communicate
with and influence segments of the governments whose policies we are
trying to change. They believe we should increase the IMET program
on a worldwide basis, particularly in certain selected countries now
prohibited from participating in it, because they believe IMET has
proven successful in fostering pro-U.S. attitudes in foreign military stu-
dents. This complex issue requires further study.
2. Bilateral Economic Assistance, Trade and Investment Programs.
U.S. bilateral economic assistance is provided in several forms. It
includes direct humanitarian assistance (disaster relief and PL 480 Title
II), assistance programs directed primarily to benefit the needy, other
economic development programs which benefit the poor majority less
immediately, food aid given to support development (PL 480 Title I),
and security supporting assistance (assistance extended for primarily
political reasons in the form of grants, budget support, commodity
loans and development projects).

Humanitarian assistance, such as International Disaster Assistance
and PL 480 Title II, is designed to alleviate human suffering by re-
sponding to emergencies caused by manmade or natural disasters. As
such it directly promotes the most basic human right—that of sur-
vival—and should not be considered for use as leverage in supporting
broader economic, political or social rights.

The basic objective of our bilateral assistance program continues to
be to meet the needs of the poor, even in those countries where serious
human rights problems exist. This policy is reflected in law—the orig-
inal Harkin Amendment—which states that AID programs do not have

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
to terminate in such countries where AID assistance “directly benefits
needy people”.

As a result of the “New Directions” in development assistance,10
mandated by Congress, the focus of regular U.S. bilateral economic
assistance has increasingly been directed to meeting the basic human
needs of the poor majority in the developing countries, such as nutri-
tion, health care, education and human resource development, and less
on large-scale capital transfers for major infrastructure development.
Such programs, which assist the poor majority in developing countries
gain access to participation in decisions which shape their lives,
strongly and independently promote group two economic rights, as
well as create a climate supportive of a broader observance of political
and social rights.

As a rule then, bilateral development assistance which directly
benefits the needy should not be used as a policy instrument to sanc-
tion a government for its human rights violations. (Where assistance
benefits the needy, but a country’s human rights record is poor, we
should consider the extent to which our aid is or can be provided
through non-governmental institutions thus reducing our identifica-
tion with the government.) There may be instances, however, in which
a particular government’s human rights violations are so flagrantly
gross and systematic that the need to disassociate from that gov-
ernment outweighs the development assistance goals in that country.
Such a balancing of considerations will require case-by-case analysis.
Reducing economic assistance that does not directly benefit the
needy is a more appropriate means to disassociate the U.S. from a re-
pressive or corrupt government, but such bilateral programs are now
the exception.

Security supporting assistance is extended to a limited number of
countries in which the U.S. has special interests of high political pri-
ority. Currently, 80% of our security supporting assistance goes to Is-
rael and the three confrontation states in the Middle East. Food assist-
ance under PL 480 Title I can also be used to leverage human rights
improvement. However, the distribution and terms of Title I aid have
traditionally been affected by political factors. In addition, its use
would entail the considerable political risk of appearing to provide or
deny food to hungry people in order to achieve U.S. political objectives.
An increase in aid that directly benefits the needy can be an effec-
tive way to encourage positive human rights conduct. Such increases
directly promote our overall human rights objectives by contributing to

Human Rights
the fulfillment of vital human needs. In addition, assistance programs
designed to encourage wider participation in the economic life of a na-
tion can encourage creation of an underlying climate supportive of a
broader observance of human rights. Increasing assistance within ex-
isting budget levels to support countries with improving human rights
records is possible, but difficult to accomplish. We would expect such
increases to be made very selectively. Increases in bilateral economic
assistance on human rights grounds should normally be considered on
an annual basis to support long-term improvement in human rights
conditions and to meet legitimate development needs. In shaping the
overall bilateral aid budget, the pattern of allocation should reflect our
human rights policy as well as more traditional economic development
criteria.
3. Trade and Investment Programs
The U.S. is a strong proponent of liberalized trade, most impor-
tantly because discriminatory arrangements established by other major
trading countries generally damage U.S. trade. The power of the Presi-
dent to use trade measures to favor or discriminate against a country
on human rights grounds is limited by international and domestic legal
obligations to grant non-discriminatory treatment to most nations.
Moreover, singling out particular countries for punitive action is very
difficult to accomplish “cleanly”. Other countries’ trade and economic
interests almost inevitably become involved, risking a chain reaction
which may adversely affect our economy. Only where there has been a
broad international consensus that a country is guilty of particularly
egregious conduct have a sufficient number of countries coordinated
their trade sanctions so as to have a significant economic impact on the
offending regime.

Most Favored Nation Treatment. Under current U.S. domestic law
(19 U.S.C. 1202), all non-communist countries, as well as Poland and
Yugoslavia, are accorded most-favored nation (MFN) tariff treatment.
There is no existing domestic legal authority to withdraw MFN tariff
treatment from any of these countries, although section 301 of the
Trade Act authorizes applying discriminatory duties to an individual
country in response to a proven unfair trade practice.

Furthermore, such a sanction, even if authorized by U.S. law,
would violate our international obligations if applied to any of the
forty-three countries with which we have treaties of Friendship, Com-
merce and Navigation or any of the one hundred six countries which
are parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) or to
which that agreement is applied de facto.

Beyond these legal limitations, we believe that our trade policy in-
terests, as well as practical considerations, militate strongly against
using withdrawal of MFN treatment as a sanction against human rights

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
violations. Withdrawing MFN would set a damaging precedent. It is
conceivable that some countries, faced with domestic pressures for in-
creased protectionism, might cite foreign policy objectives as a con-
venient justification for discriminatory restrictions.

Generalized System of Preferences. The United States accords prefer-
ential treatment (i.e., duty-free entry) for certain products of about 100
developing countries under the Generalized System of Preferences
(GSP) authorized by Title V of the Trade Act of 1974. Under the Trade
Act, the President has the authority to designate any developing
country meeting certain requirements as a beneficiary of GSP. He also
has the authority to terminate GSP benefits for any country upon
sixty-days notice. The benefits of GSP are a unilateral grant authorized
by a GATT waiver and are not subject to the same rights of compensa-
tion or retaliation provided in the GATT with respect to MFN treat-
ment. Consequently, the President could use the GSP as a human rights
sanction without obtaining new legislation and without violating our
international obligations.

Denial of GSP benefits as a sanction would not entail nearly the
same adverse trade policy consequences as in the case of the long-
enshrined MFN principle. The denial of GSP to Uganda, in part be-
cause of human rights concerns, generated no adverse reaction. How-
ever, since GSP benefits are limited, it remains to be seen whether the
threat of termination or denial of benefits would induce greater respect
for human rights. Widespread denial (or withdrawal) of GSP benefits
might call into question our trade commitment to a generalized system.
Export-Import Bank and OPIC. Government programs supporting
U.S. exports are administered by the Export-Import Bank (Ex-Im),
while the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) encourages
U.S. private investors to invest in developing countries through its po-
litical risk insurance and finance programs. Ex-Im and OPIC can be dis-
tinguished from bilateral assistance programs in that they facilitate U.S.
business activities in foreign countries. In some cases Ex-Im does deal
directly with foreign governments. OPIC does not provide financial
subsidies to LDC governments, but does enter into umbrella agree-
ments with them. OPIC insures U.S. private investment in LDCs, par-
ticularly the lowest income LDCs, thereby complementing the develop-
ment assistance objectives of the U.S.

Ex-Im and OPIC programs normally will not be appropriate ve-
hicles for influencing changes in the human rights practices of gov-
ernments. In cases of gross violations, where we do not wish to be asso-
ciated with the government in question, it may be desirable to curtail

Human Rights
them. In the rare cases where we might resort to curtailment, our action
could have a significant impact on the government in question.
C. Initiatives in International Financial Institutions.

U.S. concern with promoting human rights through the interna-
tional financial institutions (IFI’s) became explicit last spring with the
passage of the Harkin Amendment to the authorizing legislation for the
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and the African Develop-
ment Fund (ADF). That amendment requires that the U.S. vote “no” on
loans or assistance to a country that “engages in a consistent pattern of
gross violations of internationally recognized human rights . . . unless
such assistance will directly benefit the needy people in such country.”
The Harkin Amendment will in all likelihood soon be replaced by
language on this year’s IFI authorizing legislation. As it emerged from
conference, the legislation instructs the USG through its Executive Di-
rectors to seek to channel assistance away from countries whose gov-
ernments engage in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human
rights or provide refuge to airplane hijackers; to use our “voice and
vote” in seeking to channel assistance towards projects which address
basic human needs; and to consider a number of factors related to
human rights concerns e.g. specific actions taken on bilateral assistance
on human rights grounds, extent to which the assistance benefits needy
people, status of a country regarding nuclear proliferation, and respon-
siveness of governments in providing better accounting of MIAs.
Where other means have proven ineffective, the legislation re-
quires us to oppose loans (i.e., vote “present,” abstain, or vote “no”) to
countries which engage in a consistent pattern of gross violations of in-
ternationally recognized human rights unless such assistance is di-
rected specifically to programs which serve the basic human needs of
the citizens of such countries or unless the President certifies that the
cause of international human rights would be more effectively served
by actions other than voting against such assistance.

This legislation is fully compatible with our policy to use our mem-
bership in the IFIs to promote human rights.

The new IFI legislation also specifies “the Secretary of State and
the Secretary of the Treasury shall initiate a wide consultation designed
to develop a viable standard for the meeting of basic human needs and
the protection of human rights and a mechanism for acting together to
insure that the rewards of international economic cooperation are espe-
cially available to those who subscribe to such standards and are seen
to be moving toward making them effective in their own systems of
governance.” We will need to develop a strategy for implementing this
requirement.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
While most of the discussion to date concerning human rights and
the IFI’s has focused on particular loans and votes, it is also important
to develop a long-term approach whereby we seek an overall reduction
in IFI lending to countries that consistently violate human rights, ex-
cepting loans for the needy. Our policy in this regard should parallel
our bilateral aid policy (see pg. 20, para. I).

Support from the other industrialized democracies for our efforts
to use our voice and vote in the IFI’s to promote human rights has been
minimal to date: only Canada and Sweden have indicated some sup-
port. A number of leading LDCs—including Egypt and India—have
questioned the legality of U.S. actions on human rights in the IFI’s.
The articles of all the IFI’s contain a provision not different in sub-
stance from the following language in the World Bank’s acticles: “The
Bank, its officers and employees should not interfere in the political af-
fairs of any member, nor shall they be influenced in their decisions by
the political character of . . . (the recipient government). Only economic
considerations shall be relevant to their decisions . . .” (Art. 10, Sec. 10).
The Legal Adviser of the State Department believes that the prohibition
against interference in the “political” affairs of members may be inter-
preted validly as not applicable to the consideration of human rights
factors, particularly group one rights, which are more fundamental
than “political” matters and therefore not within the scope of that term.
The injunction to weigh only economic considerations in making deci-
sions can in many, if not most, cases be satisfied by relating the human
rights situation in a country to economic issues. For example, welfare
and other social concerns are, broadly speaking, economic as well as
human rights considerations.

It is only fair to state, however, that other IFI members may very
well resist this line of reasoning. Some may argue that our negative
vote or abstention on human rights grounds raises serious questions of
compatibility with an IFI charter. Others may be encouraged to condi-
tion their participation on what we would consider to be “political”
grounds, citing our action as a precedent. For example, the Arab coun-
tries might raise matters concerning the Palestinians or the allegations
they have made elsewhere concerning Israel’s human rights practices
in the occupied territories. We should consider whether or not it would
be possible and in our interest to seek amendments to the charters to in-
clude human rights considerations.

Our interest in promoting human rights will be best served by ad-
herence to the following guidelines:

Human Rights
—There is a presumption that our votes in the executive boards of
the IFI’s in support of our human rights policy should be used spar-
ingly and designed to advance the overall strategies we will work out
for individual countries.
—When we plan to cast a non-affirmative vote or make a state-
ment of concern for or condemnation of human rights practices in the
IFI’s, we should apprise other nations of the rationale for our proposed
action and seek their understanding and cooperation.
—The information on human rights which the U.S. uses to arrive at
its judgments should be available to other IFI members to the extent
possible.
—In the longer run we should develop a consensus among IFI
member governments in support of our human rights policy and seek
to persuade these governments that IFI managements and members
should give great weight to human rights factors when assessing the
suitability of proposed loan programs.

D. Use of Overseas Broadcast Facilities and Cultural and Educational
Programs.

International awareness of the effort to preserve and extend
human rights will, in itself, contribute to the success of our policy. That
awareness can be increased by appropriate use of the facilities and pro-
grams of the United States Information Agency (USIA), Radio Free Eu-
rope, Radio Liberty and the State Department’s cultural and educa-
tional programs. Domestic awareness and understanding of our policy
can be promoted by the State Department’s Bureau of Public Affairs.
1. USIA.

USIS posts abroad offer important opportunities available to the
U.S. for the creation of intellectual, philosophical and (to at least a lim-
ited degree) political “infrastructure” in support of human rights. USIS
posts are engaged in dialogue with influential elites and “establish-
ments”—as well as the next generation of leadership. Seminars, sym-
posiums, relations with editorial writers, bar associations and the like
offer important opportunities to kindle and sustain the spark of con-
cern for group three rights, in particular.

The USIA, through its radio broadcast facilities, in print and via
television, can present and elaborate our human rights concerns di-
rectly to audiences abroad. Although all communications media can
and should be used, radio is our primary direct channel to mass audi-
ences. Where other media are controlled, radio is particularly impor-
tant. Coordinated, balanced and consistent future programming
should develop the theme that human rights is a universal human aspi-
ration, not an American idiosyncracy, and should cover positive

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
human rights developments, particularly outside the U.S., as well as
the record of continuing violations of human rights.
2. Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL).

RFE and RL have played a key role in the rising awareness that has
accompanied the expanding human rights movement in the Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe. Human rights activists in Moscow, Warsaw
and other cities frequently cite RFE/RL’s extensive coverage as a vital
source of information. In the future, the Radios will utilize the expan-
sion of their technical facilities which has been proposed by the Presi-
dent to extend their human rights coverage to larger audiences. An-
other priority is to augment news-gathering and research capabilities,
especially in Western Europe, for more detailed reporting of CSCE de-
velopments. The Radios also seek to give increased attention to human
rights developments affecting the non-Russian nationalities of the So-
viet Union.
3. Cultural and Educational Exchange.

The international exchange of persons program administered by
the State Department’s Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs
(CU) conveys a human rights message to all foreign leaders who partic-
ipate in it. Experience indicates that the overwhelming impression left
with most visitors to this country is that the American people do care
about human rights and that the United States does seek to protect and
foster them. CU intends to give additional, more specific attention to
human rights concerns. Objectives could include encouraging in-
creased international activity among American non-governmental
groups which have an interest in human rights, especially groups from
the academic and journalistic communities, and strengthening CU rela-
tions with activities of the legal profession in international human
rights endeavors.

E. Improved access to the U.S. for refugees and dissidents.
In keeping with our overall objectives, we should demonstrate a
generous, humanitarian policy of providing refuge to victims of repres-
sion. We should continue to support provisions in H.R. 717514 that
would increase the authorized global number of conditional entries

Human Rights
under the Immigration and Naturalization Act (INA) from 17,400 to
20,000 and admit additional refugees in emergent situations as condi-
tional entrants, permitting them to adjust their status to that of perma-
nent residence after two years.

We should oppose provisions in H.R. 7175 that would impose nu-
merical limitations on the numbers of such refugees who may be ad-
mitted by the President in emergent situations under certain circum-
stances and the requirement that other countries must accept
resettlement of their fair share of the refugees involved before the ad-
mission of such refugees into the United States.

We recommend a more liberal use of the Attorney General’s au-
thority to admit individual refugees and groups of refugees who do not
qualify under the INA. Specifically, we believe that the Attorney Gen-
eral and the INS in considering applicants for parole into the United
States should be more forthcoming with respect to innocent victims of
authoritarian regimes. Such a change in policy would be a concrete
demonstration of the sincerity of our commitment to human rights.
While the process of consulting with Congressional leaders before
using the parole authority is not required by law, we would want to no-
tify them before liberalizing our policy. There is likely to be some nega-
tive Congressional reaction to a liberalized parole policy.
Dissidents in repressive countries, to the extent they may be able to
proceed to free countries, should generally be considered as refugees.
Most such dissidents would qualify as refugees under the new defini-
tion of refugees contained in the pending legislation that we support.
F. Substantive and Procedural Initiatives the U.S. Could Take in Various
International Forums.

There are important advantages to pursuing our human rights ob-
jectives through multilateral institutions. Because of the clearly defined
human rights responsibilities of multilateral organizations, examina-
tion of the human rights practices of all countries can be properly pur-
sued and, since the responsibility for initiatives in multilateral bodies is
shared, individual country situations can be considered in a manner
less likely to bring the U.S. into direct confrontation with the country
concerned.

Increased use of multilateral institutions will improve their ca-
pacity to deal effectively with human rights problems and enhance
public support for them.
1. The United Nations.

The United Nations can be a valuable forum for developing multi-
lateral cooperation on behalf of human rights. It has broad repre-
sentation and mechanisms for protection of human rights. Specific doc-
uments such as the Charter, the Universal Declaration, and the UN

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
human rights conventions express concerns and commitments in this
field. Accordingly, we should expand and intensify our efforts at the
UN and support and carry through on them in our bilateral relations
and by ratifying promptly those conventions we support.
We should give careful consideration to taking the following
human rights initiatives in the UN:
—UNESCO Executive Board Session (September–October 1977).
Develop broader support for human rights issues by establishing
an independent Expert Review Committee.
—32nd Session of the UN General Assembly (1977).

Conduct a major effort, in close consultation with other interested
governments, to secure approval for the establishment of a UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Propose the establishment of a spe-
cial ad hoc Expert Committee on Torture to identify serious instances of
torture worldwide.
—Next Session of the UN Commission on Human Rights (Spring 1978).
Propose measures to strengthen procedures for instituting studies
of situations involving consistent patterns of gross violations of
internationally-recognized human rights. Press for an additional an-
nual session of the Commission, to be held at UN headquarters in New
York.
—Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
Continue to consult with key African delegations to help break the
pattern whereby they link Zionism and racism. Our objective is to
reach understanding on that issue before the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination so that the U.S. can attend
that meeting, scheduled for August 1978.
2. Organization of American States.

The Inter-American Human Rights Commission, an independent
agency of the OAS, is playing an increasingly central role in the
struggle to defend human rights in the Western Hemisphere. We are
working to increase the staff and budget of the IAHRC to cope with
mounting human rights complaints. We shall submit the American
Convention on Human Rights, which President Carter signed, to the
Senate for approval.

IV. National Security Aspects of U.S. Policies on Human Rights, Including
Consideration of Their Impact on Friendly States and Allies; and
Other Areas of Major Strategic Concern Such as the PRC and the
Koreas.

Section I(F) includes a brief discussion of the direction our policy
should take with various groups of countries, including allied nations
and Third World countries. The thesis underlying much of the discus-

Human Rights
sion there and elsewhere in this study is that the shape that our policy
ultimately takes with respect to individual countries will depend on
our evaluation of (1) the human rights situation, (2) the full range of our
interests, and (3) the leverage we have to encourage change where
change is desired.

Invariably, working out our human rights approach in individual
countries will require a careful balancing of considerations. The sum-
mary analysis of the impact of our human rights policy on our relations
with the Soviet Union contained in Section I above concludes that we
can pursue our human rights concerns and our security interests,
which include maintaining a credible deterrant while pursuing arms
control and arms reduction, in our long-term relationship with the So-
viets. Full country evaluations are in preparation for the Soviet Union,
the PRC, and South Korea, as well as other countries.

V. Action to Promote Integration of Human Rights Considerations
into U.S. Foreign Policy.

The Executive Branch has already taken important steps to help as-
sure implementation of the Administration’s focus on human rights,
but needs to do more. Steps taken so far include:
Interagency: Establishment of the Interagency Group on Human
Rights and Foreign Assistance, pursuant to an NSC memorandum
cludes representatives from the NSC, State, Treasury, DOD and AID.
Its mandate is to coordinate the development and implementation of
U.S. human rights policy as it relates to bilateral and multilateral eco-
nomic and security assistance programs. With respect to security assist-
ance, the recently-created interagency Arms Export Control Board will
take human rights factors into consideration in its deliberations.
State Department: The Office of the Coordinator for Human Rights
and Humanitarian Affairs has been expanded. A Human Rights Coor-
dinating Group, chaired by the Deputy Secretary of State, functions to
provide balance and consistency for all aspects of U.S. policy on human
rights. All U.S. mission chiefs have been instructed to give their per-
sonal attention to furthering observance of human rights in their host
countries, to provide frequent reporting on human rights, and to assure
full mission involvement in the implementation of our human rights
policy. Priority attention, here and at posts abroad, is being given to
the collection and analysis of comprehensive data concerning human
rights conditions in all countries, as well as the development of country
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
strategies. Fulltime human rights officers in each of the Department’s
regional bureaus and full or near fulltime human rights officers in each
of the Department’s functional bureaus have been designated. They are
responsible for monitoring human rights concerns within their bu-
reaus, coordinating with the Department’s Office of Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs, and relating bureau actions on human rights to
actions taken elsewhere in the foreign affairs agencies.
Next steps could include expansion of the mandate of the Inter-
agency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance to include all
aspects of our human rights policy, not simply foreign assistance. That
expanded purview would promote greater coordination of our human
rights policy within the Executive Branch.

VI. A Strategy to Improve the Administration’s Relations with Congress
in the Human Rights Area.

A separate analysis of this important issue is being prepared by the
Congressional Liaison Offices of the agencies involved with the
Congress on human rights questions.

74.

Letter From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
Representative Donald Fraser
Washington, August 20, 1977

75.

Memorandum for the Files
Washington, August 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Working Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance
The group met to consider PL–480 in general, a $480,000 preinvest-
ment technical assistance grant to Ecuador, and the agenda for the up-
coming Interagency Group meeting. USDA and AID/Food for Peace,
as well as the regular members of the group, were represented.
PL–480
AID/Food for Peace made a presentation on Title II, disaster relief,
and Title I programs. After the Title II discussion, the group agreed that
because Title II activity was almost always confined to instances of se-
vere humanitarian need, and because food under Title II was usually
distributed directly to needy and often starving people, the group
would recommend to the Interagency Group that PL–480 Title II ac-
tivity not be routinely reviewed by the working group. The group felt
that by its very nature, PL–480 Title II activity directly promotes human
rights.

A similar determination was made in the case of AID disaster relief
activities. Once again, disaster relief, by its very nature, directly pro-
motes human rights. Further, it has been USG policy to provide
disaster relief whenever requested. Nelson Coar pointed out that the
IFIs on occasion become involved in disaster relief; the group made the
same determination on multilateral disaster relief that it did on bilat-
eral relief.

Most of its discussion at the meeting, which lasted for two hours,
dealt with Title I. The discussion began with a presentation on the gen-
eral workings of the Title I program. It was pointed out the Title I
served many objectives in addition to, and on occasion apart from, pro-
viding humanitarian aid. Title I provides budget and balance-of-
payments support to host governments, it is used to promote the
development of free markets in recipient countries, and it indirectly
subsidizes American farmers. The extent to which each of these pur-
poses is served by the Title I program in a given country will largely de-
Human Rights
termine the degree of effectiveness which can be expected from using
the Title I program to affect the human rights situation in that country.
USDA and AID/Food for Peace stressed that planning Title I sales
was a lengthy and involved process which could not be turned on and
off very easily; they also stressed that the success of the program rested
in part on the ability of customers to be able to rely on the program
from one year to the next, and that the program also had an important
domestic constituency. Longstanding group members, including EB
and D/HA, responded that implementing the link between human
rights and our bilateral and multilateral assistance programs had
created planning and continuity problems for other parts of AID as
well as for the international financial institutions; that we were actively
and continuously seeking ways to improve our procedures; and that
the group endeavored to take operational program requirements and
constraints, and other relevant factors, into account without sacrificing
progress towards our policy goals. The point was also made that our
human rights policy would be viewed as arbitrary and inconsistent,
and therefore be jeopardized, if, for example, we were exerting pres-
sure on a country in the IFIs and through non-PL–480 bilateral aid at
the same time that we were allowing to proceed without hindrance
highly concessionary program aid through PL–480 Title I.
It was pointed out that introducing the Food for Peace program
into our human rights policy might not satisfy human rights-related re-
quirements of the new Food for Peace legislation. AID/Food for Peace
assured the group that it was in the process of drawing up comprehen-
sive regulations which would meet all the requirements of the legisla-
tion. After reviewing the new legislation and a verbal summary of
AID/Food for Peace’s plan to implement it, the group was satisfied
that it need consider only how to tie implementation of our human
rights policy to PL–480 Title I.

The group decided to recommend to the Interagency Group that
the following procedure be adopted with respect to PL–480 Title I:
When AID/Food for Peace and USDA, along with other agencies,
begin the process which eventually culminates in a Title I agreement
with a country, AID/Food for Peace will inform D/HA and EB that the
process is underway. D/HA and EB, in consultation with other inter-
ested offices and agencies, will be able to determine whether the antici-
pated PL–480 program might become a useful tool of our human rights
policy in the relevant country, and will inform the group, whenever it
is considering actions to improve the human rights situation in a
country, of any pending PL–480 Title I activity in that country.
AID/Food for Peace requested some indication of countries in
which it might expect its Title I activities to be affected by human rights
policy. EB and D/HA responded emphatically that any such list could

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
be construed to be a “hit list.” It was pointed out that human rights situ-
ations are constantly evolving; that progress in countries which still
have a long way to go will often receive a positive response from the
U.S. because we want to respond positively to positive trends; and that
in general the form of our human rights initiatives in different coun-
tries will often turn on tactical considerations which can only be evalu-
ated in the context of a variety of rapidly changing factors. D/HA
agreed to indicate informally a few countries slated for PL–480 Title I
which had human rights records such that barring a drastic transfor-
mation no attempt to influence the human rights situation in those
countries through assistance was envisaged at this time. It was made
emphatically clear, however, that any countries not so mentioned,
which included by far most Title I recipients, did not represent a group
of countries in which any action was being contemplated. It was
pointed out that most of the countries in the remaining group also
would not experience any reduction in bilateral or multilateral assist-
ance due to the U.S. human rights initiative and had not in the past.
There was some concern that this rendered the list basically useless for
Food for Peace’s purposes, but as this was the objective sought by EB
and others at the meeting, the issue was allowed to rest.
After the meeting, representatives from EB, D/HA, Treasury ARA,
and AF discussed the agenda for the Interagency meeting. It was
agreed that in addition to the PL–480 recommendations, the agenda
would consist of the following items:
Argentina: The country evaluation plan on Argentina will be
cleared by the meeting and will be distributed with the agenda. The
gathering decided to recommend that rather than continue to flatly op-
pose Argentina’s IFI program, a positive step might be to allow some of
the program to come forward if Argentina will grant the “right of op-
tion to seek asylum” to political prisoners, or take even more significant
steps. ARA stated that it was likely that the right of option would most
likely be reinstituted soon anyway, and it was felt that allowing move-
ment on the IFI program in response to the reinstitution would demon-
strate our willingness to cooperate and respond positively to positive
trends.

Nicaragua: There was no discussion of Nicaragua because the
country evaluation plan was not ready.

Ethiopia: While it was anticipated that the decision on the AID
loans will have been made by the meeting, an AFDF loan will come up
on September 19th in the AFDF Board. D/HA will recommend ab-
staining; Treasury, EB, and AF favored a “yes” vote, perhaps with a
statement. It was decided not to make a recommendation to the Inter-
agency Group.

76.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, September 12, 1977
You asked what we have done on Human Rights, and why we
have had no initiatives. I, for one, believe that many key issues were
raised in the PRM 28 effort, have been waiting for some reaction or
guidance from you on those questions. I sent over a suggested PRC
agenda paper and a draft PD four weeks ago and have heard nothing
more about them.

In the planning document we were asked to submit last Tuesday3 I
made a suggestion concerning the President’s first human rights goal—
ratification of the Genocide Treaty. I suggested that we make an all out
effort (including Presidential calls for the first time), to ratify the treaty
during the fall session, in order to demonstrate that the extreme right
wing is not invincible. I made this suggestion in the context of helping
the Panama Canal Treaty get ratified but it obviously has a dual pur-
pose. I still think this is a good idea.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
77.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) and
the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary
of State Vance
Washington, September 15, 1977
SUBJECT
Presidential Talk on Human Rights
There still seems to be public misunderstanding of what our
human rights policy actually comprises; how we are trying to imple-
ment it; and—perhaps most important—how it fits in the President’s
overall foreign policy design. Many still seem to think we are talking
only about violations of the person and of political rights, and that our
criticism of foreign governments on that score may interfere with our
other goals.

We think a Presidential talk on the whole range of human rights
issues would be useful later in the year, or early next. It should be in the
more relaxed and reflective “fireside chat” format rather than a formal
speech.

Its purpose would be to explain how “human rights” is a thread
that runs through everything the President is doing, and indeed gives
coherence to his varied initiatives. To that end, it would:
—Include our definition of “human rights,” as in your Law Day
and Warren Christopher’s Bar Association speeches.
—Explain how our North-South efforts (including the basic
human needs emphasis), and our attempts to help bring racial justice to
southern Africa (and perhaps the Middle East and Cyprus) are funda-
mental parts of the “human rights” policy.
—Make clear the relation of these initiatives to American security
interests: insofar as we can alleviate the causes of tension and discon-
tent, we will deny opportunities to would-be trouble makers and re-
duce the risk of wars, thus contributing to a world in which Americans
can live in peace and prosperity.

Human Rights
—Be sober about the limits of American power and influence, but
explicitly and firmly reject the notion that because we can’t do every-
thing, we should do nothing.
—Talk quite specifically about how we are trying to use different
sources of influence (quiet and public diplomacy; the aid program; con-
ventional arms transfers); how effective we can reasonably expect to be;
and what progress we think we already have contributed to.
—Emphasize our efforts to work through international institu-
tions, because long-term positive changes in international respect for
human rights are more likely to come when we add our influence to
that of others.
—Acknowledge the dilemmas our complex definition of human
rights will get us into when, for instance, we must decide whether a
particular aid program or loan will do more to help the poor or to prop
up a dictatorial regime.

This speech would also enable us to make clear the direct relation
between the President’s foreign and domestic initiatives, and specifi-
cally what he is doing to complete the unfinished “human rights”
business at home. Domestic programs such as welfare reform, efforts to
reduce youth unemployment in the cities, new guidelines for the FBI
and CIA, should obviously be talked of as ends in themselves, but also
as essential to America’s prestige and influence in the world and its
right to talk about the human rights performance of others.
Recommendation
That you approve the attached Tarnoff to Brzezinski memo-
randum, recommending that we begin working on such a talk.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
78.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz), the Assistant
Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs (Derian), and the Director of the Policy Planning
Staff (Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, September 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Commodity Credit Corporation and Human Rights
Issue for Decision
You are being asked to decide whether Commodity Credit Corpo-
ration (CCC) extensions of credit should be subject to review on human
rights grounds. D/HA and S/P believe they should be so reviewed.
The Agriculture Department and EB disagree.

Essential Factors
CCC credits are an official mechanism for facilitating the export of
American agricultural commodities. They are designed to serve com-
mercial objectives, but have at times been used to pursue political ob-
jectives as part of our foreign policy. No mechanism now exists
whereby they are routinely reviewed for human rights considerations.
Narrative arguments from both points of view are contained in an
attachment.

Options
1. That the Department adopt the position that the extension of
CCC credits not be subject to human rights review.
Pro
—CCC is a commercial mechanism; its manipulation for political
purposes can only erode our export efforts.
—The law establishing the CCC makes no reference to foreign
policy considerations or to a role for the Secretary of State in the admin-
istration of the program.
fidential. Drafted by Stephen Johnson and concurred in substance by Katz, USDA, and
Lauralee Peters (ARA/ECP). Schneider initialed for Derian. Tarnoff initialed the
memorandum.

Human Rights
—The interest rates on CCC credits are set at commercial levels
and must be above the cost of money to the Treasury. The repayment
period can be as long as three years. The CCC program is designed to
meet the competition of the government entities which control trade in
other major exporting countries and to maintain and expand American
agricultural exports in the face of their competition.
—In times of short supply CCC credits may be particularly benefi-
cial to a potential importer. In such circumstances decisions regarding
extending credit have occasionally included political considerations.
Given the present situation of an abundant American and world food
supply, however, we can gain no political leverage with CCC credits. If
we withhold them, a potential importer will merely turn to one of our
competitors.
—We now have large agricultural surpluses in this country. If our
human rights efforts were seen to be interfering with export efforts, it
would be likely to cause a domestic political confrontation between ad-
vocates of human rights and agricultural interests to the detriment of
the Administration’s overall political position.

Con
—CCC credits are provided by a United States Government corpo-
ration, established by action of the United States Congress. They are an
official international activity of the United States Government. Human
rights is a central goal of American foreign policy and, therefore, must
be taken into consideration in CCC decisions.
—CCC credits are at least partly concessional in nature and are
viewed by other governments and by their publics as an element of
American assistance, denoting a favorable political attitude.
—The timing, amount and nature of any extension of credit is a
foreign policy act. We should at least consider therefore, whether on
balance it serves our interests, including our human rights interests.
2. That the Department adopt the position that all extension of
CCC credits will be reviewed through the working group and the Inter-
agency Committee for their influence on human rights.

Pro
(Con argument for Option 1 and the following)
—This option permits the Interagency Committee to view all as-
pects of government-related economic relationships and human rights
policy.
—Human rights is the only aspect not reviewed by the National
Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Policies.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Con
(Pro argument for Option 1 and the following)
—Human rights has been established as a major policy objective
by this Administration but it is not overriding in every circumstance.
—By extending human rights criteria to the commercial arena we
are inviting a backlash effect which could harm the cause of human
rights.
3. Subject to procedures to be worked out between the Deputy Sec-
retary of State and the Deputy Secretary of Agriculture, where a
country to which CCC credits may be extended is designated by any
relevant bureau or department as raising exceptional human rights
concerns, the situation thus presented will be submitted to the working
group and the Interagency Group for recommendation.
Pro
(Same as Option 2 and the following)
—This process now is in place for the consideration of ExIm Bank
commercial loans for non-strategic materials.

Con
(Same as Option 2 and the following)
—The CCC’s primary purpose is to promote agricultural exports.
Foreign policy considerations, while sometimes a factor, will only very
occasionally be of significance.

Recommendations
That you approve Option 1, which is favored by EB and the Agri-
culture Department, that CCC credits not be subject to human rights
review.

Alternatively
That you approve Option 2, which is favored by D/HA, that all ex-
tensions of CCC credits be reviewed through the working group and
the Interagency Committee for their influence on human rights.
Or
That you approve Option 3.

79.

Editorial Note
At United Nations headquarters in New York on October 5, 1977,
President Jimmy Carter signed the International Covenant on Eco-
nomic, Social, and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. Both covenants had been open for signature
at the United Nations since December 19, 1966, and Carter, in his March
17, 1977, address to the United Nations General Assembly, had as-
serted his intention to seek ratification of these and other covenants and
conventions:
“To demonstrate this commitment, I will seek congressional ap-
proval and sign the U.N. covenants on economic, social, and cultural
rights, and the covenants on civil and political rights. And I will work
closely with our own Congress in seeking to support the ratification not
only of these two instruments but the United Nations Genocide Con-
vention and the Treaty for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Dis-
crimination, as well. I have just removed all restrictions on American
travel abroad, and we are moving now to liberalize almost completely
travel opportunities to America.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I,
pages 444–451)
In remarks made at the October signing ceremony, held in the Eco-
nomic and Social Council Chamber at United Nations headquarters,
Carter explained the significance of the administration’s actions:
“By ratifying the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, a gov-
ernment pledges, as a matter of law, to refrain from subjecting its own
people to arbitrary imprisonment or execution or to cruel or degrading
treatment. It recognizes the right of every person to freedom of
thought, freedom of conscience, freedom of religion, freedom of
opinion, freedom of expression, freedom of association, and the rights
of peaceful assembly, and the right to emigrate from that country.
“A government entering this covenant states explicitly that there
are sharp limits on its own powers over the lives of its people. But as
Thomas Jefferson once wrote about the Bill of Rights, which became
part of our own American Republic, and I quote again from Thomas
Jefferson: ‘These are fetters against doing evil which no honest gov-
ernment should decline.’
“By ratifying the other Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cul-
tural Rights, a government commits itself to its best efforts to secure for
its citizens a basic standard of material existence, social justice, and cul-
tural opportunity.

“This covenant recognizes that governments are the instruments
and the servants of their people. Both of these covenants express values
in which the people of my country have believed for a long time.

80.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, October 10, 1977
SUBJECT
Possible Human Rights Initiatives
(1) Creation of a Human Rights Foundation
This would be modeled on the Inter-American Foundation which
is a quasi-governmental organization that receives its money through
Congressional appropriation, but has very loose ties with the gov-
Human Rights
ernment, and makes its own policies. This foundation could: 1) funnel
money to the international human rights organizations and to national
human rights organizations operating in other countries (as well as to
American human rights groups), based on the value of their work;
2) provide much needed support for refugee resettlement efforts, in-
cluding the retraining (language, professional standards, etc.) and
placement of professionals (doctors, lawyers, scientists, etc.) who are
political refugees. In particular, the Foundation could finance the reset-
tlement of such key individuals—not in the US where their talents are
wasted—but in other third world nations badly in need of these skills.
This would redirect the classic “brain drain” in the interest of pro-
moting both human rights and economic development; 3) support the
work of NGOs in the multinational organizations particularly the UN,
where they are the source of crucial data on human rights conditions;
4) set up and award an annual human rights prize, with a sizeable
award comparable to the Nobel, to recognize an outstanding contribu-
tion to human rights anywhere in the world. The Foundation could
probably employ (depending on the legislative terms of its creation)
foreign nationals who could provide essential expertise in certain areas,
and would give it a slightly multinational image.

(2) Reapportionment of Support from the Violators to the Violatees
The Administration could publicly announce that it was rechan-
neling certain funds which would have gone to governments guilty of
human rights violations, and would spend it instead on those who had
suffered from these violations. This would obviously have to have
Congressional approval, but if it were announced in this way, it would
probably get it. These funds might either be spent directly by the gov-
ernment, or could be redirected through the Foundation or to an inter-
national body of some sort, for example, the UN Commission on Ref-
ugees. (In view of last week’s Congressional denial of the funds needed
to support the additional 15,000 Indochinese refugees paroled earlier
this summer, this may prove to be the only way we can get help to these
people.) This policy would be closely linked to:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
(3) Targeting of Foreign Assistance to Countries which Respect Human
Rights
The relevant statutes prescribe certain rules which must be fol-
lowed in allocating US foreign assistance (including SSA, AID pro-
grams, PL–480), and political-military interests impose additional con-
straints, but within these limitations there is still latitude to target
money and aid to countries where there is a good, or improving,
human rights record. The problem is that in a sense we would be fur-
ther punishing the needy who live under a bad regime in doing this.
However, the reality is that there are more than enough needy people
to go around, and so it can be argued that in this way we provide an ad-
ditional incentive to bad governments to change (and for people who
live under these governments to unseat them). We follow this policy
now in theory—but certainly not in practice. The country-by-country
ZBB process simply does not provide for such kinds of tradeoffs. We
should be able to point to clear trends—decreases for violators, in-
creases for others—rather than increases for Indonesia and the Philip-
pines, Nicaragua, etc.

(4) Overt Criticism of Offenders
The President or Andy Young7 could speak out against gross
violators.
—Uganda: The President might suggest, in some very low key
manner, that Americans might want to organize an informal, voluntary
boycott of Ugandan coffee (a` la grapes and lettuce). We could arrange
that the NGOs and civil rights groups would pick up this ball and run
with it.
—Cambodia: strong public criticism in a major forum. Might we
raise this issue with the PRC, the only country with diplomatic repre-
sentation in Cambodia? We could use their public support of our
human rights policy to gently suggest that their support of this vicious
regime is inappropriate, or that they should use their influence to stim-
ulate improvements.
—Vietnam: there is much public criticism of the fact that this Ad-
ministration has not spoken out against what is going on in Vietnam.
We could push for human rights improvements both publicly and pri-
vately with the government.

Human Rights
(5) Improvement of Relations with Congress
The mess with the IFI bill, and the recent refusal to fund 15,000
more Indochinese refugees, is evidence of the severe problems in
Congress at both extremes of the ideological spectrum. The human
rights leaders in Congress are perfectly aware that the Right is using
this issue to end all foreign aid, but because of their criticism and lack of
trust in the Administration’s policies, they are in a box, and a coalition
of the Administration with those who should be its natural allies on this
issue is much more distant now than it was last January. Before rela-
tions deteriorate further, we should make a determined effort to turn
things around by initiating a series of working meetings—chaired by the
Vice President with Christopher also present—with the prominent
members on this issue from both Houses and both parties. The agenda
should be set by the Congressmen (through staff consultations) but
should include one meeting devoted to bilateral assistance policies
(economic and military), and one to the IFIs, with explicit discussion of
what Congress wants and expects from the US delegations. There
should also be a meeting devoted to policies toward the USSR and
Eastern Europe, where a consensus might be built about the Jackson-
Vanik problem. These meetings would provide a reasonably quiet and
apolitical forum for the Administration to try to explain why it has
taken some of the actions it has, (for example, on the recent Nicaraguan
decisions). This would be helpful for us too—if our policies cannot be
rationalized in this forum then they will obviously never work on the
Hill.

(6) In the UN—Fight Efforts by the USSR, Argentina, Chile, etc., to
Remove the Consultative Status of the NGOs.

This move is apparently afoot10—I have not yet heard about it from
USUN—but it is widely worried about elsewhere. We should be in the
lead of those fighting it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
(7) In all Multinational Forums—Recognize and Promote the Power of
Words
Nothing could demonstrate more clearly than the Helsinki Final
Act, the unexpected and unpredictable power of “mere words.” El-
eanor Roosevelt’s insistence on including human rights language in the
UN Charter was of course greeted by roars of cynicism—and yet now
they have in many respects achieved the status of international law. It
was not the US, but the Helsinki Monitoring Groups in Eastern Europe
and the USSR, which turned the Helsinki agreement from a Western
loss into a triumph. We should learn from this lesson the potential for
exploitation of any international document which the Soviets sign.
There is no reason to allow them to continue to get credit for signing
documents to which they do not even pay lipservice. We might start by
reminding the world at Belgrade, that on August 8, 1975, Izvestia hailed
the Final Act as “a new law of international life” thus discrediting sub-
sequent claims of “interference in domestic affairs.”
(8) Get the Genocide Treaty Ratified
This was the President’s first human rights goal, and yet we
haven’t yet succeeded—because we haven’t really tried. People are be-
ginning to notice and to criticize—“talk is cheap.” Signing all the inter-
national human rights treaties does us little good in international
forums if we can’t get them ratified, and the Genocide Treaty is where
we must begin. I still believe that this should be tried before the
Panama Treaty. If successful, it would aid that effort by demonstrating
that the Right wing can be defeated. Only about five votes are needed.
(9) Find a Way to Use Allard Lowenstein’s Talents
Unfortunately we cannot make him an Assistant Secretary for
Human Rights, but we should find some way to make better use of his
abilities than his current job (US Representative to the UN for Special
Political Affairs) or to use his current post for some major initiative. All
of his energy, eloquence and idealism are exactly suited to this issue
(matched with lots more political savvy than others now involved).

81.

Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Counsel (Lipshutz)
Washington, October 11, 1977
SUBJECT
Creating a Human Rights Agency
Attached is the paper I promised you when we talked a few weeks
ago about the desirability of giving permanent form to the Administra-
tion’s human rights concerns by creating a human rights agency. The
paper attempts to lay out the reasons—which are largely political—for
creating such an agency and to identify the functions it could perform.
It also describes, as you suggested, alternative organizational locations
for such an agency.

The important thing, as I see it, is to enable the President to main-
tain his commitment to human rights, on the one hand, and yet not
have him under the gun of having to produce every week a new
“human rights victory” in order to demonstrate the strength of that
commitment. Creation of a human rights agency would ease the pres-
sure on him and at the same time create a body which could work effec-
tively for human rights over the long haul.

I would welcome the chance to discuss with you your reactions to
the arguments advanced in the paper.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Attachment
Paper Prepared by Samuel Huntington of the National
Security Council Staff
Washington, October 5, 1977
THE NEXT PHASE IN HUMAN RIGHTS
I. Human Rights as an Issue
Human rights is, in many respects, the distinguishing hall-mark of
Carter Administration foreign policy. It epitomizes a fresh approach to
foreign policy, the effort to base foreign policy in morality, and the ef-
fort to restore pride and confidence of Americans in the goals of their
foreign policy as well as in the government that conducts it. In other
areas, such as SALT and the Middle East, the Administration has
adopted new approaches to old issues. With human rights, the Admin-
istration has moved a new issue to center stage and focused attention
on that issue as its issue.

In so doing, the Administration has created high expectations as to
the role which moral considerations can play in foreign policy. It has
also, of course, encouraged other political forces and groups which
have their own interest in promoting human rights, at times in ways
and to extremes which differ from those of the Administration.
The human rights issue has been a major asset of this Administra-
tion. It needs to be conserved, nurtured, developed, and, most impor-
tantly, prevented from turning sour or rotten. The identification of
human rights with the Administration can, however, give rise to some
problems.
1. Pressures—many of which are inevitable and some of which are
desirable—have developed to “ease off” human rights so as not to com-
plicate or discombobulate relations with key countries, such as Iran,
Brazil, South Korea, and, most importantly, the Soviet Union. And
some downgrading of the importance of human rights in various bilat-
eral contexts undoubtedly is necessary and desirable.
2. Even without these pressures to “accommodate to reality”,
human rights cannot indefinitely remain the distinctive focus of US for-
eign policy. Other issues will crowd it and demand attention. While the
President has made clear to everyone the extent and depth of his com-
mitment on this issue, it is, nonetheless, most unlikely that human

Human Rights
rights will occupy as much of Presidential time in the first six months of
3. As human rights appears to decline in centrality and as realities
impose compromises, delays, and defeats in the achievement of human
rights goals, a reaction of cynicism and disillusionment about Adminis-
tration intentions is likely to set in. People will ask: “Whatever hap-
pened to the Administration’s great crusade on human rights?” There
is a much greater potential for this type of disillusionment with an issue
like human rights, which does involve morality and principles, than
with bread-and-butter economic issues or balance-of-power military
issues.
4. One of the great attractions of human rights as an issue has been
its broad appeal: liberals espouse it, thinking of Iran, Chile, and South
Korea; conservatives see it as a weapon for use against the Soviet
Union. The problem is not only to maintain human rights as an issue,
but also to maintain its equal appeal to both liberals and conservatives.
There is thus a need to develop an approach to human rights which
both liberals and conservatives can support.

More generally, the above considerations suggest the need to
avoid in fact and in appearance an Administration abandonment of
human rights as a central concern.

II. Human Rights Actions
A related set of problems concerns the ways in which this gov-
ernment can promote human rights. With some exceptions, the actions
which the USG has so far taken and can take to promote human rights
fall into two categories. First, the leaders and agencies of the USG can
articulate and dramatize their interest in advancing human rights. This
can be done either through “diplomatic actions, public statements, and
various symbolic acts” or through the “use of overseas broadcast facil-
ities and cultural and educational programs” (to use the language of
PRM/NSC–28). Second, the US can act or threaten to act to deny eco-
nomic assistance, loans, arms transfers, or other benefits to gov-
ernments which violate human rights (“changes in levels of security
and economic assistance and food aid” and “initiatives in international
financial institutions” in the language of the PRM). While the US can
also work through the UN and other multilateral institutions to pro-
mote human rights and can take measures on its own (such as admis-
sion of refugees), the two main methods of promoting human rights re-
main exhortation and penalties.

Each of these undoubtedly has its place. But each also has its limi-
tations. Exhortation reaches only so far, and its effectiveness declines
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
over time. Penalties—that is, denials to other countries of the means to
promote other goals we support (e.g. economic development, collective
security)—obviously conflict with our efforts to achieve these other
goals. They also obviously have a particularly irritating impact on our
relations with the particular countries concerned. In effect, the pen-
alties approach requires us: to rate, publicly, other countries in terms of
their human rights performance; to identify those countries which
don’t measure up to some standard; (e.g., are manifesting “a consistent
pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights”); and then to deny to these countries some benefit which we
would otherwise extend to them in order to achieve some other goal of
national policy. The promotion of human rights thus comes to involve
the curtailment or cancellation of efforts to achieve some other goal.
Exhortation and penalties are at times necessary and even produc-
tive. But the sustained effective promotion of human rights requires
something more. Neither exhortation nor penalties constitute a positive
program of actions to promote human rights comparable, let us say, to
the program which AID has to promote economic development. To
supplement exhortation and penalties, a positive program of human
rights actions is required.

III. A Human Rights Agency
The needs to maintain the broad support and appeal of human
rights, to institutionalize the concern of the Carter Administration with
respect to human rights, and to develop more effective action programs
to promote human rights can be most effectively met by the creation of
a distinct government agency which had the promotion of human
rights as its principal objective. Such an agency would constitute the in-
stitutional embodiment of the Carter Administration’s concern and its
permanent legacy to the future. It would be a human rights initiative
which both liberals and conservatives would have reasons to support.
It would also help ease the extent to which the promotion of human
rights (particularly through the imposition of penalties) directly con-
flicts with the advancement of other policy goals. The creation of such
an agency would underline the extent to which human rights are not
simply a passing fancy but rather a long-term commitment.
The creation of such an agency would be a natural outgrowth of
what the Administration has done to date in the human rights area and
would parallel for the Carter Administration what other Administra-
tions have done in other fields. The major foreign policy interests of the
Kennedy Administration were embodied in the Peace Corps, AID, and
ACDA, all of which were created in 1961–62. A Human Rights Agency
would be the comparable institutional embodiment of a primary for-
eign policy concern of the Carter Administration. It would be the

Human Rights
source and the stimulus for action programs in support of human
rights which went beyond exhortation and penalties.

IV. Functions of a Human Rights Agency
The overall purpose of the agency would be to support overall US
foreign policy objectives through the promotion of human rights on a
global basis. It could, presumably, assume some human rights func-
tions already being undertaken by other agencies, but it could also un-
dertake additional programs and activities which could make new pos-
itive contributions to the furtherance of human rights. Among other
things, the agency could be authorized to:
1. Plan, devise, develop, and execute programs which would fur-
ther global human rights in accordance with US foreign policy
objectives.
2. Work with other US government agencies, foreign governments,
private organizations, and international organizations for the expan-
sion of human rights.
3. Provide assistance to private individuals and organizations,
public and private international organizations, and other governments
for programs which promote human rights.
4. Periodically study the condition of human rights globally and in
specific societies and assess trends affecting human rights (possibly as-
suming here responsibilities assigned to the State Department under
existing legislation).
5. Undertake research on human rights issues and the ways of
more effectively expanding human rights.
6. Monitor US government policies and actions which affect
human rights, assess their effectiveness, and make recommendations to
the appropriate executive and legislative bodies.
7. Prepare and disseminate information on human rights in order
to promote public understanding of human rights issues and support
for human rights in the US and abroad.
original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
8. Award, as appropriate, a human rights prize (comparable to the
Nobel Prize) to an individual or group which has made an outstanding
contribution to human rights.

The above is only a general outline of some of the functions which
a human rights agency might perform, but it does give some idea of
how the current concern with human rights could be institutionalized
and made permanent and of the ways in which more positive programs
might be developed to supplement existing activities.

V. Organization and Location of a Human Rights Agency
Such an agency could occupy several different locations and have
a variety of different relations to other executive agencies. Three dis-
tinct possibilities stand out.
1. The agency could be created as an office in the Executive Office
of the President. This would be in keeping with direct interest which
President Carter has in this issue and would insure the agency of the
clout which comes from a close relationship to the President. On the
other hand, however, if the agency had the functions indicated above, it
would also be an operational agency, and there are good general
reasons for not locating operational agencies in the EOP. If a future
President did not have the same personal interest in human rights that
President Carter has, the influence which comes from an EOP location
would be diminished in any event. In addition, even if the agency were
located elsewhere, it would always be possible for the President, if he
so desired, to give its director an additional “hat” in the White House as
his Special Advisor on Human Rights.
2. The agency could be created as an autonomous entity but subject
to the policy guidance and direction of the Secretary of State. In varying
degrees, AID and ACDA occupy this type of position now. Such a posi-
tion would insure a distinct identity and program but would also in-
sure that the activities of the agency would be compatible with overall
US foreign policy objectives. The disadvantages of this location are that
it could lead to the subordination of human rights objectives to other
goals and to the undue influence of traditional Foreign Service and bu-
reaucratic concerns in the operation of the agency. Presumably, how-
ever, these could be guarded against by careful drafting of the legisla-
tion and by recruitment of the staff of the agency from appropriately
diversified sources.
3. The agency could be created as an autonomous agency, part of
the executive branch, but independent of direct control or guidance by
any other executive branch agency. In this case, one form the agency
might assume could be as a government corporation, with a board of
private citizens and government officials, appointed by the President
with the advice and consent of the Senate. The closest model here

Human Rights
would be the Inter-American Foundation. Such an organization and
location would insure the independence of the agency and would pro-
mote its sustained commitment to its original goals. It would also, how-
ever, tend to separate it from other executive branch agencies con-
cerned with human rights and would probably reduce its ability to
influence US policy more generally.

Each of these possible organizational locations thus has its advan-
tages and disadvantages. Any one could provide an acceptable format
for the performance of the new programmatic functions related to
human rights. The alternatives do, however, have different implica-
tions for the extent to which existing offices and functions concerned
with human rights would be absorbed in the new agency or would re-
main separate. At present, for instance, in the State Department human
rights matters are handled by the Coordinator for Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs in the Office of the Deputy Secretary, by the
Counselor’s office, and by the Assistant Legal Advisor for Human
Rights in the Office of the Legal Advisor. If the second alternative were
adopted, presumably some of the positions and functions now in the
State Department would be moved to the new agency in the Executive
Office, but some would also probably remain in the Department. If the
third alternative were adopted, the changes in the existing offices and
functions in the Department would probably be relatively minor.
VI. Creating a Human Rights Agency
A proposal for the creation of a human rights agency would be an
appropriate part of the President’s legislative program for the 1978 ses-
sion of Congress. Congressional interest in and support for such a pro-
posal would probably be extensive. In addition, there is a growing and
increasingly self-conscious and articulate human rights constituency,
involving, in a variety of ways and degrees, groups which are both cen-
trally concerned with the issue, such as Freedom House or Amnesty In-
ternational, but also larger and more politically influential groups, in-
cluding labor, church organizations, the press, Jewish groups, and
others. As a result of the broad constituency for human rights, the Ad-
ministration is now cross-pressured by liberals who want action
against one set of countries and conservatives who want action against
another. Creation of a human rights agency would be one cause which
both liberals and conservatives could support.
lished the IAF as an independent foreign assistance agency of the United States Govern-
ment that provides grants for development programs.

82.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, October 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Weekly Report
[Omitted here is a summary of activities and accomplishments.]
Human Rights
This week, Huntington advanced the view that increasing the
human rights policy has been reduced to “exhortations” and “pen-
alties” in dealing with the rest of the world. That means the President
will not be able to talk as much about human rights in 1978 as he has in
1977. To avert a reaction of cynicism by the public, Huntington pro-
posed that some kind of human rights organization be established,
which can carry the human rights policy for the President. He asked for
my critique of his proposal, both the concept and three alternatives for
the organization. The concept is an excellent one, which I fully sup-
port, but I am not convinced that the President should talk less about
human rights. He should talk more but differently on the subject. The
case for this approach follows.

Although it is probably going to be true that the President will talk
less about human rights in 1978 and 1979, it also is possible for him to
talk more about the policy in a more flexible and effective way. It is true
that two main methods have become the essence of our promotion of
human rights: exhortation and penalties.

The policy is doomed to become a millstone if these remain the
main methods. Three other ways, far more important and effective, are
(1) the mere presence of the U.S. example, (2) creating cooperative and
constructive international relationships, such as those in the tri-lateral
area, which provide a climate in which human rights flourish, and
Human Rights
(3) preventing war and aggression which threaten and lessen human
rights.

In dealing with governments where human rights are grossly vio-
lated, it is not useful for the U.S. either to exhort or penalize as the main
effort to execute a human rights policy. Rather it is crucial that we do
not condone or approve the behavior of those governments although
we find it necessary and useful, in the search for peace and prevention
of aggression, to make deals, supply arms, sign treaties, and so on. Mo-
rality in foreign policy is a matter of taking responsibility for the real
choices we have. We do not have the choice, short of initiating a major
world war, to free all the political prisoners in the USSR. We do have
the choice, however, to make it known that while we are abiding by
agreements and seeking new ones with the USSR, we are not, through
silence, accomplices to the crimes of that regime. If the Shah of Iran
buys our arms, we can justify that as a measure toward stabilization of
the region, (certainly a gain for some human rights) but we should not
let anyone believe that such sales mean U.S. moral approval of
SAVAK’s actions.

We got into trouble in Vietnam precisely because at each decision
point we did not make explicit to ourselves and the public where we
stood on the iniquities of the Saigon regime. Very soon, our own iniq-
uities and those of the Saigon regime were sufficiently gross to rival the
VC and NVA crimes and to undercut domestic U.S. support.
Many cases will not be clear. The overall advantages for human
rights to be gained from a security arrangement with a repressive re-
gime versus the improvement in the rights of subjects of that regime
through U.S. leverage on its leaders—e.g., South Korea—must be reas-
sessed from time to time by public debate. The mood of the country
must govern here. Unpopular security commitments are unviable com-
mitments in the event of war.

The same kind of periodic reassessment of every formal or tacit ar-
rangement we have with the Soviet Union is equally essential. Any
SALT treaty, trade agreement, or cultural agreement with the Soviet
Union which is achieved through calculated silence and thus tacit ap-
proval of Soviet repressions of individuals and nations is of no value
to this country unless the popular sentiment understands and sup-
ports it as a pragmatic step taken in full consciousness of the moral
implications.

In many respects, Lenin solved this problem for Soviet policy with
his treatise, “Left Communism: An Infantile Disorder.” Both the cynics
and the crusaders for the President’s human rights policy are guilty of
the ideological confusion which Lenin pointed out in the ranks of the
Left Communists. There is an ironic symmetry here: the U.S. like the
USSR, must have correct interstate relations but also pursue the interna-

83.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Deputy Secretary
of State (Christopher)
Washington, October 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Implementation of New Human Rights Legislation
Title VII on human rights of Public Law 95-1182 raises certain ques-
tions that I believe should be considered by the Inter-Agency Group on
Human Rights
Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. In particular, the following two
issues need our prompt attention.
1. Channeling assistance toward countries other than those that engage
in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights. The Secretaries of State and Treasury are to submit annual
progress reports to the Congress on implementation of this mandate.
The Congress intends to use human rights as a means of allocating
available resources. The human rights PRM states that “efforts should
be made to reinforce positive human rights and democratic tendencies
in the Third World, particularly in the states that already have demon-
strated good or improved human rights performance.” The PRM also
supports incentives as well as sanctions as a means of advancing the
cause of human rights. For example, in referring to incentives, the PRM
proposes goodwill missions, Presidential letters, and public statements
in support of countries with good or improving human rights records.
For the most part, however, the PRM does not provide guidance for im-
plementing a policy of incentives.

Any process whose aim is to channel multilateral assistance away
from offending countries towards recipients where the human rights
conditions are good is not likely to be achieved quickly. However, the
process should be initiated as soon as possible. In implementing such a
policy, it will be necessary to determine which countries the U.S. con-
siders to be serious problems or gross offenders, at the same time we
select countries that can be considered exemplary.
2. Initiation of wide consultations designed to develop (1) a viable stand-
ard for (a) meeting basic human needs, and (b) the protection of human rights
and (2) a mechanism for acting together to insure that the rewards of interna-
tional economic cooperation are available to those who subscribe to such
standards.

By including this provision, the Congress is no doubt seeking to
encourage us to get support from other countries for our human rights
factors for the consideration of loans. Earlier in July, House and Senate conferees had
reached a compromise position on IFI loans and human rights, proposing that U.S. repre-
sentatives to the IFIs would be required to oppose loans to countries in violation of
human rights norms but would not be required to vote against these loans. Likewise, U.S.
officials would not be required to oppose loans if the President certified that opposition
would not advance human rights in that country. However, the full House rejected the
compromise in September, returning to the Senate an amended H.R. 5262, which re-
quired U.S. representatives to oppose loans or aid to any country that violated human
rights standards unless the assistance directly benefited the needy. (Congress and the Na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
objectives. The provision conveniently coincides with the Administra-
tion’s interest in internationalizing our efforts, which will be indispens-
able to success of our policy and will at the same time obviate the need
to be out front, as we are now, in exercising human rights initiative
through the IFIs. Having already done some initial work in establishing
standards for human rights performance and for meeting basic human
needs, we should, of course, take an active role in multilateral efforts in
this regard.

In referring to the reporting requirements on progress made on
“internationalization” of our human rights policies, the Congress rec-
ognized in Sec. 703(b) that the achievement of this goal would be
gradual. The stress in the legislation on this effort is on “initiation” of a
wide consultation. A necessary first step to comply with this provision
would be to consider mechanisms for a general approach to interna-
tionalization and vehicles for initiating international consultations.
As indicated at the outset, I believe that the Interagency Group
should address both issues promptly. To start the process, Treasury
will prepare proposals5 for dealing with both the substantive and pro-
cedural aspects involved. We will submit drafts to the Group as soon as
possible, for review and discussion by the several agencies concerned.
C. Fred Bergsten

85.

Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, October 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights Agency
1. I attach a draft memo from you to the President proposing the
creation of a human rights agency.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2. This follows on a series of steps relating to this issue, including:
(a) our discussion in July of the desirability of proceeding with
something along this line;
(b) my memo to you and Jessica of September 17th, on “The Next
Phase in Human Rights”, discussing the need for and alternative ways
of organizing such an agency;3
(c) Jessica’s memo to you of October 11th, which included this
along with other human rights initiatives and where you again en-
dorsed this initiative as a “good idea”.
3. I submitted a draft of the attached memo to Jessica. She had one
specific reaction to point (1) on page two which I have attempted to
meet with a change in language.
4. Jessica is, I understand, working on a broader range of human
rights initiatives, including this one, in accordance with your response
to her October 11th memo. Given your consistent positive endorsement
of this idea dating back to our discussion in July, as well as its current
timeliness, it nonetheless seemed to me worthwhile to suggest the en-
closed memo as one way of promptly moving ahead with this critical
initiative, without prejudice to other desirable ones in this area.
Recommendation: That you sign the enclosed memorandum to the
President.
paper, which is printed as an attachment to Document 81. (Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Staff Material, Europe/USSR/and East/West—Putnam Subject File, Box 31,
as Document 80.

Human Rights
86.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz), the Assistant
Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs (Derian), and the Deputy Administrator of the
Agency for International Development (Nooter) to the
Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, November 9, 1977
SUBJECT
PL 480 Title I—Human Rights Reporting Requirements
Issue for Decision
The issue is when and how PL 480 Title I agreements should be
amended to require that the food or proceeds directly benefit the
needy. There basically are three possibilities: 1) apply this additional
requirement only to countries specifically identified as gross human
rights violators; 2) apply it to a limited number of human rights
problem countries; or 3) apply it in all future Title I agreements.
A related but separate decision is what procedure should be fol-
lowed for review of proposed Title I allocations.

Essential Factors
The issue arises due to the inclusion in PL 480 legislation of a new
Human Rights amendment (Section 112). That provision states in part
that “no Title I agreement may be entered into with a country that en-
gages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights . . .
unless such agreement will directly benefit the needy people in such
country.” This will not occur “unless either the commodities them-
selves or the proceeds from their sale will be used to directly benefit the
needy” and finally “the agreement shall specify how the projects or
programs will be used to benefit the needy people.” Congressional
committees may require the President to demonstrate that specific
agreements will directly benefit needy people, and the President must
submit an annual report to the Congress on steps taken to carry out Sec-
tion 112. The statute refers only to agreements with governments en-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
gaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations, but the requirement
could of course be imposed in agreements with any government.
All Title I agreements already include general “self-help” provi-
sions under which recipient countries agree to undertake agricultural
development projects and programs. Legislation directs the Executive
Branch to consider particularly the extent to which self-help efforts
“contribute directly to development progress in poor rural areas and to
enable the poor to participate actively in increasing agricultural pro-
duction.” Annual reports on self-help progress are required from recip-
ient governments, and some monitoring of self-help project expendi-
tures occurs. We do not, however, require recipient governments to
demonstrate how food or proceeds will specifically help the needy.
EB View (supported by USDA)
EB believes that only agreements with countries identified as con-
sistent and gross violators should be amended. Its reasoning is as
follows:
—This is what Section 112 of the PL 480 Act requires. It is not nec-
essary or desirable to go beyond the law to add reporting requirements
for countries which are not gross violators.
—Some have argued that additional reports are needed to meet
Congressional intent, and to indicate to Congress that the Administra-
tion takes the amendment seriously. EB does not agree. There is a clear
division in Congress between human rights advocates and farm bloc
Congressmen interested in expanding U.S. farm exports. This split on
the issue creates a different, and more controversial, human rights cli-
mate for PL 480 than for other assistance programs. On the specific
amendment in question, many Congressmen had serious reservations
about including it in PL 480 and would not favor Administration action
to apply it liberally. This being the case, EB does not believe any clear
Congressional intent exists regarding implementation. The Adminis-
tration can demonstrate to Congress other, more effective, actions to use
PL 480 to promote human rights. These include, for example, the re-
view process already initiated, appropriate demarches linked to Title I
programs etc.
—Too many reports already are required under the PL 480 pro-
gram, which take up a significant amount of staff time. In addition to
“self-help” reports mentioned above, there are shipping and com-
modity arrival reports, new reports required regarding storage facil-
ities and production disincentives, quarterly reports to Congress on
planned programming, an annual report to Congress on global food as-
sessments etc. Another reporting requirement will only add to the
burden.

Human Rights
—EB’s primary concern, however, is that new PL 480 human rights
reporting requirements will create serious new bilateral problems with
recipient governments. If new reports are required of just a few human
rights problem countries, we risk creating a “hit list” which would hurt
our relations with those nations. Some recipient governments, knowl-
edgeable about the legislation and Section 112, may not accept the addi-
tional reporting requirement as a condition for PL 480 assistance. This
would place the United States in the awkward position of either having
to agree to omit the report or to terminate PL 480. The HA position that
agreements should be amended for all countries would be extremely
inefficient and unfairly penalize innocent governments. In addition to
adding to a reporting burden which already is excessive, it would
likely complicate and delay PL 480 programing. This would adversely
affect recipient country food distribution programs and lead to wide-
spread criticism domestically and abroad.
—To be effective, reports on how food programs benefit the needy
would have to be based on careful monitoring of recipient country food
distribution and local currency allocation priorities. This would require
a significant increase in AID mission activity in this area beyond what
exists in most countries today. Such an expansion would represent a
major departure from our current policy under which AID seeks to re-
duce its role in recipient country currency allocation decisions. AID’s
experience, particularly during the period of local currency sales pro-
grams, has shown that such involvement can hurt our political and de-
velopmental objectives and lead to undesirable friction. EB does not be-
lieve we should go down that route again.
—Finally, EB has a continuing interest in Title I programs used for
budgetary and/or balance of payments support purposes. Most pro-
grams promote these objectives to some extent; a few are implemented
specifically for such purposes. Recent examples include allocations for
Jamaica and Portugal to alleviate the difficult financial situation which
those countries face. Requiring all, or even a few, governments to docu-
ment that Title I directly benefits the needy would undermine this key
aspect of the program.

In sum, EB shares AID’s view that a new requirement for all Title I
agreements would be highly undesirable, but believes that new re-
quirements for just a few problem countries would be equally bad. Our
conclusion, noted above, is that the special requirement should be ap-
plied only when Title I food assistance is provided to a country identi-
fied as a gross human rights violator. In that case, the special provision
and report are required by Section 112 of the PL 480 Act and we must,
of course, comply.

AID View
AID believes applying the Section 112 requirement, that food or
local currencies directly benefit the needy, to all Title I agreements,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
would not be a workable solution. It would strain our political relations
with recipient countries, overburden the administrative systems of
countries which do not have human rights problems, and could
threaten the continuation of large and important programs such as
Egypt.

At the same time, AID recognizes HA’s argument that it would be
difficult to limit the application of Section 112 to governments that are
found to be consistent violators without establishing a “hit list”. The
Administration could therefore reasonably apply Section 112 more
broadly to governments about whose record there is a serious question.
This is the standard now being applied by AID in its review of Devel-
opment Assistance programs.

AID therefore proposes that when the Christopher Committee re-
views PL 480 allocations at the beginning of each year it determine
which governments are in the questionable category. PL 480 Title I
sales agreements with those governments will then be written to in-
clude the conditions required by Section 112. Their wording would be
carefully drafted to avoid accusations and yet make clear the intent of
the legislation.

Section 112 requires much more than reports from purchasing
governments with human rights problems: the commodities or local
currency proceeds must be used for specific identified projects and pro-
grams which directly benefit needy people, and the agreements must
say how the projects and programs will do that. This directive is sub-
stantially different from current legal requirements and policy relating
to Title I sales in general. Under that policy, as laid down by Congress,
“emphasis” is to be placed on reaching needy people. We have not in-
sisted that transactions be identified with specific programs or projects
where a direct benefit to needy people can be shown. This approach
allows an important degree of flexibility in programming for various
purposes, within the basic stipulation that there be a needy people
emphasis.

With the new Section 112, Congress clearly had the new require-
ments in mind only for governments where serious human rights

Human Rights
problems exist. An attempt to apply the requirements to all agreements
would require substantial changes in the terms now in general use in
Title I agreements, reduce AID’s flexibility in negotiating these agree-
ments, and create a significant impediment to the sale of American ag-
ricultural commodities which Congress did not contemplate. On the
other hand, until specific violators are designated, the EB proposal will
look like an inadequate response to Congressional intent.
As a practical matter, moreover, it is not possible to reserve judg-
ment until after agreements have been entered into on what reports
will be required from the purchasing governments. The governments
can realistically report only on the basis of accounting systems set up
and made operational well before the commodities are distributed or
the proceeds generated.

The proposal to include the Section 112 provision in all agreements
seeks to avoid public identification of troublesome countries and to
permit the U.S. to use PL 480 to show displeasure with a lack of
progress on human rights after an agreement is signed. The AID rec-
ommendation also allows these objectives to be met. By focusing on
troublesome governments, the Executive Branch will not designate vio-
lators, and we shall always have ways of indicating displeasure—in-
cluding, if necessary, adding Section 112 requirements to new PL 480
agreements that might be negotiated.

There is no approach open to the Executive Branch which will
guarantee the secrecy of human rights problems of governments with
which we deal. The problem-governments are aware that they have a
problem. Congressional hearings and other public testimony, as well as
press reports, will make it clear which countries are troublesome. In
any case, the Executive Branch must account for measures it takes at
least once a year.

The all-agreements proposal could raise public and Congressional
suspicions about the Administration’s good faith in carrying out
human rights measures. At a time when MODE restraints and AID “ef-
fectiveness” are important issues, it would further clog the system with
additional manpower requirements and paper. The AID proposal, on
the other hand, would impose an additional but manageable workload
on purchasing governments, AID missions, Embassies, and Wash-
ington review offices by limiting the requirements to cases where a real
effort must be made to assure adherence to the legislation.
HA View
While the current law requires that it must be demonstrated only
in the case of gross human rights violators that the food or proceeds go
to the needy, the Congress has made it clear that emphasis should be
placed on the use of Title I proceeds to benefit the needy. It would,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
therefore, not be inconsistent with this general Congressional concern
for the needy to require an accounting in all countries.
To single out only certain countries for application of Section 112
would signal to all that these are countries with serious human rights
problems and thus create a “hit list” which would have repercussions
in other policy areas and limit the Administration’s overall flexibility in
pursuing its human rights strategies.

Using a Section 112 provision only for governments whose records
are known to be troublesome at the time of negotiations could make it
difficult to adjust to subsequent changes in the other countries. We
might find ourselves in a position of not having required reports from a
government where the situation has deteriorated, and we might have
to explain this failure to Congress.

Imposition of a detailed reporting requirement in all agreements
would place a heavy burden on AID missions and purchasing gov-
ernments. It is, therefore, suggested that AID place a clause in all agree-
ments requiring that the food and/or proceeds derived from the sale
thereof be used to directly benefit needy people. To implement this
provision, AID would tell most governments that only general state-
ments are required. Our missions could be asked to evaluate these
statements based on their general observation and knowledge of the
programs.

In the case of governments with serious human rights problems,
however, it could be decided in Washington at any time in the year that
their human rights situation is sufficiently serious to demand a more
detailed accounting. This could be done not only in the legislated area,
relating to countries engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations
of human rights, but also with regard to other countries where serious
human rights problems exist. Determinations on whether demands
should be levied for these more detailed reports could be made
through the mechanism of the Interagency Group, and eventually
through the country evaluation plans.

Allocation Decisions
The Interagency Group reached a consensus that PL 480 Title I al-
locations should be reviewed by that group before the quarterly sub-
missions to Congress. In addition, as agreements with human rights
Human Rights
problem countries come up for negotiation during the year, the Inter-
agency Group may be asked to review them for consistency with
human rights criteria.

The Group strongly recommended that PL 480 allocations be con-
sidered as soon as possible in relation to other policy levers in the con-
text of individual country evaluation plans.

Recommendations
Statutory Requirements
Option 1 (EB and USDA supports)
That only Agreements with countries identified as consistent and
gross violators should be amended.

Option 2 (AID supports)
That Agreements be drafted to include the Section 112 require-
ments only for those governments about whose human rights record
there is a serious question.

Option 3 (HA supports)
That all Agreements be drafted to include the Section 112 require-
ments, but that implementation of the requirement that purchasing
governments make reports to the U.S. be done on a selective basis to be
determined as a result of interagency review of specific countries
where serious human rights problems exist.

Allocation Procedure:
That the Interagency Group review allocations to all countries on a
quarterly basis and, for individual countries with problems, again
when agreements come up for coordination by the Interagency Staff
Committee on PL 480.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
87.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to
Secretary of State Vance
Washington, November 10, 1977
Status Report on U.S. Policy on Human Rights
This will bring you up to date on actions which have been taken in
pursuance of our human rights policy, in response to the Deputy Secre-
tary’s memorandum of May 3 requesting me periodically to prepare
such a summary for you.

Summary
—Personal visits abroad by Department principals have resulted
in high level discussions of our policy with many governments.
—The fundamental human rights documents and policy state-
ments have been sent to all our posts and the unified military
commands.
—Preparation of both classified and unclassified human rights re-
ports is well advanced.
—High level “quiet diplomacy” and public actions regarding secu-
rity assistance and aid programs as well as public diplomatic efforts
may have contributed to significant human rights actions and initia-
tives in countries such as Haiti, Nicaragua, Korea, the Philippines, El
Salvador, and Iran.
—The Inter-Agency Committee on Human Rights has reviewed
and made recommendations on numerous loans both in the framework
of the International Financial Institutions and our own AID programs.
—The Arms Export Control Board, chaired by Mrs. Benson, has in-
corporated human rights considerations into the whole range of its
policy actions with respect to security assistance programs and indi-
vidual arms export proposals.
—HA, with legislative liaison officers in State, Treasury, Export-
Import Bank and the Department of Defense, helped shape current leg-
islation and answer many Congressional inquiries.

Human Rights
—IO, our missions in New York and Geneva, our mission to the
OAS and HA have been working together to strengthen the interna-
tional institutional framework.
—The President’s signature of the two human rights covenants
was a major step forward.

STATUS REPORT
1. Communication of Policy to all Posts
A. The Deputy Secretary’s ABA speech was dispatched to all
posts.

B. In trips by you, the Deputy Secretary, Ambassador Young, As-
sistant Secretaries Todman, Maynes, Moose, Holbrooke, and myself,
the human rights policy has been communicated in the countries vis-
ited. We have begun a series of airgrams to all diplomatic posts trans-
mitting information about the recognized non-governmental organiza-
tions in the human rights field.

C. A packet of materials has been prepared for distribution which
provides an up-date on current human rights legislation; a special Li-
brary of Congress study on the status of international human rights
agreements; and a USIA set of human rights documents.
D. Human Rights officers have attended regional consular officer
conferences in Latin America and Africa.

E. HA has been meeting with Ambassadors and political officers
and DCM’s while they are in the Department, on a regular basis.
2. Actions with Respect to Individual Countries
A. Initial drafts of the country evaluation papers from the geo-
graphic bureaus have been received and reviewed. Final versions of the
classified country evaluation papers and the unclassified report on
human rights conditions for submission for the Congress are being pre-
pared for submission to me by November 22 and to the Deputy Secre-
tary by December 15.

B. Particularly in Latin America, the recent trips by Department
spokespersons have produced greater awareness of the Administra-
tion’s policy and varied forms of response: Ambassador Young’s trip
(accompanied by the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Rights,
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Latin America and Assistant Adminis-
trator for AID) resulted in agreement to sign the American Convention
of Human Rights in the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Barbados.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
In Chile, Argentina, and Uruguay, the visits of Ambassador Low-
enstein, Assistant Secretary Todman and myself were preceded or fol-
lowed by government announcements designed to reflect improved
human rights situations. The actions ranged from purely cosmetic to steps
which were real but limited in scope. All indicated a desire to diminish the
U.S. focus on their repressive practices.

Haiti—Haiti agreed to a visit by the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights and to sign the American Convention on Human
Rights and released several prisoners on the list that Ambassador
Young turned over to them during his trip there.

Argentina—Argentina has rejected our condition on the sale of
eight helicopters—a statement that they would not be used for internal
security. In addition, arms transfers for internal security purposes have
been prohibited. Other arms transactions have been approved or de-
layed on a case-by-case basis.

Uruguay—General agreement has been achieved within the De-
partment and with the Ambassador not to move forward on internal
security arms transfers and to review all others on a case-by-case basis
with agreement that the only issues to be decided relate to spares.
Nicaragua—An initial decision to withhold approval of the FY 77
FMS credit agreement was followed by the GON lifting the state of
siege. The Government of Nicaragua has been informed that imple-
mentation is dependent upon continued improvements in human
rights. Two AID loans have been deferred for later consideration by the
Interagency Group. Additional arms transfer requests remain under
review.

Guinea—The GOG stated a willingness to allow the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to visit. Sending military assistance
(patrol boats) has been under review because human rights problems
are serious. The Guinea PL 480 program is also under review.
Indonesia—Agreement apparently has been reached with the
ICRC for the reinstitution of its visits to prisons in Indonesia although
no movement has occurred with regard to visits to East Timor. In addi-

Human Rights
tion, the Government has reaffirmed its intention to release 10,000 de-
tainees this year. We have urged again that consideration be given to
accelerating that process and to permitting detainees to be reintegrated
into Indonesian society rather than placed in relocation camps. GOI has
agreed, but with restricted movement for a year.

Korea—A demarche has been made with regard to IFI loans and
our human rights policy. A proposed commercial arms sale of small
arms was delayed earlier this summer on the same basis because of the
arms going to Korean police. Additional requests for arms transfers to
Korean police are under review on human rights grounds.

Iran—Improvements in the civil-judicial procedure have been pro-
posed in legislation expected to be enacted shortly and the Interna-
tional Commission of Jurists (ICJ) and ICRC have been given assur-
ances of full cooperation in conducting their activities in Iran. The ICRC
is now visiting Iranian prisons for the third time. Nevertheless,
pending arms transfer proposals with regard to police, particularly
with tear gas and internal security equipment, raise serious questions.
Dominican Republic—During the Young visit, the DR informed us
of their intention (now fulfilled) to become signatories of the American
Convention on Human Rights and, in addition, to release political pris-
oners (subsequently freed) mentioned to them. They also gave assur-
ances with regard to the openness of the forthcoming presidential
election.

Honduras—During the deposit of the ratification documents to
the American Convention, the President of Honduras also announced
that legislation would be enacted before the end of the year providing a
specific date for open democratic elections.

Bolivia—Three prisoners had been released following visits by As-
sistant Secretary Todman, myself and the Assistant Secretary for Con-
sular Affairs. Also, during the bilateral talks with the President, Banzer
stated that he would give personal attention to the remaining prisoners
who fell within the categories of being ill, facing minor charges, having
already served more time than the minimal sentence would provide for
or who had suffered mental and physical deterioration as the result of
the prolonged detention. Parents of the U.S. prisoners sharply criti-
cized Department’s efforts in Senate testimony.

El Salvador—In the aftermath of the discussions with the Salva-
doran Ambassador and host officials, steps were undertaken by the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Romero government to provide protection to the Jesuits. Additional
positive actions by the El Salvador government also resulted in a U.S.
decision to support a previously delayed IDB loan. Nevertheless, ha-
rassment continues to be reported by priests and three Catholic lay
leaders were killed by police in late August. Terrorism also increased
with killing of the former Rector of the University of El Salvador. We
have not reinstated previously delayed commercial arms sales and use
of prior-year FMS credits.
3. Coordination of Policy
A. The Deputy Secretary completed the initial PRM 28 process
with the submission of a completed State Department response to the
NSC. There remains a possibility for a PRC meeting on issues raised
in the PRM 28 paper. This process involved several meetings of the
Human Rights Coordinating Group, the PRC chaired by the Deputy
Secretary, and an enormous amount of time and effort by the staff.
B. The Inter-Agency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign As-
sistance as of September 1 had met 5 times since its creation. It has
taken action on 56 loans, including recommendations of 6 abstentions,
and 23 demarches. Its proceedings resulted in the withdrawal or delay
of 10 loans to countries against whom negative votes otherwise would
have been cast on human rights ground.

C. The Inter-Agency Committee and the ad hoc staff working
group which reports on it have considered loans coming before all in-
ternational financial institutions, AID FY 77 projects, Ex-Im proposals,
OPIC agreements, and have begun the process of considering PL 480
requests. With regard to AID FY 77 programs, two loans to Chile were
deferred. The Chilean government ultimately rejected these. De-
marches were requested with regard to ten programs, and seven AID
loans and grants were delayed.

D. FY 79 budget proposals of AID including PL 480 were reviewed
by HA as a part of a comprehensive policy review by H, S/P and other
concerned policy bureaus. Recommendations have been forwarded to
Governor Gilligan including cuts in budget increases for certain human
rights problem countries.

E. The working groups of the Arms Export Control Board, with
HA participation at each step of the FY 1979 Security Assistance budget
process, considered recommendations from the Department of Defense
and the regional bureaus for Under Secretary Benson to put forward to
Human Rights
the Secretary as a part of his submission to OMB. HA recommended
cuts in MAP, FMS credits and IMETP programs for human rights
problem countries.

In addition, HA has participated in several decisions involving in-
dividual arms sales both in the framework of the Arms Export Control
Board and otherwise. HA reviews all arms export policy papers and its
input is invariably included, when necessary.

An agreement has been reached between the Under Secretary for
Security Assistance and the Deputy Secretary to ensure that, in the
event of a disagreement over security assistance decisions in which the
Office of Human Rights believes the decision goes contrary to our
human rights policy, an appeal can be taken to the Deputy Secretary.
4. Economic Assistance Actions
A. In addition to the decisions made with regard to the Interna-
tional Financial Institutions and AID FY 77 programs within the Inter-
Agency Committee, HA has engaged in discussions with Export-
Import Bank to permit our comments concerning the human rights
situation in a particular country to be taken into account by Ex-Im Bank
in their decision-making. A similar process is being developed with re-
gard to OPIC.

In that regard, Ex-Im, after discussions with our front office and
consideration at the Inter-Agency Committee, determined not to lift an
existing limitation on available credits for Chile. OPIC similarly deter-
mined not to go forward with a country agreement with Uruguay
pending improvements in the human rights situation.

Part of the rationale of those two institutions was that such consul-
tation and cooperation with the Department was necessary in order to
carry out the spirit of provisions of recently-enacted statutes affecting
their programs.

In addition, a pending Commodity Credit Cooperation loan to
Chile for $10 million was delayed by mutual consensus at the initiation
of our office.

B. In addition to previous actions, the overall development of
AID’s future programs has focused on basic human needs and other
positive aspects of the human rights policy. However, this positive side
to the policy still is not fully understood by the public or the Congress
as integral to our overall approach. Some of the unused funds for FY 77
by AID may be reallocated to countries with grave poverty problems
and improving or exemplary human rights records.
5. Security Assistance Action
A. In considering requests from countries with serious human
rights problems for FMS cash and credit sales or commercial license ap-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
proval, a general trend has been developing, based on our individual
decisions, to rule out weapons which could be used for internal secu-
rity purposes. In addition, weapons going to police and civil law en-
forcement forces of such countries have been particularly suspect. Re-
strictions thus have been placed on arms transfers to Argentina,
Nicaragua, El Salvador and Uruguay. Some commercial license ap-
provals for weapons to Korean national police were deferred for sev-
eral months on human rights grounds. Weapons for the Indonesian
prison guards were specifically denied.

However, substantial amounts of military equipment continue to
be sold to regimes which engage in serious violations of human rights
and which deny to their people the ability to participate in government.
If there is one aspect of our policy that is sure to draw, and has al-
ready drawn, criticism from human rights advocates of the Congress
and among the human rights constituency, it is military assistance and
sales. For that reason, it seems appropriate to examine much more vig-
orously proposals for arms transfers to countries with serious human
rights problems even where a judgment has not been made that a par-
ticular country falls within the parameters of Section 502(B).
An additional criterion which is being used at times in examining
arms transfer requests relates to whether the equipment desired is le-
thal or non-lethal.

B. After discussions, the Departments of State and Defense both di-
rected by telegram that all human rights policy cable exchanges be
made available to the appropriate military attaches, Security Assistance
managers, and to the appropriate unified military commands.
6. Cooperation of Congress and NGOs
A. Together with H, we have been involved in attempting to obtain
the most effective legislation dealing with human rights.
B. Foreign Assistance Act amendments of 1977 did not signifi-
cantly alter the human rights provisions of Section 116 although addi-
tional human rights reports covering all economic assistance recipients
are now required.

C. After considerable pulling and tugging, language was adopted
in the conference on the international financial institutions authoriza-
tion bill which modifies the Harkin amendment slightly and extends its
reach to all international financial institutions.

Human Rights
D. The Export-Import Bank legislation13 as well as the PL 480 pro-
vision of the Foreign Assistance Amendment14 were altered to require
consideration of human rights factors. Foreign Assistance amendments
have been signed into law; however, the Export-Import Bank legisla-
tion still is awaiting conference.

E. State Department authorization legislation changed the title of
the Coordinator for Human Rights to Assistant Secretary for Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs but retained responsibility for all
human rights recommendations and for matters affecting refugees and
POWs within this office.

F. While the Foreign Assistance Appropriations Bill was pending
conference, HA worked with H and appropriate bureaus in devel-
oping the Department’s position on these provisions. Most of the provi-
sions involve ear-marking of funds, denying those funds for particular
countries. Given the Administration’s desire for additional flexibility,
the general principle which we adopted was to oppose such ear-
marking but to limit our lobbying to prevent undermining the credi-
bility of our human rights commitment.

G. The efforts to secure ratification of the genocide treaty have con-
tinued although the focus of attention on the Panama Canal Treaty rati-
fication presumably has delayed the Senate’s consideration of the
treaty at least for several months.
7. Multilateral Diplomacy
A. United Nations: Continuing consultations by Ambassador
Young and others have been aimed at separating the Zionism/racism
language to permit the United States to participate fully in the Decade
against Discrimination. In addition, those consultations have been de-
signed to enhance the possibility of adoption of the Costa Rican resolu-
tion creating the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. At the very least, the effort this year is designed to establish a
substantial foundation which would permit us to accomplish this goal
at an early subsequent session. We also have been pressing for the cre-
ation of an ad hoc committee on torture as an effective step to follow up
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the 1975 Declaration Against Torture. While perhaps less effective in
the long run in directly improving human rights conditions than the es-
tablishment of a High Commissioner, this proposal or a similar one
would seem to be less controversial and, therefore, more likely to gain
approval in this session. The Third Committee currently is considering
proposed resolutions on this subject.

The office worked closely with the United Nations Mission in en-
couraging and then cooperating with the Secretary General of the
United Nations in his effort to secure a resolution of the sit-in by fam-
ilies of disappeared persons in Chile, an effort which ultimately was
successful.

President Carter on October 5 signed the UN Covenants on Civil
and Political Liberties and Social and Cultural Rights.

HA and IO are working to protect NGO’s from attack during
UNGA. There is some effort by the Southern Cone Latin American
countries to have the credentials of some NGOs challenged.
B. The Organization of American States: Following the OAS Gen-
eral Assembly at Grenada, our efforts to support and strengthen the
Inter-American Human Rights Commission have yielded agreement
from Haiti, Paraguay and El Salvador to permit visits by the Inter-
American Human Rights Commission to their countries to evaluate
human rights conditions. In addition, the momentum generated by the
President’s signing the American Convention on Human Rights in
June20 has influenced a half dozen additional countries to sign, bringing
the total number of countries which have either deposited their signa-
tures or agreed to deposit their signatures to 16. In addition, six coun-
tries have now ratified the Convention including Costa Rica, Colombia,
Honduras and Venezuela. A good working relationship also has been
developed with the Inter-American Commission such that an exchange
of information has been possible on an informal basis (this should be
held confidential). The accessions to the American Convention on
Human Rights and agreements by several countries to permit visits by
the IAHRC undoubtedly will place a greater focus on that Commis-
sion’s activities, ultimately strengthen it and make it a more active in-
strument for the promotion of human rights in the hemisphere.
C. UNESCO: The preparatory conference met early in August to
refine the proposals that were presented to the UNESCO Board in late
September and early October, and to establish formal human rights
Human Rights
machinery to receive complaints in the areas of UNESCO jurisdiction.
A final decision will be delayed until next year. The U.S., with Tom
Buergenthal leading our delegation, was a key mover in developing
both the machinery and the proposed resolution.

D. International Legal Defense: In conjunction with L, legislation is
being drafted to establish the mechanism to support and finance legal
defense efforts in other countries. An action proposal on this subject
should be available next month. Substantial interest has been expressed
both in the House and the Senate, particularly from Congressman
Fraser and Senator Cranston, with regard to this matter.
8. CSCE
HA has continued to be involved in the process of defining the
policy objectives, strategy and tactics for the CSCE conference. Recom-
mendations for accelerated bilaterals with East Europeans, an Inter-
Agency Committee to assess U.S. implementation and respond to com-
plaints, and agreement for the U.S. to play an active leadership role in
the forthcoming conference, both the plenary and working group, were
initiated by this office. Our involvement results both from my being
named as State Department representative on the CSCE Commission
and from HA’s appropriate role in human rights as it relates to multi-
lateral activities.
9. Public Diplomacy
As always the most effective communication of our policy has
been the actions taken by the Administration. Decisions restricting
arms transfers are particularly persuasive. The reports of an emphasis
on human rights by Department officials during their trips have a sim-
ilar effect. Ambassador Young’s trip through the Caribbean and my
trip to Argentina are examples. In addition, we have continued to par-
ticipate in the Public Affairs activities of the Department and to com-
municate directly with non-governmental organizations both in Wash-
ington and at their annual conferences in other locations. The recent
surveys of public attitudes on U.S. human rights policy continue to
show growing public support for this policy even when in competition
with other interests.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

88.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 22, 1977
SUBJECT
PL–480 and Human Rights
The Story Behind the Washington Post Story
As you know, PL-480 consists primarily of two separate pro-
grams—Title I and Title II. Under Title II, food grants are made through
private agencies, through the UN/FAO and other multilateral pro-
grams, and through friendly governments to help the needy for
emergency/disaster relief and other purposes (maternal/child health,
school feeding, etc.). Because of the nature of these programs, the Inter-
agency Group decided that no human rights review of recipient countries
was necessary.

Title I (which is the subject of the article) is a very different story.
Title I was originally conceived as a means of disposing of US farm
surplus. It primarily provides budget and balance-of-payments sup-
port to recipient governments, indirectly subsidizes American farmers,
and sometimes promotes the development of free markets in recipient
countries. It has often been abused in the past and used for blatantly
political foreign policy purposes. For example, in 1975, the government
proposed using 85 percent of the Latin American allotment for Chile,
and in 1976 proposed that Chile get 93 percent—despite the fact that
Chile has the fifth highest per capita income in Latin America, and is
not on the UN’s MSA list. Thus there is a valid question of to what ex-
tent Title I loans should be subject to a review of the human rights prac-
tices of the recipient. This concern was seconded and in fact super-
vened by the enactment of Harkin language in the FY ’78 Title I
legislation. Like all the other Harkin amendments, this stipulates that
no Title I support can go to a country which engages in a “consistent and gross
pattern of human rights violations”—unless the food itself, or the proceeds
from the sale of the food, directly benefit the needy people of that
country.

Human Rights
Thus the preliminary FY ’78 allotments (which are informally pre-
sented to Congress at the beginning of each fiscal year), had to be re-
viewed to test their consistency to the new legislative directives, as well
as to Administration policy. The review took some time since a number
of difficult questions had to be answered including:
—Should any Title I assistance be provided to a country which is
judged to be a gross and consistent violator of human rights?
—Should Title I assistance be diverted away from gross and con-
sistent violators or lesser violators and toward those nations which
make progress or have good human rights records?
—How do we avoid creating a “consistent and gross violator” hit
list?
—Should all Title I agreements, or just agreements with consistent
and gross violators, be amended to require host governments to report
on the use of Title I food or proceeds; or, alternatively, should some
other method be sought to guarantee the human rights provisions of
Title I legislation are met?

In order to avoid the designation of any country as a consistent
and gross violator, it was decided (essentially by Christopher) to re-
view Title I allotments for all countries and to require “troublesome”
countries (as defined by the human rights working group) to provide addi-
tional reporting showing that the aid is indeed reaching the needy.
In order to avoid a possible leak (there have been many from the
Christopher group) the list of those countries being considered as trou-
blesome was not presented to the interagency group. Instead, consulta-
tions were to be held with the interested parties. Apparently State got
so hung up in internal debate on the list, that they never got around to
consulting NSC. I have spoken to Oxman about this and will talk to
Schneider also. It appears to have been an honest mistake made under
severe time pressures.

89.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 23, 1977
SUBJECT
USIA’s Suggestions for Human Rights Week—Your Query
Reinhardt suggests (Tab B) that the President’s greatest source of
support on human rights comes from people rather than from their
Human Rights
governments. Everyone I have talked to and everything I have read in
the past months confirms this. Each of the President’s speeches and
statements in this area has captured much attention and generated ad-
ditional support, which eventually percolates back to governments.
Thus I think that Reinhardt’s suggestion for a Human Rights Week
speech addressed to people all over the world is an excellent one.
You may remember that after the last UNGA speech, we got many
reports of reactions expressing disappointment that the President had
not once mentioned human rights. Some interpreted this as a backing
off from the policy (this isn’t serious—it’s a press obsession that will be
with us until the policy is no longer new). We even got some indica-
tions of disappointment from governments who were expecting some
general words of praise for the positive steps that have been taken in
many places. Thus there is substance that can usefully be said in such a
speech, and I think we can be confident that the market has not been
saturated with talk of human rights: I am a little leery of Reinhardt’s
suggestion that the speech address “the place of the individual in so-
ciety” which could easily get too philosophical and ethnocentric, but I
believe that it would be well worthwhile to take a look at his draft.
Rick informed me yesterday that a proposal for a 3–4 minute
Human Rights Week statement is already in the system. Obviously we
would not want to do both. I would suggest that it be expanded into a
10–12 minute speech.

I have no particular comments on Reinhardt’s proposals Two and
Three other than that we should take a look at his material. I have
drafted a note for a reply to Reinhardt’s memorandum along these
lines—it is at Tab A.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Recommendation
That you sign the memorandum at Tab A.

That you approve a 10–12 minute speech rather than a short state-
ment for Human Rights Week.

Tab B
Memorandum From the Director of the United States
Information Agency (Reinhardt) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 16, 1977
As the end of the Carter Administration’s first year in office ap-
proaches, I have engaged in some preliminary New Year’s ruminations
and reflections on the experiences of several months at USIA. The
Agency’s Deputy Director, Charles Bray, has just returned from a
two-week visit to the Federal Republic of Germany, Nigeria, Egypt,
Jordan and Israel, and the impressions he gathered in discussions with
intellectuals, academics, media, government and opposition leaders in
these countries furnished more material for thought. Several common
themes concerning the atmospherics within which we operate abroad
emerged from our analysis.
—In much of the world, the intellectual discourse appears to pro-
ceed not from firmly held tenets about the future of a given society, but
rather from questions about the direction in which societies are headed,
questions about the place of any society in the community of nations
and about the place and role of individuals within societies. Perhaps it
has always been thus, but questions surely outnumber answers in
today’s world. In this psychological climate, the President’s emphasis
on human rights has struck a responsive chord with peoples, if not
always with governments. Their interest appears to lie less in the policy
implications of the President’s views than in what is perceived as a
powerful affirmation of basic human values.
ally by next year), the Egyptian reopening to the Western market
economy, the overwhelming German celebration of our Bicentennial,
are simply examples.
—The reverse side of the coin is the tendency on the part of many
to dismiss the USSR as an irrelevant model, bankrupt of values, and es-
sentially unworkable.

In light of the foregoing, I recommend to you and the President for
consideration three specific proposals:
First, Human Rights Week (December 10–17) affords the President
an opportunity to address domestic and foreign constituencies simulta-
neously, with a discussion of the place of the individual in society, his
relationship to government and economy, the sources of our societal
values, their relevance to others. I would like to submit a draft speech
for consideration within a short time if you give preliminary endorse-
ment to this recommendation. USIA could facilitate live international
TV coverage by satellite; at a minimum we could place the text in the
hands of a very large number of important foreigners. We assume, of
course, that the President would deliver the speech before an appro-
priate specific audience or as an Oval Office address to the nation.
Second, assuming the President plans a year-end “State of the
World” message to Congress, the content and tone could usefully re-
flect some of the foreign preoccupations which the foregoing suggests. I
will forward, by November 28, some specific suggestions in this regard.
Third, the foreign environment we think we perceive has impor-
tant implications for the new International Communication Agency.
We gather the President will be reviewing the FY 1979 budget on De-
cember 6. I would like to send you background material and a few in-
formal proposals before that meeting.

90.

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, November 25, 1977
SUBJECT
PL 480, Title I
This memorandum is intended to apprise you of the steps we are
taking to comply with the new amendment of the Agricultural Trade
Development and Assistance Act of 1954 which became effective on
“Sec. 112. (a) No agreement may be entered into under this title to
finance the sale of agricultural commodities to the government of any
country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of in-
ternationally recognized human rights, including torture or cruel, in-
human, or degrading treatment or punishment, prolonged detention
without charges, or other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty, and
the security of person, unless such agreement will directly benefit the
needy people in such country. An agreement will not directly benefit
the needy people in the country for purposes of the preceding sentence
unless either the commodities themselves or the proceeds from their
sale will be used for specific projects or programs which the President
determines would directly benefit the needy people of that country.
The agreement shall be used to benefit the needy people and shall re-
quire a report to the President on such use within six months after the
commodities are delivered to the recipient country.

“(b) To assist in determining whether the requirements of subsec-
tion (a) are being met, the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and
Forestry of the Senate or the Committee on International Relations of
the House of Representatives may require the President to submit in
writing information demonstrating that an agreement will directly ben-
efit the needy people in a country.

“(d) The President shall transmit to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, the President of the Senate, and the Committee on Ag-
riculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate, in the annual presenta-
tion materials on planned programming of assistance under this Act, a
Human Rights
full and complete report regarding the steps he has taken to carry out
the provisions of this section.”
Twenty-nine countries are scheduled to receive PL 480, Title I
Agriculture are complying with the new statutory requirement set
forth above by seeking to include a new provision in the FY 78, PL 480,
Title I agreements with certain countries. The new provision, calling for
assurances that the food or the proceeds therefrom are used for needy
people, is attached under Tab 2. (With Herb Hansell’s help, we are pre-
paring a simplified version of the requested assurances.)
In considering which of the 29 recipient countries ought to be
asked to agree to the new provision, we assessed the possibility of only
including countries engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations
of internationally recognized human rights (“gross and consistent vio-
lators”). However, of the 29 countries on the overall list, none has thus
far been formally determined to be a gross and consistent violator.
While some of the countries on the list are arguably in that category, it
has been our view that a formal designation to that effect is not a partic-
ularly useful policy tool and has many obvious disadvantages. Yet any
effort to confine our application of the new statutory provision to gross
and consistent violations would almost certainly result in the designa-
tion of several of the 29 countries. Accordingly, we concluded it would
be a mistake to ask only countries designated gross and consistent vio-
lators to agree to the new provision.

As another possibility, we considered seeking to include the new
language in the agreements with all 29 countries. The claimed benefit of
this approach was that it would avoid singling out any countries as
human rights violators. However, AID and Agriculture were strongly
opposed to this course of action because of the considerable additional
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
burden, expense and possible delay that it would entail, not only in the
negotiating process, but also in the efforts required to monitor compli-
ance with the new provision. Moreover, inclusion of all 29 countries
would not be a faithful construction of the terms of the amendment.
The third approach we considered—and the one we chose—was to
seek to include the new language in agreements with those countries as
to which there are serious human rights questions. Such an approach
avoids the principal disadvantages of the two extreme courses dis-
cussed above. It does not, at this point, stigmatize any country as a
gross and consistent violator, but nevertheless enables us to comply
with the statute. Moreover, this approach will prove useful when we
report to Congress on our compliance efforts, as required by the
statute: we will be able to report that all countries about which there is a
“serious question” complied with the “needy people” requirement of
the statute, and yet we will not have to brand any country as a gross
and consistent violator. On the other hand, this approach avoids the
onerousness of including all 29 countries, thus permitting AID and Ag-
riculture to operate without undue disruption of the PL 480 negotiating
and monitoring process.

Having chosen the middle course of including only countries with
seriously questionable human rights records, we determined after
wide consultation within State, AID and Agriculture that, of the agree-
ments which are ready to be negotiated, those with Indonesia, Korea,
Bangladesh and Guinea should include the new language. Negotiating
instructions to our personnel in Indonesia, Korea and Bangladesh have
been sent out, and those for the Guinean agreement will be dispatched
on Monday.

The instructions state that the negotiation of these agreements
should be given top priority and that every effort should be exerted to
conclude the agreements within ten business days. If it should appear
that efforts to include the new provision will make it impossible to con-
clude the agreement within that period, we will communicate a pos-
sible fallback position to the posts, e.g., a side letter or memorandum of
intent. (We are receiving quite understandable complaints from the
posts and bureaus on this matter, but the problem stems from the
statute itself and our need to implement it with fidelity to our human
rights policy.)

91.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
282352. Subject: Guidance on Human Rights Provisions of New
Development Assistance Legislation.
1. Summary: New legislation amending Foreign Assistance Act
(FAA) requires SecState to provide to Congress an annual report on
status of human rights in all countries receiving development assist-
ance. FAA already contained requirements for such a report on coun-
tries receiving security assistance. Reports on both development and
Limited Official Use. Drafted in HA/HR; cleared in draft by Swift, Collins, Runyons,
Clapp, Martens, David Moran, Fuerth, and Lister; approved by Schneider. Also sent to
CINCPAC, CINCEUR, SecDef, JCS, and CINCSO.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
security assistance countries will be submitted to Congress by January
31, 1978. Posts in recipient countries are required to inform host gov-
ernments of new reporting requirement and/or to remind them of pre-
vious requirements. End summary.
now reads as follows:
Quote
Sec. 116. Human rights. (A) No assistance may be provided under
this part to the government of any country which engages in a con-
sistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights, including torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, prolonged detention without charges, or other flagrant
denial of the right to life, liberty, and the security of person, unless such
assistance will directly benefit the needy people in such country.
(B) In determining whether this standard is being met with regard
to funds allocated under this part, the Committee on Foreign Relations
of the Senate or the Committee on International Relations of the House
of Representatives may require the administrator primarily responsible
for administering Part I of this act to submit in writing information
demonstrating that such assistance will directly benefit the needy
people in such country, together with a detailed explanation of the
assistance to be provided (including the dollar amounts of such assist-
ance) and an explanation of how such assistance will directly benefit
the needy people in such country. If either Committee or either House
of Congress disagrees with the administrator’s justification it may ini-
tiate action to terminate assistance to any country by a concurrent reso-
lution under Section 617 of this act.

(C) In determining whether or not a government falls within the
provisions of Subsection (A) and in formulating development assist-
ance programs under this part, the administrator shall consider, in con-
sultation with the Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs—1) the extent of cooperation of such government in permitting
an unimpeded investigation of alleged violations of internationally rec-
ognized human rights by appropriate international organizations, in-
cluding the International Committee of the Red Cross, or groups or
persons acting under the authority of the United Nations or of the Or-
ganization of American States; and 2) specific actions which have been
taken by the President or the Congress relating to multilateral or secu-

Human Rights
rity assistance to a less developed country because of the human rights
practices or policies of such country.

(D) The Secretary of State shall transmit to the Speaker of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of
the Senate, by January 31 of each year, a full and complete report re-
garding—(1) the status of internationally recognized human rights,
within the meaning of Subsection (A), in countries receiving assistance
under this part; and (2) the steps the administrator has taken to alter
United States programs under this part in any country because of
human rights considerations.

(E) Of the funds made available under this chapter for the fiscal
year 1978, not less than $750,000 may be used only for studies to
identify, and for openly carrying out, programs and activities which
will encourage or promote increased adherence to civil and political
rights, as set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in
countries eligible for assistance under this chapter. None of these funds
may be used, directly or indirectly, to influence the outcome of any
election in any country.

End quote
3. This legislation requires the Secretary of State to transmit to
Congress human rights reports on all countries receiving development
assistance by January 31, 1978. In accordance with the interpretation of
the provision by the AID General Counsel, the Department plans to
submit reports on countries receiving assistance in FY78 and proposed
to receive it in FY79. This new requirement for country human rights
reports on recipients of bilateral development assistance is in addition
to the annual reports the Secretary of State is required to provide to
Congress on countries receiving security assistance from the United
States pursuant to Section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as
human rights reports on both development and security assistance
countries by January 31, 1978.
4. Reports for both categories of countries will be identical in
format and substance. They will be unclassified versions of part A of
the human rights country evaluation plans (CEP) which most posts
have either drafted or received from the Department for review and
clearance.

Department provided guidance regarding the International Security Assistance and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
5. The reports are now being completed and cleared in the Depart-
ment. Well before submission to Congress, the Department will tele-
graphically provide the final texts to posts in each country for which ei-
ther security assistance or development assistance human rights
reports are required (refer to lists of countries in each category below).
Congress can be expected to make public all of these reports immedi-
ately after their submission.
6. Action requested: Posts in countries with which the U.S. has or
expects to have development assistance programs should seek an ap-
propriate opportunity to provide host governments, at an appropriate
level, with the text of human rights provisions of revised Section 116 of
the FAA, and report reactions, if any. In addition, posts in security
assistance recipient countries should remind host governments, at an
appropriate level, of the human rights reports required under Section
ernments that reports for countries in both types of assistance pro-
grams will be provided to Congress by January 31, 1978. Posts should
avoid implying that this representation assures the provision of either
type of assistance, since budget deliberations are still underway within
the Executive Branch of FY79 proposals.
7. Embassies in countries which receive neither form of assistance
may, at their discretion, also bring to the attention of host governments
amended.
8. FYI. Following are countries currently receiving, or expected to
be proposed for, development assistance, including those receiving
assistance under narcotics programs and housing guarantee programs,
and on which human rights reports will be submitted under amended
Section 116.

ARA—Bolivia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Sal-
vador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nica-
ragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay.

NEA—Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco,
Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Yemen (Sana).

EA—Burma, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand.
AF—Benin, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Empire, Chad, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, So-
malia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Upper Volta, Zaire, Zambia.
9. The following countries are currently expected to be proposed
for a security assistance program which will require the submission of a
human rights report under Section 502B.

Human Rights
EUR—Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany (FRG), Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
United Kingdom, Yugoslavia.

NEA—Afghanistan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Egypt, India, Iran, Is-
rael, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, Sri Lanka, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen (Sana).
AF—Cameroon, Chad, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Ivory Coast,
Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Mali, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Sudan, Upper Volta, Zaire, Zambia.

EA—Australia, Brunei, Burma, Republic of China, Fiji, Indonesia,
Japan,
Korea,
Malaysia,
New
Zealand,
Philippines,
Singapore,
Thailand.

ARA—Bolivia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ec-
uador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Ni-
caragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela.
10. Brazil will be subject of septel.

Vance
not plan to submit a human rights report for Brazil, unless the Embassy recommended to
the contrary, and added that the Embassy should inform the Government of Brazil that
“inaction on our part will make Brazil ineligible for new FMS cash sales, FMS financing,
grant training, and all economic development assistance in FY 1979.” (National Archives,

92.

Memorandum for the Files
Washington, November 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Meeting with Senator Talmadge
Mr. Christopher met this morning with Senator Herman Talmadge
in the Senator’s office. The meeting began at approximately 8: a.m.
and lasted until approximately 9: a.m. I was present during the
meeting as were Nelson Denlinger of the staff of the Agriculture Com-
mittee and a man whom I believe was introduced as Rogers Wade of
Senator Talmadge’s staff.

Senator Talmadge said he understood there was some problem in
implementation of this year’s PL 480, Title I program. Mr. Christopher
responded that the basic message he wanted to deliver was that the
State Department is trying its best to implement the new statute and is
now up-to-date on this matter. More specifically, he pointed out that 29
countries are scheduled to receive PL 480, Title I assistance in FY 78. He
said that of the 12 country programs that had thus far been referred to
us by the Agriculture Department, we had dispatched negotiating in-
structions to our posts in all 12 countries. He stated further that as soon
as Agriculture apprises us that any of the remaining 17 programs
are ready to be negotiated, we will forthwith dispatch negotiating
instructions.

Senator Talmadge said that he interpreted this to mean that the
problem was not with the State Department but rather with the Agri-
culture Department. Mr. Christopher responded affirmatively but ac-
knowledged that in fact there had been some initial delay in the State
Department while we attempted to bring our procedures into con-
formity with the new legislation bringing human rights considerations
to bear on the PL 480, Title I program. Senator Talmadge said he could
understand that it took some time to adjust to the new statute.
Mr. Christopher said we are aware of the need to conclude the
agreements as expeditiously as possible and that we had therefore in-
Human Rights
structed our posts abroad to give top priority to the negotiation of these
agreements. Senator Talmadge said he was pleased to hear this.
Mr. Christopher went on to say that in view of the new statute, we
were asking four of the 12 countries as to which negotiating instruc-
tions have already been dispatched to agree to a new provision in the
PL 480 agreement. Mr. Christopher explained that we had attempted to
streamline this new provision and to make it as inoffensive as possible
to the countries that had been asked to agree to it. He pointed out that
these countries might be quite sensitive to being asked to agree to this
new provision but that we were very conscious of our responsibility to
implement the new statute and felt this was the appropriate way to do
it. He reiterated that we had attempted to make the provision as accept-
able as possible, consistent with our obligation to apply the statute
faithfully.

Mr. Christopher then handed Senator Talmadge a letter setting
forth the facts he had just given orally (a copy of the letter is attached
under Tab A). I also gave a copy of the letter to Messrs. Denlinger and
Wade. Senator Talmadge and the others read the letter. He then com-
mented that he very much appreciated Mr. Christopher’s coming to see
him and was grateful for the information that had been provided.
Mr. Christopher then handed Senator Talmadge a copy of the
latest version of the new contractual provision we are asking certain
countries to agree to (a copy of the provision given to Senator Tal-
madge is attached under Tab B). I also handed copies of this new pro-
vision to Messrs. Denlinger and Wade. Senator Talmadge read the pro-
vision and said it seemed quite sound. Mr. Denlinger commented that
this language was less extensive than the provision we had originally
sent out. Mr. Christopher agreed and explained that this reflected our
efforts to streamline the provision as much as possible. Mr. Denlinger
said he thought it was a considerable improvement.

Mr. Denlinger then turned to the question of CCC credits. He said
there was a good deal of concern about bringing human rights consid-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
erations to bear on programs that are essentially commercial in nature
such as the CCC credit program. He said he understood that the State
Department had been in discussions with the Agriculture Department
about this matter and that there was currently an issue as to CCC
credits for Chile. Mr. Christopher responded that as to strictly commer-
cial programs such as the CCC and EXIM programs, it was our policy
to convey our views and advice to the agency concerned when that
agency wished to bring a problem to our attention. He said our role
was advisory. He said there are some cases, such as Uganda, where we
thought it clearly unwise to go forward with such programs. Senator
Talmadge said he could not agree more.

Senator Talmadge reiterated that he appreciated Mr. Christopher
coming to brief him. Mr. Christopher referred to the interest that some
of the Senator’s colleagues had expressed in holding hearings on the PL
480 matter and said he would be happy to meet with them to provide
further details. The Senator asked Mr. Denlinger which Senators had
expressed an interest in hearings. Mr. Denlinger responded that 14 of
the 17 members of the Agriculture Committee had sent a letter to Sen-
ator Talmadge expressing interest in hearings on this matter, but that
he thought the information we had provided might make hearings un-
necessary. The Senator said that in any event hearings could not be
held until January and asked Mr. Denlinger to provide each of the 14
Senators in question a copy of the letter Mr. Christopher had just pro-
vided. The Senator again thanked Mr. Christopher for his time, and we
departed.

In the anteroom as we departed Mr. Christopher explained to Mr.
Denlinger that we hoped they would not distribute the draft contrac-
tual provision in view of the possible negative effect of such distribu-
tion on the on-going negotiations. Denlinger said he understood this
risk and would therefore not distribute the draft provision.

93.

Memorandum From Michael Armacost of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 30, 1977
SUBJECT
PL–480, Title I: Shipments to Human Rights “Violators”
PL–480, Title I shipments to a number of countries are being held
up as a result of monumental confusion in our purposes, exaggerated
interpretations of the Congressional intent, and bureaucratic mis-steps
by the Christopher Committee. The salient facts in this case are these:
—Section 112–A of the legislation governing PL–480 Title I pro-
grams specifies that shipments of commodities should not go to coun-
tries that are “gross and consistent violators of human rights”, except
when the President determines that any commodities going to such
countries will be channeled to the needy.
—There are 29 recipients of PL–480 Title I shipments. So far as we
are aware, none has ever been determined to be a “gross and consistent
violator of human rights”. Thus we are not legally required to with-
hold shipments to the intended recipients (evidently Chile has been
judged a “gross and consistent violator”, but none of the shipments are
planned for Chile anyway). The Christopher Committee has decided
practices, and the Committee has decided that our PL–480 contracts
with these countries be amended to provide for additional reporting on
human rights matters. Our Ambassadors to these countries have been
instructed to seek host government concurrence in such amendments.
—This effort has not been crowned with great success. The Indone-
sian Government bristled at our suggestion and refused. Our Ambas-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
sadors in South Korea and Bangladesh have refused thus far to raise it
with the host government.
—Evidently new contracts must be signed next Monday. Thus we
must either press ahead to secure these amendments in the contracts,
thereby risking a repetition of our experience with Indonesia in other
countries, or seek less offensive new reporting requirements, or drop
for at least this round of PL–480 shipments any effort to change the con-
tracts with recipient governments.
—This effort—which Agriculture leaked to the Washington Post
last week—has encountered a frosty reception from the Hill. Senator
Inouye is livid about it and has indicated his belief that the Executive
Branch is over-interpreting the Congressional intent embodied in Sec-
tion 112–A. Senator Humphrey, we are told, is disturbed that the
enormous effort that he put into the development of the PL–480 pro-
gram over the years may be jeopardized by this ill-considered move.
Twelve Senators have written to express their dismay that the United
States would withhold food from less developed countries as a lever on
human rights.
—Bob Bergland evidently is eager to repeal Section 112–A of the
law. But that will take time and will not resolve our immediate
problem.
—The continued delays in shipments that have resulted from this
confusion are costly to the recipients. For example, in the seven weeks
shipments have been held up, the cost of commodities desired by In-
donesia has increased by $17 million.

A reasonable interpretation of the law does not require us to with-
hold shipments from any of the intended recipients. We believe it
would be desirable to expedite early dispatch of the commodities. Since
this has become a public issue, however, it would be prudent to consult
with the Congressional leadership and secure their understanding that
for this round of shipments we will not attempt to add new amend-
ments to PL–480 contracts, while leaving open the future of Section
carry out the Department’s instructions regarding the P.L. 480 negotiations, he wanted to
express his “personal reservations” concerning the policy and its potential negative im-
pact on U.S. relations with the ROK Government. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P840084–2025)

Human Rights
112–A and how it should be interpreted by the Executive Branch. This
would allow us to move the commodities, escape from a politically em-
barrassing position, elude a confrontation with the Hill, and avoid the
establishment of what can only be viewed as a “hit list” (the 14 coun-
tries required to send in new human rights reports as a pre-condition
for obtaining PL–480, Title I assistance.)

Recommendation:
That you call Vance9 and discuss this matter with him, urging a
resolution of the immediate problems along the lines suggested
above.

Henry Owen concurs.
cables on this subject until the NSC can review it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
94.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for International Organization Affairs (Maynes), the Legal
Adviser (Hansell), the Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic and Business Affairs (Katz), the Assistant
Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs (Derian), and the Director of the Policy Planning
Staff (Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, November 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights Resolution in UNGA
Issue for Decision
Whether the U.S. should vote against or abstain on a draft resolu-
tion in the UN which sets forth guidelines for future work within the
UN system with respect to human rights questions or, alternatively,
join in a consensus adopting the resolution. The vote will likely take
place on December 1.

Essential Factors
Under an agenda item entitled, “Alternative approaches and ways
and means within the United Nations system for improving the effec-
tive enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms,” Iran pro-
posed a draft resolution which concentrates on collective rights at the
expense of individual rights. Subsequently, the co-sponsors accepted
some Western amendments, so that the present draft resolution (at Tab
1) has now gained the co-sponsorship of a few Western States (New
Zealand, Finland and Sweden) and an apparent willingness to go along
with a consensus by most other Western States. USUN informs us that
if there were a vote, the UK, Japan, Ireland and possibly the Nether-
lands, would abstain, while most other Western States would vote yes.
None, however, are planning to call for a vote.

An additional factor is that the vote on the UN resolution to estab-
lish the High Commissioner for Human Rights will come up immedi-
ately after the vote on the Iranian resolution. All bureaus recognize that
Human Rights
the text of the Iranian resolution will significantly influence the future
mandate of the High Commissioner if that Office is established—and
that the vote on the Iranian resolution may influence whether that Of-
fice is established.

We are requesting USUN to seek further amendments to the reso-
lution, but this memorandum assumes it will not succeed.
The Options
Option 1—That we call for a vote and vote against or abstain on the
Iranian resolution. While we are convinced that the resolution warrants
a negative vote, it is recognized that political considerations (particu-
larly unity with allies) might call for the U.S. merely to abstain.
Those supporting this option believe that, while the Iranian resolu-
tion has been somewhat changed for the better since its introduction,
the resolution is still seriously flawed and would result in material
harm to U.S. efforts to protect individual human rights and also in sub-
stantial damage to U.S. economic interests in the North/South dia-
logue. The most basic of the problems in the resolution which leads to
this conclusion are these:
(1) The heart of the resolution is operative paragraph 1(E), which
provides that future UN work with respect to human rights should “ac-
cord or continue to accord priority” to the search for solutions to “the
mass and flagrant violations of human rights” affected by situations such
as apartheid, colonialism, aggression and threats against national sov-
ereignty, refusal to recognize the right of every nation to exercise full
sovereignty over its wealth and natural resources, etc.

The following paragraph (1(F)) states that the realization of “the
New International Economic Order” (NIEO) is an essential element for
the effective promotion of human rights and should also be accorded
priority.

The resolution thus unmistakably provides that, by its terms, fu-
ture UN work in the field of human rights would accord priority status
to collective, as opposed to individual, human rights and also accord
priority to the achievement of “the NIEO.” We do not subscribe to the
view that the achievement of any particular economic or political pro-
gram, such as the NIEO, is essential before persons are accorded the
human rights which are inalienably theirs. Nor can we accept that
“mass” human rights take priority over the individual human rights set
forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the UN Cov-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
enants. The view that the Iranian draft is intended to have these unfor-
tunate results is reinforced by the co-sponsors’ rejection of most of the
proposed Western amendments designed to mitigate and balance the
text between references to both mass violations and violations of the
person. To the argument set out under option 2 that “mass and fla-
grant” is the same standard as the “consistent pattern of gross viola-
tions” referred to in Resolution 15034 and U.S. legislation, it need only
be pointed out that U.S. legislation speaks of such violations as torture,
cruel or degrading punishment or other flagrant denial of the right to
“life, liberty and the security of the person.” The thrust of U.S. legisla-
tion is thus to protect the person and a consistent pattern of violations
of the rights of the person is not equivalent to the collective, or “mass”
rights which are the priority aim of the Iranian resolution. The
co-sponsors’ rejection of proposed amendments makes this distinction
clear. (Proposed amendments sent to USUN are contained in cables at
(2) Given the above, and the recognized influence of the Iranian
resolution on the mandate of any eventual High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the U.S. must register the strongest possible disagree-
ment with the Iranian draft, which, particularly if adopted by con-
sensus, would skewer the High Commissioner’s mandate so as to have
that Office become another advocate of the NIEO and other favorite
causes of the G–77 (colonialism, occupation, self-determination and
“full sovereignty over wealth and natural resources”—the last being
the code term for confiscation of foreign property), as well as causes of
clear human rights concern, notably apartheid and racial discrimina-
tion. It should be noted that the NIEO is considered necessary not for
the realization of full human rights but even for their promotion. The
High Commissioner would thus be required to promote the NIEO as an
element of the promotion of human rights.

(3) U.S. participation in a consensus for the Iranian resolution
would provoke Congressional and other supporters of human rights
who would see in this a marked retreat from the Administration’s posi-
tion on individual human rights. This might stimulate more mandatory
legislative structures, such as the recent Long amendments to the IFI
legislation. Moreover, right-wing forces in the United States already
are mounting a mail campaign against Senate advice and consent to
ratification of the UN human rights Covenants on the ground that they
do not incorporate the protection of private property of the Universal

Human Rights
Declaration. If we support conditioning progress on human rights to
furthering the NIEO, we shall fuel this campaign.

(4) The proposition, in preambular paragraph 9 and operative
paragraph 1 (E), that refusal to recognize a State’s full sovereignty over
its wealth and natural resources constitutes a “mass and flagrant viola-
tion of human rights” undercuts the U.S. position on the relevance of
international law to expropriation of foreign property and runs counter
to existing U.S. legislation which invokes penalties whenever interna-
tional law standards are not met upon an expropriation. The U.S. voted
against the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties6 particularly be-
cause we could not support the G–77’s view of permanent sovereignty
over natural resources. Support for the Iranian resolution would brand
our own position on this fundamental North/South issue as being a
human rights violation. To say that international law can be read into
the language of the resolution is to ignore the explicit rejection of such a
reading over the past years by the G–77, as well as their rejection of a
proposed amendment to the resolution along these lines. (The tenth
preambular paragraph speaks of the “continuing existence of an unjust
international economic order.” This characterization goes far beyond
what the U.S. has previously agreed to and would also have adverse
implications for North/South negotiations.)

(5) The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted by
the UN with the abstention of the Soviet bloc. A consensus adoption of
the Iranian resolution would allow its proponents to argue that the res-
olution has greater international support than the Universal Declara-
tion and should govern interpretation of it.

Option 2—Accept the resolution by consensus, with a statement
clarifying our position on troublesome aspects of the resolution.
Those supporting this option believe that the Iranian resolution is
much improved over the original text and contains good language in
support of individual human rights. Operative paragraph 1 (A), which
is a perfectly acceptable statement of the U.S. position, provides:
“All human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and
interdependent; equal attention and urgent consideration should be
given to the implementation, promotion and protection of both civil
and political, and economic, social and cultural rights.”
Operative paragraph 1 (C) states that all human rights and funda-
mental freedoms of the human person and of peoples are inalienable;
and paragraph 1 (D) speaks of the “need for promotion of the full dig-
nity of the human person.” In addition, an earlier reference to the reso-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
lution constituting a “revaluation” of UN work in the human rights
area has been deleted. Thus, the resolution does not merely deal with
“mass” human rights but supports individual human rights as well.
The priority to be accorded in paragraph 1 (E) would be to “the
search for solutions to the mass and flagrant violations of human rights
of peoples and persons affected by situations such as . . .” The operative
term is mass and flagrant violations of human rights. The priority provision
need not be read as being limited to the situations listed and thus, in the
view of those who support this option, does not necessarily preclude
other situations such as genocide or torture. It also should not be read
as being confined to collective rights since the reference is to the human
rights of “peoples and of persons.” In fact, it may be maintained that
paragraph 1(E) essentially recognizes the existing situation in the
United Nations human rights fora where the principal attention has
been repeatedly given to the mass and flagrant violations of human
rights such as those resulting from apartheid, racial discrimination, and
colonialism. The United States itself has supported priority to this kind
of human rights violation in its strong support for the so-called 1503
procedures, under which the Human Rights Commission has a special
competence to study or investigate situations revealing a consistent
pattern of gross violations of human rights. This, IO and HA maintain,
is the same standard used by Congress in barring security assistance on
human rights grounds in the Foreign Assistance Act.

Paragraph 1(F) would accord priority to the realization of the New
International Economic Order as an essential element for the effective
promotion of human rights. This paragraph does not elevate a partic-
ular category of rights over another, and merely reflects the overriding
concern of the LDCs for economic development. Any problem we may
have with this paragraph could be handled by an explanation of vote.
The references to the exercise of full sovereignty over its wealth
and resources says nothing about the international law pertaining to
expropriation situations. They can, therefore, easily be understood as
being intended to apply in conformity with existing international law.
A negative vote or abstention on the resolution could prejudice the
possibilities of establishing a High Commissioner for Human Rights
and could displease those countries which have argued for amend-
ments to the Iranian text to meet our concerns.

HA believes, with IO, that we can safely join in a consensus adop-
tion of the Iranian text, which has been modified significantly to meet
U.S. concerns. We can cover our remaining reservations in a statement
after the resolution has been adopted. HA notes that the Iranian resolu-
tion will be adopted in any case, with the support of most countries
which share our human rights positions and concerns. It need not be
read as constituting the mandate for the future High Commissioner.

Human Rights
The resolution establishing that Office constitutes a self-contained
mandate.

A positive U.S. gesture on this Iranian-Third World text should en-
hance support for what HA considers to be our primary objective, the
creation of the post of a UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Recommendations
1. That we call for a vote on and abstain on the Iranian resolution,
making an appropriate explanation of vote in either case (calling for a
vote precludes adoption by consensus) (supported by L and EB).
2. That we join in a consensus with a statement setting forth our
problems with the resolution (supported by IO, S/P, USUN and HA).
S/P believes our statement should place special emphasis on the over-
riding importance of the universal declaration of human rights.
3. That if others call for a vote on the Iranian resolution, we then
seek a paragraph-by-paragraph vote; if it is secured, we vote for the
paragraphs which we find acceptable, abstain on paragraphs 1(E) and
1(F), and abstain on the resolution as a whole. We would make clear
that we were using this procedure to emphasize our view that no one
understand our human rights policy if this paragraph is consistent with it.” (Ibid.)

95.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Attached at Tab I is a memorandum for the President outlining a
number of steps we might take in the human rights field. At Tab A is a
new version of the PD we worked on last summer. It now includes a
directive to channel foreign assistance, insofar as possible (i.e., within
the restrictions of statute and previous Presidential directives) to coun-
tries with a good record of observing human rights. The PD is included
not because it contains so much new policy, but because I have come to
believe that it is important to bureaucratic morale. The lack of a PD is
more and more often cited as the reason for the lack of direction in our
human rights programs. In short, there is a vague feeling in the bureau-
cracy that something is missing, and perhaps issuance of the PD will
allow us to go on from here to fill in some of the other gaps.
Human Rights
The reason for all the delay in getting this package to you is that I
have been struggling to find some answers to what I see as the major
problems of our human rights policy. We have pursued the policy on
many fronts. We have:
—taken innumerable diplomatic initiatives expressing concern
over general conditions or specific offenses and encouraging specific
improvements (prisoner releases, elections, etc.);
—pushed countries to accept visits by investigatory or observer
teams from various international agencies;
—worked to strengthen the human rights machinery of both the
UN and the OAS;
—made a fairly large number of general public statements on
human rights, though only a very small number of country-specific
statements;
—signed three international human rights treaties (though we
have done nothing on ratification of any); and
—steadily pursued an honest review of implementation of the Hel-
sinki Final Act at Belgrade.

But without any doubt, the major instrument of our human rights
policy has been our foreign assistance programs—both bilateral and
multilateral, and it is here that the major problems have arisen. Even
without the present statutory requirements, foreign assistance—espe-
cially through the IFIs where our vote is often irrelevant—is a crude in-
strument for pursuing a human rights policy. The legislation adds
many complicating factors, of which the worst are: defining what
makes a “gross and consistent” violator of human rights; and, deciding
when aid “serves the basic human needs” of the recipients.
Because of the Administration’s reluctance to judge any country
(except perhaps Chile) a “gross and consistent violator”, there has been
a consistent tension between our policy and Congressional expecta-
tions. This has fed Congress’ suspicions that, but for its pressure, the
Administration would renege on its commitment to human rights. (I
know this is hard to believe given the President’s deep personal com-
mitment to this policy, but it is what the human rights advocates in
Congress believe.)

Rather than make a sharp and clear determination that a small
number of countries are “gross violators”, the Administration has
turned instead to treating a large number of grey area countries as
more or less under the requirements of the law prescribed for gross vio-
lators. This leads to an uneven policy, uncertain signals being sent out,
and enormous dissension within the government. It also creates a huge
workload, since a policy level group must review every loan and grant

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
to each of more than 30 grey area countries. The group often finds itself
debating whether building a particular road, for example, serves the
basic human needs of the population (is the ability to get goods to
market a basic human need?), or what fraction of a certain loan to Ar-
gentina is going to bring potable water to poor people in Buenos Aires
versus what fraction will be spent on a computer system to improve
billing. There are also more basic questions—is “basic human needs”
the actual services (food, shelter, health care) or is it the money to buy
those things? If it is the latter, then any loan which increases employ-
ment, or even contributes to long term economic development, would
have to be considered to serve the basic human needs of the people.
In the absence of clear determinations or rigid criteria for ranking
countries, we are inevitably led to comparisons of the countries in the
grey area. But how can you usefully compare El Salvador to Romania,
or Guinea to Korea? Counting instances of torture or numbers of polit-
ical prisoners and executions quickly becomes ludicrous. Each country
is so different in its culture, its internal and external threats, its eco-
nomic status, its political traditions, its relations to the US, and its reac-
tion to outside pressure, that the task is impossible to accomplish to
anyone’s satisfaction. Finally there are questions we have not even
begun to address, such as what compensating value should we place
on good observance of economic rights (distribution of wealth particu-
larly) in the same country where political rights are very poor—Korea,
USSR, Iran, etc.

I have gone into this at such length because this is the aspect of our
policy most visible (and sometimes most important) to other nations
and most open to criticism. I can’t help feeling that until we solve these
problems everything else is just tinkering at the margins.
Recommendation:
That you forward the memorandum at Tab 1 to the President.

96.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, December 3, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Outlined below are several human rights initiatives for your con-
sideration. This matter is especially timely because December 10–17 is
Human Rights week (a specific proposal regarding that is made in
item 4).
1. Creation of a Human Rights Foundation
This proposed foundation would be modeled on the Inter-
American Foundation which is a quasi-governmental organization that
receives its money through Congressional appropriation, but has very
loose ties with the government, and makes its own policies. This foun-
dation would:
—funnel money to the international human rights organizations
and to national human rights organizations operating in other coun-
tries (as well as those in the US) based on the value of their work;
—provide badly needed support for refugee resettlement efforts,
including the retraining (language, professional standards, etc.) and
placement of skilled and professional political refugees. In particular,
the Foundation could finance the resettlement of such key indi-
viduals—not in the US where their talents are wasted—but in other
Third World nations badly in need of these skills. Thus the classic
“brain drain” would be redirected in the interest of promoting both
human rights and economic development. The dimensions of this
problem are formidable—reports are, for example, that 40 percent of
the Argentine Physics Society has left Argentina as political refugees;
—support the work of the non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in the multinational organizations, particularly in the UN,
where they are a crucial source of impetus and of information on
human rights violations;
—set up a data bank where the growing volume of information on
alleged human rights violations (and improvements) can be collected,
checked and analyzed. The resources of the data bank would be avail-
able to NGOs, governments and multinational institutions as well as
responsible individuals;
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—issue an annual study reporting on and analyzing trends in
human rights conditions during the previous year. While other organi-
zations already do this (Freedom House for example), every additional
source is helpful. The lack of accurate information is still a hindrance to
the programs of multinational institutions as well as to our own
programs;
—serve as a central clearing house—a place for those who need
help, or who have information to share, to go to;
—set up and award an annual human rights prize, with a sizeable
award comparable to the Nobel, to recognize an outstanding contribu-
tion to human rights anywhere in the world.

Depending on how the legislation creating such a Foundation is
written, the Foundation could have a greater or lesser degree of official
status. For several reasons I believe it would be best to maximize its dis-
tance from the government. This would: provide an independent
source of information from official State Department views; allow the
Foundation to employ foreign nationals who could provide essential
expertise in certain areas, and give the Foundation a slightly multina-
tional (and therefore more credible) image; and protect the Foundation
should any of your successors not share your commitment to human
rights. The Foundation would be run by a Board of Directors including
a majority of private members with some representation of the
Congress and the USG, as well as some non-Americans. I visualize a
relatively small staff with most of the Foundation’s program being im-
plemented through existing organizations.

As to implementation, there are two basic approaches. Either this
can be developed and presented as an Administration initiative, or we
could interest a member of Congress in the idea and let him push it. The
latter approach worked very successfully with the Inter-American
Foundation. The idea for that Foundation was presented at an early
stage to Congressman Dante Fascell, who took it over, saw to its enact-
ment and has since zealously made sure that its appropriations come
through. The disadvantage of this approach, is that you would not get
credit for the idea. Hence I would recommend that it be launched as an
Administration initiative.

Recommendation:
That you authorize detailed development of this proposal.
To be presented as a Presidential initiative
Find a member of Congress to father it

Human Rights
2. Improve Relations with Congress
Relations between Congress and the Administration in the human
rights area are at a very low ebb. It is hard to accept, given your own
deep commitment to this issue, but most human rights advocates in
Congress believe that, were it not for their continuing pressure and vig-
ilance, the Administration would renege on its commitment to human
rights. The situation has been complicated by the fact that the Right
wing has recognized this issue as a golden opportunity to turn a “lib-
eral” issue to its own ends. It became a common pattern this year for
members to be enthusiastically proposing and voting for human rights
restrictions on aid measures and IFI funding bills, only to turn around
and vote against final passage of the bill. Thus we face a strange alli-
ance of both ends of the ideological spectrum that caused us so much
difficulty during this past year with the IFI appropriations and other
issues.

One of the main reasons we have not been able to win Congress’
trust, is that with the best of intentions, we have found it impossible to
implement some of the legislation in this area. A strict interpretation of
the Harkin amendment, for example, would have us create a “hit list”
of “gross and consistent violators” of human rights. Congress did not
think through the damage such a list would do to our overall foreign
policy. This is only one example among many where both Congress
and the Administration would gain from listening to the other in a
quiet and apolitical forum.

Before relations deteriorate further, we should initiate a series of
working meetings—chaired by the Vice President—with the promi-
nent Congressional human rights advocates from both Houses and
both parties. A specific agenda for these meetings would be set through
staff consultations, but with active Congressional participation. It
would be made clear to those invited that they were not being called to
the White House to hear the Administration’s position, but to think
through the problems involved in implementing legislation now on the
books, (as well as other problems) and to actively participate in
working out mutually satisfactory resolutions. As a starting point,
there should be at least one meeting devoted to bilateral assistance pol-
icies (economic and military), and one to the IFIs, with explicit discus-
sion of what Congress really expects from the US delegations. There
should also be a meeting devoted to policies toward the USSR and
Eastern Europe, where we might begin to build a consensus about the
Jackson-Vanik problem. Such a series of meetings is most appropriate
to the White House, not only because we are trying to build trust in Ad-
ministration’s policies in this area, but because ultimately, we would be
asking the Members to rethink their own legislation—something that
could not be done effectively at a lower level.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Recommendation:
That you ask the Vice President to chair a series of meetings as out-
lined above, with staff help from the NSC and the State Department.
3. Targeting of Foreign Assistance to Countries that Respect Human Rights
Existing statutes prescribe certain rules which must be followed in
allocating US foreign assistance (including Security Supporting As-
sistance, AID programs, PL–480 and others), political-military interests
impose additional constraints, as does your recent decision to target US
assistance to poor people, primarily in low income countries. Never-
theless, within these boundaries, there is still flexibility to channel more
money and aid to countries where there is a good, or improving,
human rights record. We follow this policy now in theory, but not in
practice. The country-by-country and program-by-program budgeting
process has simply not provided for this kind of analysis. We should be
able to look at overall assistance levels (from all programs) and over a
period of years be able to point to clear trends—decreases for egregious
violators, increases for others.

Recommendation:
That you approve this policy change.
4. Speech for Human Rights Week
December 10–17 is Human Rights Week. This is an international as
well as a US designation. I recommend that you deliver a short (5–7
minutes) speech on this occasion which USIA would carry to interna-
tional audiences via satellite. Most of the support for your policy
comes from people, rather than governments, and this speech would be
addressed directly to them. It might briefly review human rights im-
provements around the globe during the past year, and then turn to the
setbacks and the magnitude of the problem that lies ahead. In empha-
sizing the global nature of these concerns, the speech should focus on
events in international forums—the UN, the OAS, and Belgrade. It
might indirectly allude to the fact that in 1975, Izvestia hailed the Hel-
sinki Final Act as “a new law of international life” thereby supporting
our claim that human rights concerns transcend national boundaries.
You might also want to address in personal terms, the motivations and
the goals that lie behind US human rights policies. These are only pre-
liminary ideas—if you approve the speech, I will work with Fallows on
a draft for your consideration.
tion. Recently, my staff, working with NGO representatives and Frank
Moore’s office, produced a solid vote count based on written answers of
the Senators. For cloture, where 60 votes are needed, we have 54 solidly
committed in favor, with 15 undecided or leaning in favor. On final
passage where 66 votes are needed (or fewer if some members can be
convinced to take a walk) we have 56 solidly committed, and 13 unde-
cided or leaning in favor. We are beginning to get criticism for the lack
of effort on Genocide, particularly because we have signed three more
human rights treaties this year, and so there is now a total of five
treaties waiting to be ratified. There has also been criticism from
abroad, to the effect that the US will sign anything but then not ratify.
Ratification of the Genocide Treaty must of course wait until after
Panama is resolved, but it should be attempted as soon as possible
thereafter.

Recommendation:
That you request the Vice President to review the feasibility of
making the ratification of the Genocide Treaty a high Administration
priority immediately following resolution of the Panama Canal.
6. Issuance of a Human Rights PD
Attached at Tab A is a draft human rights PD. It formalizes our
human rights policy as it now stands, including the positive targeting
of foreign assistance to countries with good records on human rights. It
also directs a detailed study of the problems connected with implemen-
tation of the Harkin amendment in the IFIs, and the problems and reac-

97.

Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to
President Carter
Washington, December 7, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
I have reviewed the human rights initiatives proposed in Zbig’s
memorandum of December 3 (Tab A) and, by and large, I think they
are excellent. Reviewing the proposals in the order in which they were
presented:
1. Creation of a Human Rights Foundation. I see both pros and cons to
this proposal and think it will require careful exploration. While I have
no strong objection, I do think that we run genuine risks with such a
foundation. It would have a quasi-governmental character. The gov-
ernment would take blame for ineffectiveness or inaction on those diffi-
cult human rights which cannot be resolved immediately. Such a foun-
dation might do no more than duplicate the work of such organizations
as Freedom House and Amnesty International.

Human Rights
However, I realize that there is movement toward such a founda-
tion, and if it is to be created, it would be useful for your Administra-
tion to play a role of leadership and to help shape its charter. I recom-
mend that in the speech you give during Human Rights Week you state
that you have directed the National Security Council to explore the
possibility of such a foundation. Zbig would follow up on this by con-
vening a meeting of Congressional leaders, scholars and repre-
sentatives of private foundations to discuss the proposal. The language
in your speech should be designed to identify you as taking an impor-
tant initiative while at the same time leaving open the door that the de-
cision on establishment of the foundation will depend on the results of
the NSC exploratory process.
2. Relations with the Congress. I am fully in favor of chairing a series
of meetings with members of the Congress to discuss our human rights
objectives and the need to shape legislation genuinely to advance our
human rights goals around the world. I will immediately get to work
with Zbig and his staff to set up these meetings with members of the
Congress.
3. Targeting of Foreign Assistance to Countries that Respect Human
Rights. I concur with this proposal as a basic Administration objective
and the language on this issue in the draft Presidential Directive at-
tached at Tab A does a good job of stating this objective. In my opinion,
it is important to keep such guidelines general. The Administration
will have to live with them; we will be measured by our compliance
with them; and flexibility will be required if we are to comply
satisfactorily.
4. Speech for Human Rights Week. I fully endorse the recommenda-
tion that you deliver a speech next week on human rights. One of the
real strengths of your administration has been the manner in which
you have underscored repeatedly the fundamental importance of
human rights and the fact that this is not an issue of passing interest. As
mentioned above, in your speech you may wish to make reference to
the fact that you have directed the NSC to explore the possibility of a
foundation. It would also be useful to note the steps being taken to es-
tablish a High Commissioner on Human Rights.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
5. Ratification of the Genocide Treaty. At this point, I would recom-
mend against a hard push involving you personally for ratification of
the Genocide Treaty immediately after the Panama Canal Treaties.
There is a strong likelihood that we will, by the Spring of 1978, be
moving from Panama to SALT in the Senate. I doubt that the Genocide
Treaty would move quickly through the Senate, and I think it would be
a mistake to have this the subject of a prolonged, controversial and
emotional Senate debate. Further, I am not at all certain that either
Americans or many people abroad see the Genocide Treaty as being
crucial to the progress we desire on human rights. I would recommend
that we go slow on plans to push for Senate action on the Genocide
Treaty, reassessing this position if it develops that SALT will not be
ready for Senate action. In the meantime, the Secretary of State can
take the appropriate occasion to remind the Senate that we want the
Genocide Treaty to move forward.
6. Issuance of Human Rights Directive. I concur in the desirability of
issuing the proposed directive. It is an excellent idea. Looking to the
implementation of the directive, I think it will be important to tighten
up the interdepartmental group, to make it more assertive. This is an
issue which I think might be useful to discuss with Cy at the next for-
eign policy breakfast meeting.

98.

Memorandum From the President’s Counsel (Lipshutz) to
President Carter
Washington, December 7, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights Policy
Attached is a proposed “Presidential Decision Memorandum”
which I urge you to sign.

Human Rights
I believe that this will be extremely helpful to you and the Secre-
tary of State and Dr. Brzezinski as a meaningful way of reenforcing and
institutionalizing within the State Department bureaucracy this funda-
mental policy of the Administration.

I also believe that it will be of assistance to us in our attempts to de-
fuse the efforts by Congressman Harkins and others to attach manda-
tory provisions to numerous legislative bills which are coming up in
the Congress, by demonstrating your determination to further institu-
tionalize your Human Rights Policy in the State Department.
If you approve this Presidential Decision Memorandum, I will
have it drafted in final form for your signature.
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Office of the White House Counsel

99.

Editorial Note
On December 9, 1977, President Jimmy Carter issued Proclamation
Bill of Rights Day and encouraging Americans to observe international
conference by highlighting the significance of Human Rights Week. He
referenced his personal attempts to “make sure that a concern for
human rights is woven through everything our Government does, both
at home and abroad.” He continued:
“This policy has produced some controversy, but it’s very much in
keeping with the character and the history of our own country. We be-
came an independent nation in a struggle for human rights. And there
have been many such struggles since then, for the abolition of slavery,
for universal suffrage, for racial equality, for the rights of workers, for
women’s rights.

“Not all of these struggles have yet been won. But the freedom and
the vigor of our own national public life is evidence of the rights and
the liberties that we have achieved. I believe that public life every-
where, in all nations, should have that same freedom and vigor.
“We have no wish to tell other nations what political or social
systems they should have, but we want our own worldwide influence
to reduce human suffering and not to increase it. This is equally true

Human Rights
whether the cause of suffering be hunger on the one hand or tyranny on
the other.

“We are, therefore, working to advance a full range of human
rights, economic and social, as well as civil and political.
“The universal declaration and other international human rights
covenants mean that one nation may criticize another’s treatment of its
citizens without regarding each other as enemies. We will continue to
do this, just as we welcome scrutiny and criticism of ourselves as part
of the normal dealings between nations. We have strengthened our for-
eign policy on human rights, and we are letting it be known clearly that
the United States stands for the victims of repression. We stand with
the tortured and the unjustly imprisoned and with those who have
been silenced.”
The President then described various initiatives undertaken in
pursuit of those objectives, including the reduction of military assist-
ance to nations engaged in consistent patterns of rights violations, the
support of international and non-governmental organizations coordi-
nating human rights activities, and an emphasis upon human rights in
relation to U.S. foreign assistance programs. Carter also highlighted
U.S. support for the establishment of a United Nations High Commis-
sioner for Human Rights. The President concluded his remarks on
human rights by noting successes, small and large:
“In the past year, human rights has become an issue that no gov-
ernment on Earth can now afford to ignore. There have been numerous
instances of improvement. Some represent genuine change, some are
only cosmetic in nature. But we welcome them all, because they reflect
a relief of suffering people and persecuted people.

“The results of our human rights policy will seldom be dramatic.
There will be tensions along the way, and we will often be perceived as
either being too rash or too timid. But this is a small risk, compared to
the risk assumed by brave men and women who live where repression
has not yet yielded to liberty.

“My personal commitment to human rights is very strong. The
American people feel as I do. Our Government will continue to express
that commitment and not ever hide it. And we will always encourage
other nations to join us.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pages
The full record of the President’s news conference is ibid., pages

100.

Memorandum From Michael Armacost of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, December 13, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights and our Aid Efforts
At the risk of becoming a bore on this subject, I should like to raise
with you again my concerns about the way human rights consider-
ations are being handled, particularly in relation to our aid programs.
We are injecting political (i.e. human rights) considerations into the dis-
position of loan requests in the international and regional banks in con-
travention of their charters, and despite the fact that we recently
walked out of the ILO on grounds others were “politicizing” that insti-
tution. We are maneuvering ourselves into a position where we ap-
pear to the public and Congress prepared to withhold shipment of
commodities of such basic importance to human welfare as food in
order to advance our concepts of political and civil rights in developing
countries. And this is being done by a sub-Cabinet Committee which in
my judgment operates with extraordinarily sloppy procedures and
without much oversight from the Cabinet members with a stake in their
decisions. My specific concerns are about the procedures.
—The law requires that we not provide PL–480 to countries which
engage in a pattern of gross and consistent violations of human rights.
The Administration has also pledged to use its “voice and vote” to en-
courage International Financial Institutions to allocate funds with sim-
ilar concerns in mind. Yet to my knowledge there has been no formal
determination that any specific country has been adjudged guilty of a
pattern of “consistent and gross violations”.
—More serious, no one in the Human Rights Bureaucracy can de-
fine with any clarity the standards by which such a determination
might be made. The standards against which “consistent and gross” vi-
Human Rights
olations are to be judged have not been clearly specified. On the con-
trary, the Christopher Committee has consciously chosen to hang loose
on this.
—While foreswearing any formal criteria, however, an informal
“hit list” has begun to emerge. With respect to the allocation of PL–480,
Title I assistance, for example, thirteen countries are being asked to ac-
cept special reporting requirements which amount to their admission
that they have engaged in consistent and gross violations. The common
thread that binds these 13 countries is not apparent to the untrained
eye. I expect this list, designed for PL–480, will acquire a measure of
“legitimacy” when it comes to determining those who are to be penal-
ized when other forms of assistance are being distributed.
—Nor have I seen much evidence that the Human Rights bureau-
cracy is very interested in results. At least in the EA area my colleagues
at State inform me that they are rarely questioned by D/HA about the
consequences of particular measures—e.g. a statement, a loan, an arms
transfer, etc.—on the human rights situation in a particular country in
the mid-term. The concern of the bureaucracy seems more clearly di-
rected at dissociating the U.S. from manifestations of what particular
individuals regard as unsavory political practices in other countries,
rather than achieving concrete and tangible advances in human rights
within the context of what is realistic and practicable in a given country. I
cannot help but wonder whether in this area we are operating on the
basis of the “Me-generation’s” Golden Rule: “If it feels good, do it”—an
approach which reduces foreign policy to a form of personal therapy. I
believe Max Weber’s essay “Politics as a Vocation” provides a more re-
liable guide to responsible ethical conduct. It counsels less perfec-
tionism and more professionalism—an effort to grasp the longer term
consequences of our actions than is apparent in our current methods.
—Our expectations must be tailored to specific national situations
and framed in terms of long-term trends. We cannot manage a sensible
policy in terms of yesterday’s headlines. The recent decisions of the
Human Rights Committee, however, are ad hoc and improvisational.
Trends appear less important than current events—to wit, our absten-
tion on the Philippine loan was explicable in terms of the Aquino sen-
tence. Worse yet, we introduced new reporting requirements from In-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
donesia in the PL–480 contracts the very week that the GOI supplied us
decision can only be regarded by the Indonesians as an insult—evi-
dence that their concrete measures undertaken largely to accommodate
our concerns result merely in new, insensitive, bureaucratic intrusions
into their affairs. To date the Human Rights Committee has not devel-
oped much skill in developing longer term human rights objectives in
relation to particular countries, or in relating its activities to longer-
term trends. Our policy exhibits as a result a sporadic and punitive as-
pect which arouses resentment.

I understand—though I have not seen the draft—that an effort is
under way to define our human rights policy guidelines in a PD. It is
my own judgment that before issuing any further guidelines on the
subject, it would be very healthy to have a detached outside observer of
impeccable and unquestioned balance and judgment come in and un-
dertake a quiet survey of our human rights policy. With nearly a year
behind us, it is time for sober reflection and a systematic appraisal of
our performance to date by someone who has no axe to grind. We need
to consolidate those initiatives which have genuine promise; to weed
out those practices which are harmful and mischievous; and, above all,
to rationalize our procedures in ways which will assure that human
rights considerations are taken into account but do not overwhelm all
other aspects of our foreign policy.

I don’t have any candidates for such a review in mind, though Inis
Claude7 has always struck me as a man who manages to combine ide-
alism and hard-headedness. My point is not to identify the person. If
you agree with the merit of such a review, I’m sure the right person can
be found.

Recommendation:
That you and David meet with Jessica, Tom Thornton, Mike Ok-
senberg, myself, and any other interested parties on the Staff to con-
sider procedures for integrating human rights concerns with other for-
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, December 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Armacost’s Memorandum on Human Rights
I disagree with virtually all of the specifics Mike cites and believe
they should all be seen in a different light. For example:
—Mike says that “We appear to the public and Congress prepared
to withhold shipment of commodities of such basic importance to
human welfare as food in order to advance our concepts of political
and civil rights”. In fact what we are doing is precisely the opposite—
adopting new procedures to try to insure that the food aid goes to the
people who are really hungry, and not to speculation or to balancing
trade deficits. Several talks on the Hill with both members and staff
lead me to believe that (after the brief scare that our surpluses might
not be shipped at all) Congress both understands and supports what
we are doing.
—The decision to avoid defining precise and clear standards of
what constitutes “a consistent pattern of gross violations” of human
rights is not the result of sloppy procedures, but was consciously taken
after much thought, including consideration at the Cabinet level (as
well as an explicit directive from yourself). The reasoning was that
global standards for such a thing would have little meaning and would
overly rigidify our policy.
—Mike’s concern that the PL–480 list will become a de facto hit list
for other programs has little grounds, since none of the other programs
in which actions have been taken have acquired such standing. Why
should this one?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Mike asserts that human rights decisions should be based on
long term trends. I fully agree. But the two examples he chooses to il-
lustrate this point do not support his argument. In the case of In-
donesia, we clearly ignored the short term event (release of the pris-
oners) and based our decision on the long term pattern. Yet Mike
objects. In the Philippine case we did not base the decision on the
Aquino sentencing (though it was probably a contributing factor in
some people’s minds) as we subsequently informed the Philippines.
—On the question of whether the human rights bureaucracy is in-
different to results, I also disagree. While Derian’s staff is far from per-
fect, they are extremely well informed. Perhaps EA doesn’t hear from
them because D/HA reads all the same cables. I don’t know. Again,
however, the question of time frame is relevant here. It is questionable
whether day to day events are of as much importance as longer term
trends. The regional desks may have to worry about every little blip in
our relations, but there should be someone who stands back and looks
at the overall pattern. For example, much too much has been made, in
my opinion, of Indonesia’s initial rejection of the new PL-480 reporting
requirements. Indonesia has now accepted the requirements, and
looking back a year from now, I suspect that the entire incident will be
seen as totally insignificant—while the principle that food aid should
go to people who are hungry will have been advanced.

Having said all this, I want to emphasize that—as you know—I
share Mike’s unease with our policy in the IFIs and with the Harkin
amendment in general. That is the reason why the draft PD calls for a
rather extensive study of this issue. I would have no objection (in fact I
think it would be useful) if outside people were involved in this effort
as Mike suggests, though I don’t believe the study should be done
wholly by outsiders.

Human Rights
101.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Congressional Relations (Bennet) to the Deputy Secretary
of State (Christopher)
Washington, December 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Consolidating Human Rights Policy
Our human rights policy has been in operation for eleven months.
We are administering it with increasing finesse, I believe, but the shoe
is pinching in a number of places. We witnessed the farm lobby’s reac-
tion in the PL 480 case, we are hearing from districts with substantial
arms industries; and within the State Department there appears to be
growing restlessness as people grapple with the complexities of imple-
mentation. The AFSA President’s complaint about the human rights
policy appears to have some currency among Foreign Service Officers,
and I am also told that there are questions within the Department about
the Secretary’s and the President’s fundamental commitment to human
rights policy.

Under these circumstances, the possibility of a real-politik backlash
both on the Hill and in the Department seems very real. To be sure,
Congress is still prepared to vote for extreme human rights amend-
ments. The IMF, which is hardly a viable tool for promoting human
rights, will be the next target. This kind of zealotry in the cause of
human rights could, however, ultimately make the policy ludicrous
and accelerate a backlash.

I believe our objectives for the time being should be to:
—stabilize our present position, avoiding all new legislation;
—pursue vigorously the mandate Congress and the President
have given us;
—smooth out our administrative techniques; and
—garner as much credibility for the policy as we can by broad-
casting its successes.

Here are some concrete steps which might be considered:
1. Frame a legislative strategy to forestall any further human rights
amendments during the next session. I have asked Ann Swift to work
on this. Her effort will include a review of the Security Assistance Bill
for hooks.
ited Official Use; Nodis.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2. Produce a year-end summary of human rights successes, and
possibly a modest set of goals for the next year.
3. Hold one meeting with Assistant Secretaries and their Deputies
where you and the Secretary, working in tandem, make it clear that we
not only intend to continue our efforts on this difficult policy but be-
lieve it is working. An even better alternative would be a State dining
room session with the President.
4. Hold a series of human rights colloquia for Department officers
who must administer the human rights policy. The target groups might
include desk officers or Deputy Assistant Secretaries in regional bu-
reaus—whoever is most likely to make or break the human rights
policy in its day-to-day application.
5. Review our intra-Departmental procedures in the human rights
areas to ensure that they are not generating needless friction.
6. Undertake a public relations effort to ensure that the right things
are said in the year-end news wrap-ups, the State of the Union Mes-
sage, etc.

102.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)
Washington, January 5, 1978
SUBJECT
Assessment of Human Rights Accomplishments

103.

Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State
Vance in Budapest
Tosec 130174/3036. For the Secretary from Warren Christopher.
Subject: Evening Reading.

[Omitted here is information unrelated to P.L. 480 and human
rights.]
negotiated and signed with nine governments, covering 2. million
metric tons of commodities (approximately 50 percent of the total Title
I program for FY–1978). Purchase and shipment of most of these com-
modities are expected to begin in the next several weeks. Negotiations
have been authorized or are underway with another nine countries,
covering nearly 750,000 tons of commodities. These negotiations
should be completed in the next two weeks, with purchase and ship-
million tons, are still under consideration by the inter-agency staff com-
mittee chaired by the Department of Agriculture.

In light of the recent amendment that brings human rights consid-
erations to bear on the Title I program, we have thus far asked six
countries with serious human rights problems to agree to a new provi-
sion in the PL 480 agreement which, in essence, provides that the food
or the proceeds from its sale will be used to benefit the needy. Fol-
lowing is the status of Title I programming in these six countries.
—Indonesia: The Indonesians accepted the new provision and the
agreement has been signed. We are advised that they will probably
start to purchase the commodities in the next few days.
—Korea and Bangladesh: The new provision has been accepted
and negotiations are nearing completion. Shipments can be scheduled
soon thereafter.
—Somalia: Negotiations have just begun. We believe the Somali
Government will not object to the language.
cret; Immediate; Cherokee; Nodis. Drafted by Lamb; cleared by Tarnoff; approved by
Christopher. Vance was in Budapest, January 5–7, participating in a ceremony honoring

104.

Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research
Washington, January 11, 1978
Progress and Retrogression in Human Rights in 1977
Near East and South Asia
India. Following a free and fair election, the new government of
Morarji Desai restored fundamental rights guaranteed under the Con-
stitution and freedom of the press. It has yet to repeal other measures
designed to maintain internal security, however.

Iran. The military justice and penal codes were revised to provide
for open civil court trials of political prisoners (formerly tried in camera
by military courts). The government also liberalized restrictions on
public expression and recognized the distinction between dissidents
and terrorists, although demonstrators continued to be dealt with se-
verely. In 1977, almost 500 political prisoners were released from
prison, and some were pardoned.

Pakistan. Despite the introduction of martial law following the
coup last year, the Zia regime’s record on human rights has reflected
improvement. Most political prisoners have been released, the press
publishes more freely than has been allowed for years, the judiciary’s
independence has been strengthened, and Amnesty International has
fidential. Prepared by David Carpenter (INR/DDR/GIS) and INR/DDR/GIS analysts.
According to a January 11 covering memorandum from Carpenter to Oxman, INR pre-
pared the paper in response to Christopher’s request to Saunders for material to be used
in Christopher’s address to the American Bar Association, scheduled to meet in New Or-
leans, Louisiana, in February. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
been invited to attend court sessions. However, elections scheduled for
October 1977 were postponed until the completion of former Prime
Minister Bhutto’s trials for political corruption and murder, according
to General Zia, the Chief Martial Law Administrator.

Sri Lanka. The lifting of Mrs. Bandaranaike’s six-year-old state of
emergency in February resulted in the release of many former insur-
gents who had been held without trial. Mrs. Bandaranaike held earlier-
postponed elections in July 1977. Her successor, Prime Minister Jaya-
wardene, fulfilled a campaign promise by releasing in November the
last of the insurgents convicted in 1971; he also repealed the 1972 Crim-
inal Justice Commission Act.

Bangladesh. Several thousand prisoners were released and local
elections were held, although an unknown number of political pris-
oners remain jailed and several minor political parties were proscribed
as a result of army mutinies against the martial law regime.
Morocco. The government continues to repress radical elements
suspected of plotting to overthrow the regime, but the trend in recent
months has been toward greater freedom and political liberalization.
Domestic press censorship has been lifted, relatively free parliamentary
elections were held in which all parties participated, and a new cabinet
has been formed with multi-party participation.

Nepal. Political parties have been banned since 1960, and the
country remains, in effect, an absolute monarchy. On the other hand,
the government released virtually all political prisoners in 1977, in-
cluding Nepal’s leading dissident, B.J. Koirala, who was released from
jail for medical treatment in the US. Koirala was re-imprisoned on his
return to Kathmandu, however.

Latin America
Hemispheric attention was focused on the human rights issue to
an unprecedented degree as a result of a combination of domestic cir-
cumstances and pressures from outside governmental, private, media,
and UN sources.

Some advances can be noted.
—Significant political releases occurred in Chile, Haiti, the Domin-
ican Republic, Paraguay, and Peru.
—State of siege regulations were lifted in Jamaica, El Salvador, and
Nicaragua.
—Barbados, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Trin-
idad, and Venezuela joined the US as advocates of human rights
compliance.
—The OAS meeting in Grenada endorsed the work of the Inter-
American Human Rights Commission and committed the member
states to renewed efforts on behalf of human rights observance.

Human Rights
—In Chile, the secret police, DINA, has been altered in form and its
power apparently diminished, and fewer reports of abuses of the indi-
vidual have been received.
—In Nicaragua, there has been a significant decrease in reports of
violations of the integrity of the person.
—In El Salvador, President Romero has acted with considerable
restraint and regard for human rights considerations in dealing with a
potentially explosive internal political situation.

On the other hand, authoritarian regimes that have, in some cases,
proven to be insensitive to human rights considerations continue to
rule millions in Latin America.
—In Argentina, the rate of disappeared persons remains un-
changed, reports of official torture continue to be received, and there is
convincing evidence that government security personnal continue to
operate in vigilante fashion—all of this in the context of a decreasing
terrorist threat as a result of successful counter-terrorist action by the
government.
—In Uruguay, progress continues to be blocked by the gov-
ernment’s unwillingness or inability to take effective measures to re-
solve its serious human rights problem, as manifested especially with
regard to its continuing negative attitude toward a visit by the Inter-
American Human Rights Commission.
—Paraguay remains an authoritarian state whose affairs are con-
ducted in some ways at the personal whim of President Stroessner and
with little regard for the rights of individuals on his part.
—Cuba continues to hold thousands of political prisoners (esti-
mated by some to be as many as 20,000.)

Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
Soviet authorities made a major and rather successful effort in 1977
to weaken the dissident movement. In Eastern Europe, while the
human rights picture continued to be mixed, all of the governments
there remained repressive by US standards.

Soviet Union. Soviet tactics against dissidents minimized poten-
tially embarrassing dissident activity during the Belgrade Conference
and the October Revolution anniversary celebrations. Although the
Shcharanskiy case was drawing greater attention in the West than the
Soviets probably expected, they apparently were able to break up em-
bryonic human rights movements in the Ukraine, Armenia, Lithuania,
and Georgia. The Soviet tactics include isolating dissidents:
—from the West, through harassment of Western correspondents,
inhibiting contacts with embassy officials, and interfering with the flow
of mail from abroad;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—from one another, through internal exile, voluntary and invol-
untary emigration, and intimidation; and
—from the Soviet public, by moves ranging from press attacks to
arrests and incarceration.

Despite these measures, dissidents remain active, though some are
disheartened. Others continue their personal contacts with Westerners,
and new members are joining the small group monitoring the Helsinki
accords.
crease over 1976 (14,875).

Eastern Europe. Life for non-conformists in Eastern Europe remains
difficult. Some easing of restrictions has occurred in some countries,
while the situation has retrogressed in others.

Polish and Hungarian authorities broadened official tolerance of
diversity in 1977, and in Poland, the authorities have engaged in an in-
creasingly meaningful dialogue with regime critics. Yugoslavia con-
tinues to maintain a relatively liberal approach to individual rights. In
contrast, the official Czechoslovak approach to human rights has been
extremely strict, involving trials, harassment, intimidation, and job de-
nials. Three countries (Yugoslavia, Poland, and Romania) declared
broad amnesties affecting a number of political prisoners.
Most of the East European countries, however, have sought to deal
with human rights concerns through a variety of expedients designed
to minimize international criticism while precluding meaningful in-
ternal change. A favorite device has been to pressure dissidents to emi-
grate, thereby avoiding the need for further sanctions against the indi-
vidual while at the same time reducing domestic dissidence.
East Asia and the Pacific
Key non-Communist countries in the area demonstrated marked
sensitivity, and in some cases, responsiveness to foreign human rights
criticism and pressures. The primary human rights violators in the
area, however, continued to be the Communist states, particularly
Cambodia, North Korea, Vietnam, and Laos.

South Korea. In response to international opinion and pressures
during 1977, the government relaxed press censorship, improved
living conditions for imprisoned dissidents, and handled student pro-
tests in October with restraint. While the government continued to ar-
rest and try violators of Emergency Measure 9 (EM–9), by year’s end it
released 16 well-known political prisoners in exchange for statements
of repentance. Other EM–9 prisoners, including Kim Tae Chung, are
expected to either be released or have their sentences reduced in 1978.
Indonesia. The government on December 20 carried out its pledge
to release 10,000 prisoners who had been arrested and detained fol-

Human Rights
lowing the Communist coup attempt in 1965. Approximately 20,000
more remain in detention camps. Officials plan to release 10,000 in
1978, and the remainder by the end of 1979. There is no evidence from
any source to support Amnesty International’s allegation that upwards
of2 90,000 political prisoners still remain in detention.
Thailand. The assumption of power by the Kriangsak government
on November 11 brought an end to press censorship, a more relaxed at-
titude toward political opposition, and introduced a period of more
open internal political dialogue. The new government, demonstrating
increasing sensitivity to international human rights pressures, also per-
mitted legal counsel for the 18 students now on trial for their activities
at the time of the Thammasat University riots in late 1976. Approxi-
mately 3,000 other students arrested at the time have been released.
Philippines. Although President Marcos frequently gave lip service
to his government’s concern for the rights of the individual, there was
little or no progress in the human rights area during 1977. Marcos con-
tinues to exercise highly centralized control over the political life of the
country through his use of martial law powers. Occasional reports of
torture by security personnel continue to be received, and political op-
position sources allege that few if any of the 1,000 detainees released
during the summer were political dissidents. Marcos’ main political
opponent, Senator Aquino, is still in prison awaiting a reopening of his
trial, despite the fact that a military tribunal had earlier sentenced him
to death for treason.

Africa
The main human rights preoccupation of all African countries in
1977 was the intensification of repression in South Africa, which was
dominated by the major crackdown on black political activity there on
October 19. There is no evidence that any of those who were arrested
at that time have been released. Despite condemnation of Africa’s racist
policies throughout the world, furthermore, prospects for any signifi-
cant improvement in the overall situation are dim, at best.
Many African leaders regard human rights as an essentially
Western political concept which does not reflect the needs and realities

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of their societies at this stage of development. In common with other
Third World countries, they place a higher priority on the integrity of
the group as opposed to the individual, and on economic development
and basic human needs as opposed to political and civil rights.
At the same time, however, some countries have reflected growing
sensitivity to outside criticism and have taken steps in 1977 to improve
their human rights reputation:
—Guinea announced the release of 62 political prisoners in
December;
—Togo announced the release of 25 political prisoners in April;
—Ethiopia announced the release of 828 prisoners in June and 894
in September (no significant political prisoners are believed to have
been included); and
—Malawi is believed to have released nearly all of its political
prisoners.

On the other hand, perhaps as many as several thousand political
prisoners are reported to be in prison and reeducation camps in Mo-
zambique, and large-scale executions are reported to have taken place
in Angola and Ethiopia. There is no improvement in the situation in
Uganda. The situation there is of considerable concern to African polit-
ical elites, however, who recognize the seriousness of the problem,
even in those cases where they are reluctant to express themselves pub-
licly about it.
105.

Action Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, January 20, 1978
The Human Rights Policy: An Interim Assessment
The attached memorandum takes stock of the human rights policy,
one year on. It begins with a description of what we have done, and es-
Human Rights
pecially of how much the policy actually has affected our economic or
military programs. This review is useful to have, but may be the least
interesting part of the paper.

You might want to begin with our assessment of accomplishments
(pp 5–6) and of whether there have been setbacks (to human rights, on
cusses the problem of consistency: ways in which we are being less, or
perhaps in some cases more, consistent than we should aim for (pp
The
memorandum
ends
with
recommendations
for
future
directions:
—A Presidential Decision would help to clarify to the bureaucracy
how the President views the policy, its application, and the range of in-
struments being used. (A draft reportedly is with the President).
—We badly need country strategy papers3 that will integrate our
human rights interests with other American concerns in each country,
and give useful guidance for coherent application of all our instru-
ments of influence.
—Our country strategies should try to emphasize what is most
likely to be effective in improving human rights situations, rather than
what decisions will make us look consistent.
—We need better procedures to integrate our economic with our
military assistance decisions.
—We have hard choices to make on compliance with the legal re-
quirements about our role in International Financial Institutions.
—We should look for more ways to multilateralize our human
rights efforts, both to reduce suspicions of a smug American moralism
and to further enlist the weight of world opinion in conjunction with
our efforts.
—We should draw more attention to what we are doing to correct
our human rights problems in this country.
briefing memorandum, noting that he had “read and reread the memorandum S/P has
prepared assessing the human rights policy, and think it is a commendable piece of
work.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—We need to do a better job of explaining, at home and abroad,
the complexities of our policy and the reasons for some apparent
inconsistencies.

The memorandum was written by my staff and we take responsi-
bility for its judgments. But we have solicited the opinions of many
others—in HA, D, EB, H, T, IO, the regional Bureaus, and AID. Most
were eager to express what they do and don’t like about how the policy
is working and the paper tries to reflect their opinions, with indications
of important disagreements within this building. Some still think
the overall tone and thrust are wrong. Comments range from “Polly-
annaish” to “overly negative”.

We believe this memorandum might be useful at the White
House, and suggest that it be sent under cover of a Tarnoff-Brzezinski
memorandum.

Attachment
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
The Human Rights Policy: An Interim Assessment
The human rights policy is off to a good start but, to no one’s sur-
prise, problems remain. In the following paragraphs we apply hind-
sight to the year’s experience, with deliberate emphasis on problem
areas and what now needs to be done.

I. What Are We Actually Doing?

Human rights advocacy has become a standard, visible, and im-
portant feature of our diplomacy. The President has repeatedly empha-
sized that it is a cardinal tenet of his foreign policy—a theme you and
other key officials have elaborated in speeches. Early in the Adminis-
tration we signed the UN Covenants and the American Convention on
pervasiveness of such exchanges makes them hard to quantify or even
summarize. But their impact in conveying our seriousness should not
be underestimated.

We also have had some months of experience with using more
concrete instruments of American influence: bilateral aid programs; In-
ternational Financial Institutions; and security relationships. These two
kinds of actions—diplomatic exchanges and use of our material sup-
port—are closely related. For example, we generally put a government
on specific notice that particular human rights problems would cause
us to oppose loans to it before actually abstaining or voting no. We
often use the occasion of a positive vote to make some form of human
rights demarche—warning that continued positive votes will be diffi-
cult absent improvement, or advising that only certain apparent or
promised improvements make it possible for us to be positive.
Bilateral Aid
Our bilateral aid programs are designed to serve basic human
needs, and so intrinsically promote human rights. Consequently, only
in extraordinary circumstances have we cut or delayed programs in
order to signal objection to a repressive government:
—We are suspending new programs to the Central African Em-
pire, partly in response to Congressional pressure;
—We have been deferring decision on some loans to Nicaragua
since mid-September, in order to assess what appear to be human
rights improvements there;9
—After press reports of our decision to delay some assistance to
Chile, Santiago cancelled our FY 77 program and it is not in future AID
budgets;10
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—We have reduced the PL 480 allocation to Guinea, and in-
creased it to Peru, on human rights grounds;
—We appear to have indefinitely delayed one CCC credit to Chile,
and the Interagency Group on Foreign Assistance and Human Rights is
also available for advice to ExIm when the latter requests (as it has done
on Uruguay and Argentina).

But most of our bilateral effort has focused not on determining
who is a deserving recipient of aid, but rather on ensuring that it does
in fact promote human rights:
—$750,000 was earmarked in AID’s FY 78 budget for projects
which promote civil and political rights (e.g., legal aid for the poor).
—We are beginning to implement the new legislative requirement
that human rights violators which receive PL 480 Title I assistance re-
port on how food or the proceeds from its sale is used to “directly ben-
efit needy people.” Reporting requirements have been signed with In-
donesia and Guinea and negotiations are underway with Bangladesh,
South Korea, Zaire and Somalia. They may begin with a few others.
Human rights concerns may cut more deeply into AID pro-
grams—including country allocations—in the future, beginning with
the 1979 budget. This is a difficult and controversial business since,
even though AID money can be reprogrammed to other countries, we
would be reducing aid specifically designed to benefit needy people in
a particular country in order to express disapproval of their gov-
ernment and try to influence its performance on civil or political
human rights.

The International Financial Institutions
The human rights policy has had greater—and more visible—im-
pact on our role in International Financial Institutions, especially on
loans for industrial development which seldom meet the “basic human
needs” criteria. Since the Carter Administration took office we have
abstained from voting on eleven loans on human rights grounds (to
sions Taken by the Inter-Agency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Economic
Assistance, May–October 1977,” October 21; ibid.) According to the NSC Global Issues
Cluster’s January 16, 1978, evening report: “The human rights situation in Guinea appears
to have improved significantly largely in response to American and other Western pres-
sure. Sekou Toure ordered the release of at least 62 political prisoners during De-
cember—the largest single political amnesty in Guinea’s history. Toure apparently in-
tends to release all political prisoners by the end of 1978.” Brzezinski wrote in the margin
next to this statement, “shouldn’t we react?” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Re-

Human Rights
Ethiopia, Benin, Argentina, the Philippines, Korea and the CAE) and
voted against seven (to Chile, Argentina and Guinea).

We have not thus far formally opposed any loans when our oppo-
sition would have meant their defeat. We only have veto power over
the IDB’s Fund for Special Operations (FSO), and in several cases we
have indicated that we might oppose an FSO loan if it came to a vote; in
most, the applicant government has chosen to hold it back. Some
$143,252,000 worth of loans are currently being held up because of our
action—to Chile, Paraguay, Uruguay and Nicaragua.

Few other participants in IFI deliberations have joined us in op-
posing loans on human rights grounds. West European opposition to
loans for the Pinochet regime began before ours. Venezuela recently
abstained on one loan to Chile. British and Swedish representatives in
the IDB recently put on record that they would have opposed a loan to
Argentina had they national votes; but the European regional group of
which they are a part cast its collective vote in favor.
Security Assistance and Sales
Human rights considerations have become perhaps the dominant
factor in arms transfers to Latin America. This has resulted from a com-
bination of factors: Congressional prohibitions (to Argentina and Uru-
guay); refusals of our security assistance by Brazil, El Salvador, and
Guatemala in response to our reporting to Congress on their human
rights situations; the low risk of Soviet inroads if our arms flows are re-
duced; and, possibly, the relatively small economic importance to us of
arms sales in the area. Most cases involving major lethal equipment to
serious violators have not been approved, at least absent progress on
human rights. However, some significant non-lethal items (e.g.,
C–130’s to Argentina) as well as some spare parts, still are approved
after careful review.

The great bulk of our arms transfers, however, are to East Asia and
the Middle East, and they have been only marginally affected by
human rights considerations. We have, for instance, opposed economic
loans in IFI’s to both South Korea and the Philippines and are including
Korea and Indonesia among the problem countries which must report
on their use of PL 480 Title I. But base negotiations in the Philippines
and troop withdrawal considerations in Korea have thus far led us to
continue very large security assistance programs to both. There has
been some impact on security relations with Indonesia, where sale of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
F–5 aircraft was made contingent on the actual freeing of some political
prisoners whose release already was scheduled.

The East Asian record will be somewhat better in 1979. Human
rights considerations have contributed to adjustments in allocations,
especially for military training, for Indonesia, the Philippines, and
Thailand. This probably is known by the recipient governments (al-
though they could rationalize their cuts as flowing from Congressional
reduction of the overall budget). But the general public perception is
likely to be of continued high levels of security assistance.
Similarly, in the Middle East, our desire to move Arabs and Israelis
toward a peace settlement and the importance of Mideast oil have kept
arms sales high.

Nor have the human rights considerations cut into arms transfers
to black Africa, either because the amounts sold are minimal or because
of an interest in supporting “moderate” governments (e.g., Morocco
and Zaire).

Finally, although we are working toward a policy of reviewing
straight commercial sales to police forces of items not on the munitions
list, no decision has yet been reached.

II. Human Rights Accomplishments and Setbacks
What Have We Accomplished?

The human rights policy has helped us at least as much as it has
produced changes abroad. Our post-Vietnam, post-Watergate image
has been greatly improved. To a large degree we have taken the ideo-
logical initiative from the Soviets. This boosts our standing—and that
of traditional friends—in Europe, and helps in our relations with a
number of LDC’s. The policy is especially appealing—and encour-
aging—to many people living under repressive regimes.

This underscores what many of us frequently forget—the US is a
model for many countries; our influence transcends our political, eco-
nomic, and military power and is strikingly important in ethical, cul-
tural, and value areas; other governments find themselves unable en-
tirely to ignore the impact of US policy and actions—particularly when
we join action to rhetoric.

Our championship of human rights is encouraging others to do
likewise. Activity in the UN and OAS has picked up considerably, and
the OAS and Red Cross human rights commissions are being allowed
into countries which previously excluded them. The West Europeans
are more active both in international fora and in diplomatic dialogue
with problem countries. Once-lonely private activists now find them-
selves deluged with invitations to conferences. Some who long have
been working to advance human rights have taken new hope from the

Human Rights
Administration’s policies; others doubtless are bandwagon-hopping.
But they all contribute to a growing international lobby which com-
bines its influence with our own.

Most important, this increased international focus already has led
to human rights improvements in several countries. Significant
numbers of political prisoners have been released, in Iran, Poland, Mo-
rocco, Bangladesh, Pakistan, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Togo,
Nepal, the CAE, Guinea and Indonesia. Iran and Thailand are opening
trials of political prisoners for the first time. Emigration from the Soviet
Union, some East European states, and Syria, has become a little easier.
In some of these countries there also has been back-sliding; moreover,
we often question whether an improvement is more than cosmetic.
Nonetheless, the overall balance is decidedly positive.

No authoritarian regime has fundamentally altered its political
system, nor are the hard-core dictatorships likely to take action which
they would perceive (in some cases rightly) as political suicide. But
some political systems are becoming somewhat freer. The opposition
in Brazil is increasingly active. El Salvador and Nicaragua have lifted
states of seige. Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador have announced intentions
to hold elections in 1978. The most notable advances in political
freedom—in India, Portugal and Spain—were independent of our
human rights advocacy; but democratic forces in all three seem to be
taking heart from our new focus.

In sum, a trend seems to have begun which could gather mo-
mentum and which already is improving the plight of individuals—in-
cluding those under some still-authoritarian regimes. And since indi-
viduals are what the human rights policy is primarily about, even the
scattered and partial successes registered to date are important. More-
over, even marginal reductions in repression offer more latitude to dis-
sidents, which in turn contributes to an internal dynamic that may pro-
duce further change.

It is neither possible nor very useful to specify the precise weight
of our influence in these developments. The important thing is that we
are contributing to an international consciousness-raising and a climate
conducive to human rights improvements.

Are We Jeopardizing Human Rights Anywhere?

Maybe, at least in the near-term. Worry about the “destabilizing”
effect of international attention to human rights may lead some author-
itarian regimes to tighten domestic screws. This may already have hap-
pened in the Soviet Union and South Africa, where the governments

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
fear that our human rights advocacy has or might stimulate critics of
the regime. In both, however, many of those most affected seem to
want us to continue our efforts; they apparently believe that the
near-term risk is in their own long-range interest.

There may be similar risks elsewhere. In South Korea, for instance,
the regime now seems eager to resolve differences with us. But it is pos-
sible that human rights behavior, combined with withdrawal of our
ground combat troops and the “Koreagate” probe, could produce a
seige mentality which would make easing of repression less likely, or
indeed even reduce tolerance for domestic dissent.

III. Are We Damaging Other US Interests?

Not yet in any quantifiable way, although the risk always is
present when we are pursuing several interests at once.

Eastern Europe
Soviet leaders fear the human rights policy, which they see as an
effort to discredit them in world opinion and to undermine the political
systems of the Warsaw Pact states. Our early high profile contacts with
leading Soviet dissidents, combined with our initial SALT proposals,
did badly rock the relationship. And we cannot know just how a gen-
eral unhappiness with the human rights policy affects the atmosphere
of Soviet decision-making across the board. But it does not, in fact,
seem yet to have interfered with SALT and other arms control negotia-
tions, or US-Soviet dealings in other areas, where the Soviets seem to be
pursuing their specific interests much as usual. Indeed the improve-
ment in US-Soviet relations following the SALT breakthrough during
Gromyko’s September visit to Washington17 has survived even the
human rights beating Moscow has been taking at the Belgrade CSCE
conference. The spillover might in fact work the other way: progress on
SALT may be making Soviet leaders more willing (within limits) to
stomach our human rights position.

Human Rights
Latin America
Several Latin American governments are at least as unhappy with
our promotion of human rights as the Soviets. With some like Uruguay,
Paraguay, and Nicaragua, our bilateral interests are so modest that our
prime interest is human rights. This could, of course, become a situa-
tion in which the sum is greater than the parts: if enough such gov-
ernments become sufficiently angry over our human rights approach,
there could be a spillover effect which damaged the OAS, and our in-
terests in it. But this is not yet the case: to the contrary, last summer’s
OAS General Assembly was notable for a surge of human rights
enthusiasm.

And in those Latin American countries where we have more at
stake, no concrete damage seems to have been done. Our severe criti-
cism of Argentina’s human rights record did not prevent it from
agreeing to make some nuclear non-proliferation commitments during
the Secretary’s November visit; and it is highly unlikely that Brazil
would have agreed to forego its reprocessing agreement with West
Germany even had we had no human rights policy. We cannot know
what price we might one day pay for the deterioration in our once close
military relationships with Brazil and Argentina. That obviously de-
pends in part on the political evolution of the countries themselves—an
evolution to which the human rights policy, if successful, could con-
tribute positively.

Middle East
The impact of our human rights policy on US interests in Middle
Eastern countries has been modest. Few of them are recipients of eco-
nomic assistance and, as noted, we have not put primary emphasis on
human rights considerations, in view of our other pressing interests,
when deciding on arms sales or determining our approach to the area
generally. The quiet diplomacy we have undertaken in the region has
been palatable to the governments concerned, and shown some success
(e.g., in increased Jewish emigration from Syria).

Africa
The human rights policy, far from damaging our interests with Af-
rican governments, has served them. This is partly because the chief
targets of our criticism have been South Africa and Rhodesia, and that
greatly enhances our stature in the area as a whole. We have refrained
from criticism of the human rights problems of frontline states whose
President Videla.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
support we want in southern Africa (e.g. Tanzania, which has more po-
litical prisoners than South Korea). Our criticism of Uganda20 is not so
enthusiastically endorsed by other African governments, but certainly
does not hurt us with them; that criticism, moreover, has been some-
what muted because of the American citizens who remain there.
Nor have other US interests been damaged in South Africa itself.
The human rights policy does not seem to have reduced Pretoria’s co-
operation on Rhodesia and Namibia, where it continues to act in conso-
nance with what it sees as its national interests. The government’s
sense of international isolation could, however, in time affect its nu-
clear weapons policies.

Ethiopia’s closure of US facilities and expulsion of American per-
sonnel probably stemmed more from the new regime’s desire to seek a
more ideologically compatible political and military relationship with
Moscow than from unhappiness with our human rights advocacy.
And Guinea—so far—continues to deny overflight and refueling rights
to Soviet reconnaissance aircraft, despite our opposition to loans to it
and our action on its PL 480 allocation.

In much of Africa, like much of Latin America, promotion of
human rights is our chief interest. Since a number of African leaders ei-
ther have good human rights records (Gambia, Senegal, Liberia) or are
working actively to improve them (Rwanda, the Sudan, Nigeria, Upper
Volta), our human rights policy is more often supportive of local efforts
there than in Latin America.

East Asia
The greatest risk to other US interests from the human rights
policy may be in East Asia, and especially in Korea. It is possible that
North Korea might miscalculate the degree of deterioration in US–ROK
relations; or that US-Korean tensions (including over human rights)
could make South Korea harder to deal with on a range of issues, in-
cluding nuclear ones.

Other potential victims of the human rights policy could be Presi-
dent Marcos’ cooperative stance toward re-negotiation of our base
rights in the Philippines, and our close relations with Indonesian
leaders. But both governments would balance their irritation with our
human rights policies against their own interest in preserving the secu-
rity and economic relationships. So far, they clearly are coming down
in favor of the latter.

Human Rights
More broadly in Asia there is confusion about US purposes and
uncertainty about the validity of our commitments to long-standing
friends. The human rights policy is not primarily responsible, but it is a
contributing factor. This could in time affect our relations even with
those in the region (e.g. Japan) whose own human rights practices we
are not criticizing.

International Financial Institutions
Some believe that we also risk damaging the IFIs, by politicizing
their work in violation of their charters. This did not start with the
Carter Administration. We opposed loans to Allende’s Chile on polit-
ical grounds, and long have used our influence to channel international
lending to anti-Communist regimes. Nonetheless, no country has here-
tofore made non-economic considerations so consistently and overtly a
factor in its attitude to IFI loans. This could come back to haunt us if
other governments decide non-economic criteria should be applied to
governments we want to support. (The discrepancy between our al-
leged politicization of the IFIs, and our departure from the ILO because
others had politicized it, is widely noted.) We also are inadvertently
strengthening Congressional opponents of the institutions.
West European governments have mixed feelings about what we
are doing. The British, French, and West Germans have asked for ad-
vance notice of our negative votes; the EC has asked for “cooperative
exploration” of how to pursue human rights concerns in the IFIs; and
Sweden has asked us to consult with the Nordic Group.

Some of these requests for consultation may suggest interest in
joining us; others from a hope of putting a check on what some Euro-
pean financial officials see as a dangerous American practice.
This survey of all the damage our human rights advocacy might
have caused to other US interests—but hasn’t—is a useful reminder
that other governments’ concrete interest in cooperation with us is
often as great as ours with them, and sometimes greater. In the past we
sometimes have made the mistake of acting as though we were the only
party with much at stake in a relationship, and so must avoid giving of-
fense. Obviously there is a point where national pride or general irrita-
tion could loom larger than practical considerations for some gov-
ernments. Anticipating that point remains one of our chief tasks. But
the need of others for us—in security or economic or diplomatic rela-
tions—usually is great enough to give us considerable room for human
rights advocacy, without serious damage to other US interests.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Beyond the specific and quantifiable, however, there is a perhaps
greater danger that we will come to be seen as the self-appointed
guardian of the world’s morals, having shifted from an anti-
Communist crusade to one equally sanctimonious. If our human rights
policy should come to be seen as designed to further some definition of
US geopolitical interests, it would not only damage our ability to press
the human rights cause, but also make us suspect on other issues. This
could be especially damaging to North-South relations. The same
human rights policy which many in the third world admire in principle
could, as it works out in practice, make us seem insensitive to LDC eco-
nomic development needs as perceived by the LDCs themselves. So far,
the human rights policy has gone far to reverse situations where coop-
eration with us was based more on need than respect. A perception of
moral arrogance and/or hypocrisy in our human rights advocacy
could shift the balance once again.

IV. Are We Being Consistent?

No. And we should not try to be completely so. There are times
when security considerations, or broader political factors, lead us to be
“softer” on some countries’ human rights performance than others.
Moreover, it often is a close call just what action is most likely to pro-
duce improvement in a human rights situation. We sometimes, for in-
stance, approve a loan in recognition of a positive trend—even though
the overall situation in the country remains as bad or worse than that in
countries whose loans we oppose. One of the most difficult questions in
the human rights business is what actions on our part are most likely to
encourage a government to believe that further progress is worthwhile,
without leading it to think we believe its human rights problem is
solved. This can only be done on a case-by-case basis, and some of our
decisions will turn out to have been wrong.

That said, we do have potentially serious problems at least with
the appearance, and perhaps with the reality, of inconsistency:
Bilateral vs. IFI Loans
We often continue bilateral aid programs to countries whose IFI
loans we oppose. We understand that bilateral programs, which we
control, are designed to serve basic human needs. But it can look to
others as though we are only posturing when our votes will not make a
decisive difference, but avoiding action which actually would deny a
human rights violator any money.

Economic vs. Military Assistance
We have been far more rigorous in applying human rights criteria
to economic assistance, which is designed to help poor people, than
military assistance or sales, which are perceived by some as helping

Human Rights
governments be repressive. As noted, this is sometimes because we
think our own security interests are at stake, or because sales of military
equipment contribute to such vital objectives such as oil price stability,
or help pay for oil imports. In Korea, it is because we are engaged in a
delicate maneuver to reduce our military involvement without dam-
aging our security interests. But the apparent discrepancies in our ap-
plication of human rights criteria to economic as opposed to military
decisions can give the impression that we are less interested in human
rights—including economic development of the LDC’s—than in tradi-
tional cold war criteria for “friends.”
The Weak vs. The Strong
We sometimes seem to be “punishing” countries which don’t
matter very much to our security or economic interests (Paraguay, Uru-
guay, the Central African Empire, Benin, Guinea) while glossing over
the human rights record of some who do (Iran, Zaire, Saudi Arabia, Is-
rael, the PRC, even, of late, the Soviet Union).

The charge is not always justified. In the case of Israel, our ap-
parent leniency is in fact part of a general strategy to resolve, inter alia,
its only serious human rights problem—the military occupation of
Arab lands. At the CSCE, we have been harder on Moscow’s human
rights failings than is generally realized. And when the charge is true, it
sometimes is for the good reason that our human rights concerns are
being kept in context with other important national interests, or that we
are concentrating on countries where we have some hope of being ef-
fective (i.e., recipients of our aid) rather than posturing toward, for in-
stance, the PRC. Nonetheless, we risk the unhappy image of being
tougher on the weak than the strong.

Regional Discrimination
Our actions can also be read as focusing on Latin America as the
best theater for human rights activity, at little risk to other American in-
terests. As earlier noted, we have opposed or urged deferral of 22 IFI
loans to Latin America; seven to Africa; and four to East Asia. Our mili-
tary programs in Latin America have been massively affected by
human rights considerations; only marginally so in East Asia; and not
at all in the Middle East.

There are reasons for this, some better than others: we have a good
deal of leverage in Latin America; more countries there are traditional
recipients of our economic and military assistance than in, for instance,
East Asia; our security and economic stake is less than in East Asia or
the Middle East; Latin American governments are ideologically disin-
clined to turn to Moscow; we expect more of it because it is part of the
West and therefore more culturally attuned to the claims of individual

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
rights; in much of the area there has been a deterioration in human
rights situations; and our past support for military regimes in the area
does identify us with their excesses. It may also be true, however, that
some human rights activists (in and out of government) are more inter-
ested in castigating those rightist dictatorships supported by previous
US Administrations than in an evenhanded application of the policy.
Whatever our motives, we do risk letting the human rights policy ap-
pear to be yet another incarnation of traditional big-stick interven-
tionism, while we shy away from more risky problems in other parts of
the world.

Sticks vs. Carrots
We are on record as being more interested in helping governments
who are trying to improve their human rights situations than in de-
nying assistance to offenders. In practice, however, we are doing far
more of the latter than the former.

Especially in foreign assistance—our chief concrete source of influ-
ence—we have been mostly responding to human rights violations.
That possibly was inevitable during this first year of a new policy. We
have had to decide what position to take on loans as they came forward
in the international financial institutions; changing the internal focus of
the IFI’s so that their lending programs would do more to promote
human rights would be harder, and take a lot more time. Even in our
bilateral aid programs, which we can control, it is difficult and time
consuming (years rather than months) to develop and obtain local and
Congressional approval of new programs. Similarly, it is easier—and
makes us look better—to reduce or end military programs than to con-
sider how or whether some of them (and especially the training pro-
grams) can be used to promote human rights. Thus across-the-board
the “reward” approach is lagging well behind the punitive.
Our Criteria: Rhetoric vs. Actions
Finally, we say that all three aspects of human rights (integrity of
the person; economic rights; political rights) are equally important. But
our loan decisions are in fact much tougher on governments which
practice torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, and other violations of
the person, than on countries where there is little political liberty.
Moreover, while we try to promote economic human rights by sup-
porting “basic human needs” loans even to most serious human rights
offenders, we do not give a government’s own efforts to promote eco-
nomic development or equity equal weight with its record on political
liberties when assessing its overall human rights performance. (South
Korea, most socialist states of Eastern Europe, and Vietnam might rank
quite high if we did.)

Human Rights
We think this is the right approach in the IFIs. To accept a tradeoff
of economic progress or equity for a government’s locking up its oppo-
sition would run counter to American principles, and could undercut
public support for the human rights policy. It would mean lowering
our sights and abandoning the principle that American resources
should promote American values. But to go beyond our present policy,
and oppose international developmental assistance to countries which
do not meet our standards of political liberty (a parliamentary democ-
racy; a free press) would be going too far toward imposing our
standards on the rest of the world. This reflects the point, stated in your
Atlanta speech, that building democracies is a longer-term proposi-
tion than putting a stop to torture.

The present approach does, however, involve problems. Some we
probably have to resign ourselves to living with; others we can try to do
something about.

We must expect the resentment of LDC governments over a policy
which clashes with their view (and possibly that of many of their cit-
izens as well) of the requirements of their present state of economic and
political development. We will encounter charges (some specious,
some sincere) of moral arrogance and of insisting, once again, that we
know what is best for other people. But we need not resign ourselves to
the present lack of appreciation (or even understanding) of what we are
doing to promote economic human rights, especially through the basic
human needs focus of the AID program. We should try harder to get
this message across.

We also need to intensify our efforts to find ways of promoting po-
litical rights. As noted above, the “punitive” approach would be inap-
propriate here; and it is far harder to devise positive action than to react
to loans on the IFI agendas. Moreover, some of the possible ways of
promoting the economic pluralism that can lead to political openings
(e.g., economic assistance which would strengthen the middle class or
labor unions in a society that now is an oligarchy), could run counter to
the basic human needs approach to AID. This might give us legal
problems in dealing with some of the countries where such develop-
ment might do the most good. But promotion of political rights should
not take a backseat to personal and economic ones just because it is
harder and because progress will be slower in coming.

V. Bureaucratic Complexities
The human rights policy is not only complicated substantively; it
also is complex and difficult bureaucratically. It crucially affects our bi-
lateral relations with foreign governments—the bread and butter of
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
State Department work—and yet it cuts across areas of responsibility
which other government departments (e.g., Treasury or Agriculture)
have thought of as their own. Consequently, important decisions are
taken in committee sessions from which, sometimes, no one emerges
entirely happy. Our case-by-case approach—the absence of clear
guidelines that certain human rights violations will always receive cer-
tain treatment, much less a “hit list” of the most offending countries—
further complicates the process.

For all the problems involved and the resentment of those who feel
that their good advice went unheeded, we still think this is the best way
to do the human rights business. The issues do go beyond the purview
of any one bureau or department. It is a perhaps extreme example of
the fact that key foreign policy issues these days are not bilateral or
even regional, but functional. But some degree of bureaucratic resent-
ment probably is inevitable.

VI. How Do We Stand With Congress?

Reasonably well at present, but we face potentially serious (and
conflicting) pressures.

Those Congressmen most interested in human rights like what we
say, but remain skeptical of our actions. Our role in legislation has so
far been largely reactive, and is seen by many as damage-limiting. It is
generally believed, for instance, that we would not be applying human
rights criteria to economic assistance if Congress had not ordered us to
do so. Our record on military assistance to human rights offenders is
especially criticized.

Congressional unhappiness with perceived softness in our appli-
cation of the policy, combined with the desire of many Congressmen to
seem tough (especially on South Korea), could produce new proposals
not only to shorten our leash in the IFIs, but also for restrictive legisla-
tion governing our participation in UN organizations or the IMF.
Moves already are afloat to inject human rights concerns into appropri-
ations for the Witteveen Facility. (Such efforts would of course be sup-
ported by those who don’t like the UN or IFIs for other reasons.) The
major coalition of human rights groups intends to focus on security
assistance to violators. Congressional unhappiness with our per-
formance could even impede the arms transfers we want to make to
South Korea in compensation for troop withdrawals.

Pressure from human rights activists on the Hill is a familiar
problem. We may have a new and growing one with Congressmen
who fear that our human rights advocacy will interfere with other

Human Rights
American interests. The outcry over PL 480 reporting requirements
could be a sample of what is to come, especially if the human rights
policy does in fact do visible damage to other interests (e.g., if US agri-
cultural exports are hurt, or if the Philippine base negotiations should
go sour). The fact that we were carrying out the expressed will of
Congress would not greatly lessen the wrath of some of its members
who belatedly realized what was going on.

VII. The Lessons of Hindsight
Most of the problems noted above will be with us as long as we
have an active human rights policy. They are part of an unavoidable
balancing act. But there is room for improvement, and some hard ques-
tions need attention.

Policy Reaffirmation
A Presidential Directive would help (the human rights PRM hasn’t
had one) to clarify to the bureaucracy how the President views the
policy, its application, and the range of instruments being used. We un-
derstand that a draft is now with the President.

Country Strategies
We badly need country strategy papers that will integrate our
human rights interests with other American concerns, and give useful
guidance for applying all our instruments of influence. There is still an
inclination on the part of many to fight the problem and to avert any
measures which may affect countries with which they deal. Country
strategy papers which took for granted the objectives of our human
rights policies and outlined alternative means for achieving these ends,
including both incentives, sanctions, and other approaches would
vastly contribute to the process of decision making.

Senior policy officials still would have to give time-consuming at-
tention to, for instance, individual loan proposals, in light of the human
rights situation at a particular moment and what else was happening
(e.g., an important visit or negotiation). But we need a better context for
those decisions—general guidance as to the relative weight to be given
to our different instruments of leverage in a particular country, and
why, and a sense of how to phase in the use of those instruments
The regional bureaus have most at stake here. The tenacity of this
Administration’s commitment to an active human rights policy is now
clear; it is in the bureaus’ interest that it be sensibly implemented. As-
sistant Secretaries and their Deputies (and regional experts in S/P)
should consider country action strategies a matter of high priority.
Bureaucratic Gaps
Gaps in our internal procedures would inhibit implementation of
coherent country strategies, even if we had them. We especially need

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
better integration of our economic and military assistance decisions.
Good country strategies, and a better flow of information about indi-
vidual decisions between the Interagency Group on Human Rights and
Foreign Assistance, on the one hand, and the Arms Control Export
Board, on the other, would help. Opinion is divided as to whether there
should be a more institutionalized advisory link between the two. We
think the various ways of establishing such a link should at least be
explored.

The Foreign Assistance Group also should continue to improve its
procedures for putting human rights in context of other American in-
terests—and be seen to do so. Regional Bureau experts have recently
been playing a larger role (in preparation of the Group’s agenda and in
introducing issues at its meetings). That trend should be encouraged,
and representatives of other Departments also urged to speak not just
to a human rights situation or the basic human needs relevance of a
loan, but to their view of our overall interests in and strategy toward a
problem country.

Effectiveness
Except for countries whose human rights violations are so serious
that legislation requires us to treat them in certain ways, we should try
to emphasize what will be effective over what will make us look con-
sistent. That may not prove possible. It certainly would be more
time-consuming, since it would be even less clear that a certain kind of
human rights violation, wherever it occurred, would require a certain
response from us. A more serious problem is that country desk officers
might be unable to resist the temptation to say that only quiet diplo-
macy could ever work in the country with which they have to deal; or,
even if we overcame the temptation, we might be unable to convince
Congress that we had done so. In that case, we might only provoke leg-
islation which further restricted our flexibility. But it is worth trying to
develop country strategies which emphasize effectiveness. It would be
essential to consult with human rights activists and critics alike on the
Hill about country strategies—not just transmit to them our finished
papers—well in advance of our decisions about particular assistance
programs.

Our Role in the IFI’s
We are required by law to use our voice and vote to promote
human rights in the IFI’s, including channeling loans to countries with
good human rights records; consulting with other donors about
standards for meeting basic human needs and promoting human
rights; and devising with them mechanisms for acting together. There
are various ways (or combinations of ways) we could meet the require-
ment. Each has advantages and drawbacks.

Human Rights
—We could try to get other donor countries to join us in applying
human rights criteria to their votes. That would increase the risk of po-
liticizing the IFI’s; further complicate our relations with LDC’s who
would suffer not only the onus of our opposition, but also a denial of
cash; and might alarm other donors. But failure to do so might lead
some Congressmen to believe that we are not serious about using the
IFI’s to promote human rights, and produce further legislative restric-
tions on our role in them.
—We could encourage the UN and OAS Human Rights Commis-
sions to make independent reports to the IFI’s. This would be con-
sistent with our desire to multilateralize our human rights policy and to
make clear that we are applying internationally recognized standards.
But the UN Human Rights Commission in particular is likely to render
judgments which we—and Congress—could not accept as objective.
—We could try to channel IFI lending programs away from
human rights violators. This would meet the letter of the law. But since
IFI programs are a long time in the pipeline, it could impede our ability
to respond to changing human rights conditions.
—We could try to design IFI programs to meet basic human needs
criteria. This might lessen the risk that our votes would politicize the
IFI’s and would be consistent with the World Bank’s own stated inten-
tion. It might do more to promote human rights (especially economic
rights) than denial of funds, or US opposition to loans that are ap-
proved anyway. But it would also reduce our opportunities for demon-
strating our disapproval of countries’ human rights failings. That
might so displease some in Congress that we would face new efforts to
reduce our contributions to the IFI’s, or to require that we oppose all
loans to certain countries. It also would remove a remaining source of
support for capital intensive “growth” projects and run counter both to
our urging the IFI’s to make loans for energy development to non-oil
LDC’s, and to our argument that a commodities’ Common Fund needs
no capacity to finance measures such as market development and infra-
structure because the development banks meet that need.

The Perception of Arrogance
We should intensify efforts to multilateralize our human rights ef-
forts. This would help reduce suspicions of a holier-than-thou attitude
or an ideological crusade against selected states. More important, it
would help the cause of human rights, by further enlisting the weight
of world opinion.

We either have done or are doing most of the immediately impor-
tant things to bring our human rights policy in line with international
standards (e.g., signing the UN Covenants and the American Conven-
tion on Human Rights) and are working to improve the capacity of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
both the UN and OAS to deal with human rights issues. We should
now be consulting with others—at the UN, in the OAS, and with other
regional leaders (e.g., in black Africa)—about their suggestions for ef-
fective human rights strategies in their areas, in the context of their own
cultural, economic, and political situations. We also should intensify
consultations with West Europeans and Canadians—private and offi-
cial—about what all of us can do to promote human rights.
Perhaps even more important, we should draw more attention to
what we are doing to correct our own human rights problems. The gen-
eral perception seems to be that we’ve done nothing but allude to our
domestic problems in a few speeches. The President’s program is better
than that, but its human rights impact is dulled because we seldom talk
of welfare or tax reform, or proposals for urban renewal, or for youth
employment, under a human rights heading. We should make a point
of stressing that these are part of our commitment to improve the lot of
individual Americans.

Generalized conclusions on such a complex of issues are very
risky, and certain to be controversial. But this is the balance S/P draws:
—The human rights policy may be the best thing this Administra-
tion has going for it. It has enormously improved America’s interna-
tional standing and our claim to moral leadership. It already has done
quite a lot to help individuals, in widely varying situations, and to con-
tribute to political dynamics that can lead to further improvements.
While the potential damage to other American interests needs to be
kept in mind, no actual harm has yet been done. That suggests to us
that such damage can in fact be avoided.
—Any serious human rights policy will be subject to conflicting
criticisms. Limiting ourselves to rhetoric and quiet diplomacy would
produce (and deserve) charges of superficiality and hypocrisy. Using
material pressure (i.e., economic and military assistance) produces
charges of moral arrogance. Softening our human rights advocacy in
some cases to protect other American interests produces accusations of
double standards. Adjusting our tactics in order to try to be effective in
different situations produces accusations of inconsistency. There is
some justice in most of these criticisms. Any policy as difficult and
complex as this inevitably has a debit side. The balance, however, is de-
cidedly positive, and we do not believe a major change of course is
called for.
—But we have not done a good enough job of articulating publicly
what we are doing, and why, and the possibilities and limits of what
we can hope to accomplish. Both the policy and its execution are far
more complex than we have managed to convey. Opinion shapers (in-

Human Rights
cluding human rights activists) here and abroad are likely to be far
more responsive to candid discussions of difficulties, dilemmas, and
inevitable inconsistencies, than to generalized rhetoric which seems to
gloss over our problems. We have done a lot in a short time to inject
new considerations into American foreign policy—to move beyond
formal relations with other governments to a concern with how our ac-
tions affect people living under those governments. We have done so
with encouraging success, and with little if any cost. We can expect to
learn from experience and do even better next year. But it is in the na-
ture of the problem that our performance will not become “perfect.”
We should go on the offensive to convey that message, and especially a
sophisticated understanding of the obstacles we confront.

106.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
18330. Subject: Annual Human Rights Reports. Reference: 77, State
1. Human rights reports on countries proposed for or receiving se-

107.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, January 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights Foundation and Other Human Rights Issues
Since our meeting with the Vice President on the Human Rights
Foundation2 I have discussed the idea with Bill Korey, John Rich-
ardson, Leo Cherne, Bob DeVecchi (International Rescue Committee),
Theron Van Scotter (American Council of Voluntary Agencies for For-
eign Service), Leonard Marks and, as you know, with Huntington,
Human Rights
Henze and Jan Nowak. All are unreservedly enthusiastic in their sup-
port for this idea. While I was working on this final version, I received a
copy of Sam’s memo. I went ahead with this anyway because it in-
cludes some additional new ideas (not all my own), and because it spe-
cifically addresses the President and Vice President’s previous reserva-
tions about this proposal. This memorandum is designed to provide
the President everything he needs to make a final decision—we need to
get this idea out of limbo.

Regarding other human rights initiatives, I have consulted with
State (at the Vice President’s direction) on who should be included in
the Congressional sessions. A shortened version of State’s list has been
submitted to Moore, and I have received comments on the Senators but
not yet on the House members. I expect final word from them shortly,
and will then arrange the first meeting with Clift.

On the PD, I believe that it is in your office—at least I haven’t seen
it since I sent over the most recent draft.

I have commissioned and received from State, a paper on all the
issues on which we are going to face problems in Congress in the next
session. This paper will form the basis for a meeting of the LIG in the
Finally, the four recently signed human rights treaties will be sent
to the President for forwarding to the Senate within the next two days.
Recommendation:
That you forward the memorandum at Tab A to the President.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
108.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) and
the Legal Adviser (Hansell) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)
Washington, January 24, 1978
Human Rights Reports and OPIC
Issue for Decision
Should the human rights reports the Secretary of State will submit
to Congress by January 31 include reports on five countries, including
Brazil, where the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) is
engaged in financing, insurance or guaranty activities, but which other-
wise are neither receiving nor proposed to receive assistance for which
human rights reports would be required?

Essential Factors
Statutory Requirements
Section 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended
(FAA), prohibits assistance under part I of that Act to the government
of any country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations
of human rights, unless the assistance will directly benefit the needy
people in the country concerned. As amended in 1977, section 116 also
requires that the Secretary of State report to Congress by January 31 of
each year on the status of human rights in countries that receive assist-
ance under part I of the FAA. The question here is limited to whether a
human rights report should be submitted on the five “OPIC only”
countries; no decision is required as to whether any of these countries
are engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations. The full text of
the statute is attached at Tab 1.
ited Official Use. Sent through Cooper. Drafted by Michel on January 12; cleared by
Boerner, Schneider, Arellano, AID/GC, Roberts Smith, Hunt, Stahnke, Jennone Walker,
and Frank Bennett. Michel initialed for the clearing officials, with the exception of Arel-
lano, who initialed the document. Anderson’s initials appear on the memorandum.

Human Rights
OPIC
OPIC is established by title IV of chapter 2 of part I of the FAA as
an agency of the United States under the policy guidance of the Secre-
tary of State. According to the authorizing legislation, the Corporation
is governed by a board of directors appointed by the President, with
Senate advice and consent, and chaired by the Administrator of AID.
Section 231 of the FAA provides that the purpose of OPIC is to comple-
ment the development assistance objectives of the United States by mo-
bilizing and facilitating the participation of United States private capi-
tal and skills in the economic and social development of less developed
friendly countries and areas. The Corporation provides financing,
insurance and guaranties to private U.S. investors in less developed
countries with which the United States has agreements covering such
programs. The government-to-government agreements (required by
section 237(a) of the FAA) normally provide that projects and activities
are subject to approval by the government in whose territory the
project or activity will take place. (See, e.g., U.S.-Brazil Investment
OPIC does not program the issuance of loans, insurance or guar-
anties in specific countries on an annual basis. The guaranteed and in-
sured projects are selected, developed and financed in the first instance
by private investors. The Corporation provides coverage for eligible
and acceptable investments, upon application by investors and pay-
ment of a premium, on a case-by-case basis. OPIC loans are also consid-
ered on a case-by-case basis. OPIC has maintained that its activities do
not constitute assistance to foreign governments and, therefore, are not
governed by section 116 of the FAA (except when a foreign gov-
ernment is directly involved in a project).

Since section 116 of the FAA was originally enacted in 19755 OPIC
has initiated steps to take human rights considerations into account in
its programs. Arrangements have been made to keep OPIC apprised of
actions taken in furtherance of United States human rights policy objec-
tives. Pursuant to recommendations by the Interagency Committee on
Human Rights and Foreign Assistance, the Corporation suspended ne-
gotiations last year on program agreements with Uruguay and Chile.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Pending Legislation
OPIC’s insurance and guaranty authorities under present law
will renew those authorities through September 30, 1980, was amended
on the floor to include a provision which would make section 116 of the
FAA expressly applicable to “any insurance, reinsurance, guarantee or
loan by the Corporation.” This amendment was adopted on November
3 following an extensive debate, during which the sponsor, Con-
gressman Harkin, asserted that his intent was to make explicit an
application of section 116 which was intended when that statute was
originally enacted. OPIC supported an unsuccessful alternative
amendment, sponsored by Congressman Bingham, which would have
made section 116 applicable only to projects in which a foreign gov-
ernment participates financially.

The companion Senate bill (S. 1771), which has passed the Senate,
contains no comparable provision. Accordingly, the Administration
will probably have an opportunity in February to express its views to
the House-Senate conference committee on what the law should be in
this regard. This issue will be addressed separately at a later date.
Need for Decision
An immediate decision is needed on whether reports should be
submitted to Congress by January 31 with respect to the status of
human rights observance in those countries where OPIC had been is-
suing insurance and guaranties until the lapse of its authority, but
which do not receive any other assistance subject to the FAA’s re-
porting requirements. The countries concerned are Barbados, Brazil,
Grenada, Trinidad-Tobago and Western Samoa.

Legal Considerations
According to its terms, the reporting requirement in section
116(d)(1) of the FAA is applicable to foreign countries that receive
assistance under part I of the FAA. It is clear that OPIC operates under
authority of part I of the FAA; OPIC’s authorizing legislation comprises

Human Rights
title IV of chapter 2 of that part. The inclusion of OPIC’s authorization
within the chapter of the FAA entitled “Development Assistance” and
the statement of its purpose in section 231 of the FAA are indications
that the Corporation is intended to serve, among other objectives, the
purpose expressed in section 102(a) of the FAA “That the United States,
through private as well as public efforts, assist the people of less devel-
oped countries in their (development) efforts . . .”
These indications are reinforced by the relevant legislative history.
The 1969 legislation which created OPIC was first considered in the
House Committee on Foreign Affairs. The Committee’s report de-
scribed the Corporation as “a new instrumentality complementing
other assistance programs by encouraging and promoting U.S. private
enterprise in contributing to the development of less developed coun-
That Congress still regards OPIC primarily as an instrument for
carrying out foreign development assistance purposes is evidenced by
the Senate and House reports on the pending OPIC amendments.
These provide:
“OPIC’s chief purpose is to mobilize the resources of the U.S. pri-
vate sector to promote economic and social development in the devel-
“According to the legislation authorizing OPIC, its primary goal is
to encourage the flow of U.S. capital and skills into less developed
friendly countries, thereby promoting the economic and social devel-
The foregoing considerations suggest that section 116(d)(1) should
be construed so as to require the submission of reports on countries
where OPIC is engaged in financing, insurance or guaranty activities. L
believes this is the better interpretation of the law.

However, an argument could be made that these reports are not le-
gally required. Congress has not always been consistent in its treatment
of OPIC activities as “assistance” for other purposes under the FAA
and, despite Congressman Harkin’s assertion as to the intent of section
116, there is no specific legislative history on its application to OPIC.
Legislation concerning OPIC which clearly addresses human rights
issues is pending and, in the meantime, it is not clear what kind of re-
porting Congress expects or will require.

Document 81.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Policy Considerations
The decision on whether or not to submit reports on the five “OPIC
only” countries ultimately depends upon a choice between competing
policy interests.

On the one hand, a failure to report would probably be criticized
by some in Congress as being in violation of the law and evidence of a
lack of sincerity and consistency in the Administration’s human rights
policy. This could have broad undesirable consequences as further leg-
islative proposals on human rights are considered. In particular, it
might adversely affect the currently pending OPIC authorization bill.
Legislation directed specifically against Brazil is also a possibility.
On the other hand, the submission of a human rights report on
Brazil would be strongly resented by the government of that country,
which has already informed us that it will reject any security assistance
which is conditioned upon the submission to Congress of such a report.
Brazil’s denunciation of virtually all bilateral military cooperation
agreements was a direct and emotional response to the FY 1978 human
rights report on that country. We believe Brazil would respond simi-
larly to a human rights report tied to any other program.
OPIC is currently engaged only in a few projects in Brazil. Existing
OPIC expropriation coverage in Brazil as of June 30, 1977, was around
$200 million. Further, under present policy, OPIC would accept future
applications concerning investments only in a few areas—energy and
mineral resources, small business, and “exceptionally developmental”
projects. The program is probably not of great importance to the Bra-
zilian government and, therefore, might well be denounced if it became
the cause for a further human rights report. Furthermore, the Bra-
zilians could—and probably would—point out that OPIC’s programs
in the first instance benefit U.S. investors in return for fees paid by
them; the Brazilian Government would not consider OPIC programs as
assistance to Brazil. Retaliatory action by Brazil in other fields is also
possible.
hibits the use of funds for FMS credit to Brazil and other Latin American countries which
have rejected U.S. security assistance in whole or in part because of our human rights re-
ports.

Human Rights
A further deterioration in our relations with Brazil over the issue
of human rights could detract from our ability to deal effectively with
that country on many important issues (including continuing nuclear
discussions). The Brazilian Government has recently asked us for con-
firmation that we do not intend to submit a human rights report be-
cause security assistance will be terminated. Our reply should ad-
dress whether a report will be required because of any other program,
If a policy decision were made to defer the submission of a human
rights report on Brazil and the four other “OPIC only” countries,
Congress might nevertheless specifically request such a report con-
cerning any of them. It would, of course, be very difficult and probably
counterproductive to resist a specific Congressional request for a report
on any country. In this regard, a request made under section 502B(c) of
the FAA would have to be honored within thirty days or we would
have to suspend all security assistance in the pipeline (including li-
censed exports under commercial contracts).

Bureau Views
HA, L and H favor including reports on the OPIC only countries.
These bureaus believe submission of the reports is the action most
clearly consistent with current law, and will avoid a potentially dam-
aging dispute with Congress (especially in seeking a favorable outcome
on the pending OPIC authorization bill). L further points out that sub-
mission of a report would remove an impediment to other forms of
continued U.S.-Brazilian cooperation, including FMS cash sales of
spare parts, which the Brazilians desire but which they cannot now re-
quest without openly acquiescing in a human rights report on Brazil.
Once a report had been submitted, Brazil could decide what, if any,
U.S. assistance it wished to request and we could decide on an appro-
priate response based on the merits of any proposed transaction.
(A question has also arisen as to whether failure to file a human
rights report would bar Brazil from purchasing military equipment
the Embassy noted that the Brazilian Foreign Ministry’s Department of the Americas had
requested written confirmation from the Carter administration that a human rights re-
port on Brazil would not be submitted to Congress. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
bassy repeated the request for written confirmation, noting “further delay in responding
to Itamaraty’s [common reference to the Foreign Ministry; Itamaraty is the palace that
houses the Ministry] request may indicate to the GOB that the USG is still debating the
consequences of a human rights report on Brazil, and that we will not honor their specific
request not to be considered for security assistance.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770482–0263)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
through commercial channels. The definition of “security assistance” in
section 502B includes licenses for the export of commercially-sold Mu-
nitions List items, and it may be argued, as DOD does, that failure to
submit a human rights report would preclude the issuance of such li-
censes. The better view is that inasmuch as commercial exports are not,
and have not been, “proposed” as part of the annual congressional
presentation materials, Congress should not be presumed to have in-
tended such an anomalous result in the absence of clear legislative
history to the contrary. Thus for example, countries receiving only
commercial exports are not included in the Congressional Presentation
Document. It is our considered view that section 502B does not prevent
the licensing of commercial exports to a country for which no human
rights report has been submitted.)

ARA and EB believe a report on Brazil should not be submitted to
Congress absent a clear legal requirement or a specific request from the
Congress. These bureaus believe that, because the Brazilians have gone
to such lengths to remove the reasons for our submitting one (by re-
jecting security assistance), a voluntary submission would be inter-
preted as a deliberate and gratuitous offense which would do lasting
harm to our bilateral relations.

OPIC’s primary concern is to avoid a Congressional objection
which might prejudice its efforts to secure an acceptable human rights
provision, tailored specifically for OPIC, in the pending authorization
bill. OPIC believes that the reporting requirement of section 116(d)(1),
referring as it does to “countries” receiving assistance under Part I of
the FAA, can be read as requiring a report solely because of the avail-
ability of OPIC programs, without necessarily concluding whether, at
present, section 116(a) applies to OPIC absent foreign government par-
ticipation. OPIC, therefore, is neutral as to the report-filing options set
forth below, as OPIC understands that each would be pursued in such
a way as to avoid prejudicing issues to be resolved in the House-Senate
conference on the OPIC bill.

Recommendation
That you decide whether—
(1) The Department should include human rights reports on the
five “OPIC only” countries, explaining to Brazil in advance that we will
do so because of OPIC insured and guaranteed projects in that
country; or

Human Rights
(2) The Department should include human rights reports on the
five “OPIC only” countries, explaining to Brazil in advance that we will
do so primarily because we do not wish to foreclose legally the possi-
bility of cooperation with Brazil in FY 1979 (favored by HA and L); or
(3) The Department should not include human rights reports on
the five “OPIC only” countries, explaining to Congress, if asked, that
the lack of clarity in the present law, and the fact that legislation on this
subject is now under consideration in Congress warranted deferral in
our judgment. (We would comply with any Congressional request for
reports on these countries.) (Favored by ARA, EB and S/P.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

109.

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to the Assistant Secretary of State for African
Affairs (Moose), the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Todman), the Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asian Affairs (Holbrooke), the Assistant
Secretary of State for European Affairs (Vest), and the Acting
Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South
Asian Affairs (Sober)
Washington, January 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Advance Notification of Human Rights Reports

110.

Memorandum From Michael Armacost and Michel
Oksenberg of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)
Washington, January 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Agenda for Human Rights Meeting
You have agreed to meet with several of us on Tuesday, January
Room. We suggest that the task of the meeting is to discuss the mecha-
nisms through which our human rights policy can be best imple-
mented. Our assumption is that the mechanisms now in place can be
improved. In order to have a focused discussion, we propose that we
concentrate on the following concrete agenda items:
1. Can we establish clearer priorities in our pursuit of human
rights as between (a) protecting the integrity of the individual; (b) im-
proving economic justice; and (c) proselytizing on behalf of our polit-
ical ideals?
2. Through what procedures can we best define practicable and re-
alistic human rights objectives in particular countries?
3. How can we implement our human rights approach in a way
which relies less on punitive sanctions and more on positive
inducements?
4. Are we in fact obliged by the language of Congressional statutes
to abstain or oppose loans by IFIs or regional banks to the “trouble-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
some” countries when no formal determination has been made that
they have engaged in a consistent and gross pattern of human rights vi-
olations? How can we manage our legal obligations in this respect
without forfeiting a reasonable degree of flexibility?
5. How can we manage the tactics of implementing human rights
objectives in a way which assures greater sensitivity to local condi-
tions? That is, what should be the role of the regional bureaus and em-
bassies in designing tactics?

111.

Telegram From the Department of State to All African
Diplomatic Posts
31692. Inform Consuls, for principal officers from Moose. Subject:
Human Rights Reporting.
1. With the completion of the annual human rights reports for
Congress, we in AF want to express our appreciation for the patience
and responsiveness of posts in providing the detailed inputs to make
this process meaningful and useful. On the basis of your contribution,
we hope that the reporting cycle for next year’s reports will consist es-
sentially of collecting new data, up-dating and strengthening this
year’s reports, and identifying any new human rights trends.
2. This is also a good time to reflect on the reporting and informa-
tion gathering process itself and to draw some tentative conclusions
which might contribute to improving our end performance in fulfilling
this major legal requirement.
3. The first and most obvious lesson we have learned is that the
principal prerequisite for an objective report defensible to both the host
government and to Congress is better information on the objective
human rights situation in each African country. This calls for conscious
Confidential. Drafted by William Swing (AF/C) and Shurtleff; cleared by Lewis, Derian,
Lannon Walker, Lewis Junior (AF/C), Thomas Smith (AF/W), Richard St. F. Post
(AF/E), and Donald Petterson (AF/S); approved by Moose. On February 6, Moose sent a
version of the cable, dated February 4, to Christopher and Derian, commenting that it
“represents what I think is a very commendable initiative on the part of two of our of-
ficers to build on our recent experience with human rights reporting.” (National Ar-

Human Rights
targeting on those principal areas in which official human rights atti-
tudes, policies and practices manifest themselves: Demonstrable efforts
to meet the basic needs of the poorest sectors of the population for food,
shelter, education and health care; respect for the sanctity of the person;
and promotion of basic civil and political liberties. We simply must
know more and, in our reporting to Congress, we must refer to specific
illustrative examples, including the positive as well as the negative, to
support our necessarily more general reporting and analysis of the
situation.
4. A corollary to better reporting is the need for comprehensive
and systematic data collection on the human rights situation and issues
in your country of responsibility. We must be prepared to document
carefully and comprehensively each African government’s record on
human rights, even in countries which do not presently receive bilat-
eral economic or security assistance. It is no less important in cases
where the government has a good record of observing human rights.
The time to begin building a reporting record is now. Do not wait for us
to task you with specific reporting requirements on the human rights
situation in your country of responsibility.
5. We will need to expand our contacts with those individuals who
are best placed to know about human rights conditions. In some cases it
will be an expatriate lawyer; in others local police or attorney general,
etc. Above all, these contacts can help us gain a deeper knowledge of
the local judicial system which makes decisions about people’s lives.
6. Given our experience with the development of this year’s
papers, we cannot rule out the possibility that there will be formal
changes in the guidelines for our CY–78 papers. However, we do not
anticipate any essential change in the three basic categories of human
rights contained in the Secretary’s April 1977 Law Day speech in
Georgia. Although difficult to identify, some thought should be given
to quantifiable measures which help objectively judge human rights
issues in these areas. For example: percentage changes in government
funds aimed at poorest segment of population; numbers of rural health
workers trained; rate of scholarization; infant mortality and other
health initiatives, central budget breakdown by sector; countrywide
breakdown of court cases, broken down along lines of number of ac-
quittals, length of sentences in relation to law under which sentenced,
etc.
7. We will try to give you additional grist for your side of the ex-
change by providing from time to time selected private organization
and press reporting on specific human rights issues in Africa. This will
include copies of periodic reports and occasional papers from Amnesty
International, P.E.N., Freedom House, the International Commission of
Jurists and other non-governmental organizations whose reporting is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
widely read and influential among human rights advocates. Keep in
mind that, though such reporting is often fragmentary, it is a bench-
mark against which our reports to Congress and public statements on
human rights are measured.
8. Finally, you should, we believe, continue to bring out in your re-
porting the differences in the local African conceptions of human rights
which focus on collective social and economic rights as compared to
our emphasis on political freedoms. Your analysis of these and other
normative issues is very valuable to us in Washington. We also need
your judgments as to trends evolving in official attitudes toward
human rights over a period of time, i.e., over periods of six to 18
months.
9. Your reactions to these general observations and suggestions,
and your own ideas on human rights reporting and analysis would be
much appreciated.

Vance

112.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Vice President Mondale
Washington, February 7, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Attached for your consideration are redrafted versions of both the
human rights PD (Tab A), and the proposal for a Human Rights Foun-
dation (Tab B).

Human Rights
Since our meeting several weeks ago, Jessica Tuchman has con-
sulted with a large number of outside experts in the human rights field,
as we agreed at that time. These include: John Richardson of Freedom
House, Bill Korey of B’nai Brith, Leo Cherne of the International Rescue
Committee, Leonard Marks, former head of USIA, Jan Nowak, and rep-
resentatives of the American Council of Voluntary Agencies for For-
eign Service, the Church World Service, and others. All were unre-
servedly enthusiastic about the idea, and were vigorous in pleading the
need for such an institution on many different grounds. I have incorpo-
rated many of their ideas into this new version of the proposal. Jody
Powell has seen the proposal and after some initial questions now rec-
ommends that the President approve it. OMB has some objections
which are, in my view, minor and bureaucratic rather than substan-
tive. They are addressed in the addendum to the memorandum. In
that addendum I have also tried to address the reservations you raised
to the earlier draft.

Nearly every day we get more indications of Congressional in-
terest in this idea. Moynihan is apparently getting ready to introduce it
on the Senate side, and there are also signs of movement from Zablocki,
Fraser, Fascell and perhaps others in the House. My concern is that if
this idea comes out as a Congressional initiative, it will be reported in
the press as another example of the Administration’s negative and pas-
sive role on human rights, and the Congress’ active and imaginative
stance. Given the number of contentious human rights issues we face in
the coming session, this would be a particularly unfortunate outcome. I
believe we must make a prompt decision on this, one way or the other,
or face the risk of being pre-empted.

113.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, February 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Attached for your consideration are redrafted versions of both the
human rights PD (Tab A) and the proposal for a Human Rights Foun-
dation (Tab B).

Regarding the PD, this draft has been refined with a particular
view to the consequences of a possible leak. The language has been
worked over and tightened, so as to minimize the problems that would
arise if the entire document were to leak, or if certain sentences were
Human Rights
taken out of context. The Vice President has reviewed this draft and
recommends that you sign it.

The revised draft of the Human Rights Foundation (HRF) proposal
at Tab B is the result of extensive consultations with members of the
EOP, as well as with a number of outside experts, including the leader-
ship of the prominent NGOs: Freedom House; the International Rescue
Committee; B’nai Brith; Church World Service; the American Council
of Voluntary Agencies for Foreign Service; and others. All the outside
experts with whom we consulted were unreservedly enthusiastic in
support of the proposal. The Vice President has studied this draft and
continues to have some reservations which are reflected at Tab B. Jody
Powell and Frank Moore both recommend that you approve it. We
have consulted with individuals at State who are supportive of the
idea, however in order to preserve its confidentiality and press value, I
have not sent the proposal over for formal State approval.
There are more and more indications of Congressional interest in
this idea. Moynihan is apparently getting ready to introduce it on the
Senate side, and there are also signs of movement from Zablocki,
Fraser, Fascell and perhaps others in the House. My concern is that if
this idea comes out as a Congressional initiative, it will be reported in
the press as another example of the Administration’s negative and pas-
sive role on human rights, and the Congress’ active and imaginative
stance. Given the number of contentious human rights issues we face in
the coming session, this would be a particularly unfortunate outcome. I
believe we must make a prompt decision on this proposal, or face the
real risk of being preempted by a Congressional initiative.
Recommendation:
That you sign the PD at Tab A and approve the proposal at Tab B.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Tab A
Draft Presidential Directive
Washington, undated
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Attorney General
The Secretary of Commerce
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The United States Representative to the United Nations
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director of U.S. Information Agency
SUBJECT
Human Rights
It shall be a major objective of U.S. foreign policy to promote the
observance of human rights throughout the world. The policy shall be
applied globally, but with due consideration to the cultural, political
and historical characteristics of each individual nation, and to the sig-
nificance of U.S. relations with the nation in question.
Specifically:
1. It shall be the objective of the U.S. human rights policy first of
all6 to reduce worldwide governmental violations of the integrity of the
person (e.g., torture; cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; arbitrary
arrest or imprisonment; lengthy detention without trial and assassina-
tion), and, secondly7 to enhance civil and political liberties (freedom of
speech, of religion, of assembly, of movement and of the press; and the
right to basic judicial protections). It will also be a continuing U.S. ob-

Human Rights
jective to promote basic economic and social rights (e.g., adequate food,
education, shelter and health).
2. Greater reliance should be placed on positive inducements and
incentives, acknowledging improvements in human rights through,
whenever appropriate and possible, preferential treatment in political
relations and economic benefits.
3. To this end, countries with a good or9 improving record of
human rights observance as defined above, will be given special con-
sideration in the allocation of U.S. foreign assistance. Programs for each
fiscal year shall be reviewed in this light.
4. In the evaluation of the human rights condition of a foreign na-
tion, and in the course of the implementation of this directive, primary
emphasis shall be placed on longer term trends rather than on specific
events.
5. The U.S. shall not take any action which would result in material
or financial support to the police, civil law enforcement authorities, or
internal security forces of governments engaged in serious violations of
human rights.
6. U.S. human rights actions within the International Financial In-
stitutions shall be designed and implemented so as not to undermine
the primary U.S. interest of preserving these institutions as effective
economic instruments. I therefore direct the Interagency Group to pre-
pare a report:12
—Analyzing the effects of recent U.S. actions in the IFIs:13
• on the IFI’s themselves (including an assessment of the legality
of our actions),14
• on Congressional attitudes and prospective legislation; and
• on the advancement of U.S. human rights objectives.

114.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Human Rights Foundation (HRF)
1. Reasons for an HRF
In addition to performing the important functions listed in Section
2 below, there are several good reasons for establishing an HRF as an
Administrative initiative:
—In the furtherance of human rights, we have relied most heavily
on exhortation and on punitive sanctions imposed through our foreign
assistance programs. Though useful and necessary, these techniques
often conflict with other legitimate foreign policy objectives and risk
creating a climate in which American commitment to human rights is
judged solely by the frequency of public denunciations or aid cut-offs.
Human Rights
An HRF will institute a positive, action program for human rights compa-
rable, say, to the activities of AID to promote economic development.
—Our human rights policy generated unrealistically high expecta-
tions in some quarters. The press now reports that the Administration
has “abandoned” or “sacrificed” human rights to other priorities. There
is a surprising, but continuing belief on the Hill that without constant
Congressional pressure there would be no human rights policy. A posi-
tive initiative such as HRF will help substantially to dispel that myth. We
face many contentious human rights issues in the coming Congres-
sional session (e.g., application of the Harkin Amendment to inappro-
priate institutions, more strictures on the IFIs, etc.). Any improvement
in the current mood would be an important political plus. By proposing
an HRF, the Administration can mobilize the heterogeneous human rights
constituency behind a constructive proposal.
—While human rights is certainly not a new concern, it is a new
policy issue, and it lacks the necessary solid intellectual base. Our frustra-
tions in the PRM–28 exercise4 provided excellent evidence of the need
for basic research on the varieties of human rights and on the most ef-
fective means of promoting human rights in diverse social and cultural
contexts. Those inside the government do not have the time to develop
such a base. It is best done outside the government—in academia, think
tanks, etc. An HRF can provide the central direction, support and motivation
for a successful, and relevant, scholarly effort.
—Human rights has been pretty thoroughly woven into our for-
eign policy bureaucracy, but this will not last long should one of your
successors not share your concern for this issue. The new procedures
could be undone as quickly as they have been created. An independent
HRF, funded by Congress, is some insurance that human rights will be an en-
during concern. Much as ACDA and the Peace Corps embody major for-
eign policy initiatives of previous Democratic Administrations, the
HRF would be an important institutional legacy of the Carter
Administration.
—Polls have shown that your human rights policy is strongly sup-
ported by people all over the world, even in places where the government
opposes it. The lasting success of the policy will depend to some extent on our
ability to cultivate that support, particularly through non-governmental
and semi-governmental organizations of all kinds. While USIA can
contribute to this goal to a limited degree, activities aimed at focusing
ument 108.
ment 73.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
world attention on human rights would gain credibility if sponsored by
an institution with some autonomy from the U.S. government.
2. Functions of an HRF
Working with private groups and national organizations in this
country and abroad, as well as with international agencies, the HRF
would develop ideas and programs to further the observance of human
rights on a global basis. The HRF would engage in at least five major
types of activities.
—Provide financial and other support to the non-governmental human
rights organizations (NGOs) in the U.S. and elsewhere. For years the NGOs
have operated quite effectively with little public support, and they now
have the potential to do much more. They can often act in circum-
stances and with techniques that would be inappropriate for the USG.
The NGOs need, want and deserve our support, but at the same time,
they must be insulated from direct dependence on the USG.
—Foster research on human rights. We need research on the different
types of human rights, their interactions, the relevance of each in dif-
ferent societial and cultural contexts, and which kinds of policies work
best where. We also need to know much more about conditions and
longer term trends in individual countries and regions. Though State
has worked hard this past year to improve its data base, most of its in-
formation comes through official channels which often give a very in-
complete picture. Finally, as time goes on, we need a critical assessment
of how well our policies are working.
—Aid victims of human rights violations. Support is badly needed for
refugee resettlement efforts, including the retraining (language, profes-
sional standards, etc.) and placement of skilled and professional polit-
ical refugees. An HRF could help to arrange and finance the resettle-
ment of such key individuals—not in the U.S. where their talents are
wasted—but in other Third World nations badly in need of these skills.
Equally important, the HRF can provide direct help and psychological
support for dissenters within their own societies by, for example,
awarding an annual prize to an artist or writer whose works are sup-
pressed in his own country, or by helping to finance the publication
and distribution of suppressed works.
—Promote efforts to multilateralize governmental human rights policies.
While the primary responsibility here rests with the U.S. government,
the HRF, working on its own and through the NGOs, could prove a
powerful ally in such efforts as: building support for the creation of a
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights; energizing the UN Human
Rights Commission; evolving harmonious policies among Western na-
tions in the IFIs; and promoting regional human rights organizations in
Africa and elsewhere. Particularly in the Third World (and notwith-

Human Rights
standing its relationship to the government) the HRF should be able to
speak with a voice independent from, and in some cases more credible
than, the U.S. government.
—Keep international attention focused on human rights issues. The ob-
jective here is to generate and sustain a worldwide constituency for
human rights. Activities might include:
—Supporting national and international conferences on human
rights issues.
—Awarding an annual human rights prize, comparable to the
Nobel, for outstanding contributions to human rights anywhere in the
world.
—Serving as a central clearing house for information on human
rights and on sources of assistance to victims of human rights
violations.
—Serving as an “echo-chamber” to amplify the voices of indi-
viduals and numerous small groups.
—Issuing an annual report on trends and conditions of human
rights globally, as well as periodic reports on particularly troubling vio-
lators of human rights.
3. Structure of an HRF
A good model for the HRF is the Inter-American Foundation, a
quasi-governmental organization that receives its money from Con-
gress but has very loose ties with the U.S. government and makes its
own policies. The Foundation is directed by a seven member board, ap-
pointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate. The board in-
cludes four members from the private sector and three ex officio repre-
sentatives of the Executive Branch. This arrangement has assured
functional autonomy for the Foundation, while preserving a minimum
degree of coordination with the U.S. government foreign policy
agencies. Details of the composition of the Board of the HRF can be
worked out in consultation with Congress. The important point is that the
legislation can be written to reflect whatever degree of linkage is desired be-
tween the HRF and the government.
4. Objections to an HRF
In his evaluation, the Vice President raises two objections to this
proposal. First, he is concerned that “such a foundation might do no
more than duplicate the work of such organizations as Freedom House
and Amnesty International.” After extensive consultations, I am satis-
fied that no one sees more clearly than do these organizations, their
own limitations and the great needs left unfilled. Even if the HRF were
to do no more than increase the funds available to NGOs, it would have
performed a valuable service. However, as the list of ideas outlined in
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Sections 1 and 2 above indicate, there is a great deal that the HRF can
do, that cannot be done by small groups working alone.

Secondly, the Vice President raised the important question of
whether “the government would take blame for ineffectiveness or inac-
tion” by the HRF. While there is no way to rule this out, I believe that
our experience with the Inter-American Foundation (IAF), which has
pursued a bold policy in a very sensitive region, indicates that this risk
is not too large. The IAF sponsors unconventional development
projects that are potentially quite controversial in the host country.
Nevertheless, while a few U.S. ambassadors have complained from
time to time about problems caused by the activities of the IAF, the
overall record has been that of an independent entity functioning
without embarrassment to the U.S. government.

Jim McIntyre has emphasized the need to avoid problems of dupli-
cation and policy coordination with the State Department. But the HRF
would not be involved in the process of formulating U.S. government
policy, so that it could not complicate that process. Most, if not all, of
the proposed functions are best accomplished by an organization with
some independence from the U.S. government. In the case of refugee
programs, the HRF would be concerned specifically with victims of
human rights repression, complementing but not duplicating current
State Department activities. Moreover, assistance to refugees would be
only a relatively modest part of the HRF’s overall program.
I can conclude only that the advantages of the HRF proposal sub-
stantially outweigh the risks.
5. Implementation
If you approve this proposal, I would recommend that we begin
consultations with Zablocki, Fraser and Fascell, and on the Senate side
with Sparkman, Kennedy and Case. If these prove successful, the con-
sultations can be expanded to include the members of the Vice Presi-
dent’s human rights group. Once the details have been worked out, the
proposal can be announced as a Presidential initiative with the appro-
priate Congressional support.

Recommendation:
That you approve this proposal, and initiation of Congressional
consultations to be carried out by NSC in close consultation with Frank
Moore.

Human Rights

115.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
36188. Subject: Release of Human Rights Reports. Reference: State
1. The Chairmen of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
and the House International Relations Committee released the 105
“Country Reports on Human Rights Practices” February 9. A statement
was issued in the names of the two chairmen which noted the legisla-
tive basis for the submission of the reports, and emphasized Congress’s
role in setting “basic guidelines of America’s human rights policy”. The
statement noted that “during the past two years, Congress has enacted
legislation linking a country’s human rights performance to the four
major types of foreign assistance: security assistance, bilateral develop-
ment assistance, multilateral assistance, and PL 480 food aid. To insure
that human rights considerations are taken into account in U.S. assist-
ance policies, Congress has established certain procedures and guide-
lines for the Executive Branch to follow. These reports are a key ele-
ment in providing Congress with the necessary information for
informed judgements”. The statement continued, “Our two com-
mittees will study these reports carefully as we prepare to consider aid
levels for individual countries in connection with fiscal year 1979 eco-
nomic and security assistance legislation.”
2. The reports have already been the subject of a number of news-
paper articles and at least one editorial, which appeared in The Wash-
ington Post February 8. We expect more to come.
3. The Department has ordered sufficient copies of the volume of
reports to provide two to each Embassy, one for its own use and one to
provide to the host government, if desired. The reports will be for-
warded by pouch as soon as received from the GPO.
classified; Priority. Drafted by H. Kenneth Hill; cleared by Martens, Moran, Lamb, Shinn,
and Shurtleff; approved by Hill.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
4. The Department wishes to thank and commend all who assisted
in collecting and reporting human rights information, and drafting and
clearing of reports for submission to Congress.

Vance

116.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at
Geneva
36220. For USDel to the Human Rights Commission. Subject: High
Commissioner for Human Rights Proposal.
1. Department has reviewed current status of Human Rights Com-
missioner proposal and possible alternatives such as an Under Secre-
tary General for Human Rights. We have concluded that USDel should
continue to strongly support High Commissioner proposal and not re-
peat not endorse or pursue further consultations on Under Secretary
General or other similar alternative proposal.
2. As USDel knows, President Carter expressed continued US sup-
port for a UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in his speech at
zation to change that basic policy. Our goal is still to establish a strong
position with a mandate guaranteeing sufficient freedom and influence
to promote effectively basic human rights throughout the world.
3. We believe that an Under Secretary General would be likely to
have his authority seriously circumscribed by virtue of the limitations
of the UN Secretariat system. His effectiveness would largely depend
on the political character of the Secretary General. There are also se-
rious financial and structural implications for the UN system itself in
creating a new Under Secretary General position.
4. Department is prepared to consider possibility of supporting al-
ternative title for UN official with the same type of autonomy we en-
visage for the High Commissioner. Provided the mandate is essentially
the same, we could seek White House approval for a “UN Special Rep-
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information immediate to USUN. Drafted by John Tefft
(IO/UNA) and Laurel Shea (IO/UNP); cleared by Rita Taubenfeld (IO/HR) and Barry;
approved by Maynes.

Human Rights
resentative for Human Rights” or “Special Rapporteur for Human
Rights” or similar title. Please advise if your consultations lead you to
believe such an alternative is possible.

Vance

117.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, February 15, 1978
SUBJECT
The Human Rights Foundation
Paul Kreisberg told me of Zbig’s proposal which Jessica brought to
yesterday’s meeting. I am aware of its sensitivity but thought you
might be interested in my first reactions.

I share some of the concerns that apparently prompted the pro-
posal: emphasis on promoting human rights (rather than “punishing”
violators) in different social and cultural contexts; institutionalization
of American concern for human rights beyond this Administration’s
span; and a less defensive and reactive posture toward human rights
advocates on the Hill, are all worthy goals.

118.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, February 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Transmittal to the Senate of Four International Human Rights Treaties
Attached for your signature (Tab A) is a letter of transmittal to the
Senate asking for its advice and consent to ratification of three UN
human rights treaties:
—The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, signed on behalf of the United States on Sep-
tember 29, 1977;
—The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, signed on behalf of the United States on October 5, 1977;
—The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, signed
on behalf of the United States on October 5, 1977; and the American
Convention on Human Rights, signed on behalf of the United States on
June 1, 1977.

Together with your letter of transmittal, State will send to the
Senate reports outlining the recommended reservations, under-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
standings and declarations which the Administration believes are nec-
essary to make the treaties consonant with U.S. law.

Perhaps the most controversial of the recommended reservations
pertains to Article 4 of the American Convention. This Article deals
with the right to life generally, including both abortion and capital pun-
ishment. Many of its provisions are not in accord with United States
law and policy, or deal with matters in which the law is unsettled. For
example, on Right to Life, Article 4 states: “Every person has the right
to have his life respected. This right shall be protected by law and, in
general, from the moment of conception. No one shall be arbitrarily de-
prived of his life.” There are also several provisions relating to the
death penalty. Consequently, a flat but straightforward reservation is
recommended to the Senate, as follows: “United States adherence to
Article 4 is subject to the Constitution and other law of the United
States.”
In the case of the UN treaties, several reservations are included to
protect possible infringements of the rights of free speech. For example,
the Convention on Racial Discrimination restricts the dissemination of
ideas which promote or incite racial discrimination. A simple reserva-
tion is recommended: “. . . nothing in this Convention shall be deemed
to require or to authorize legislation or other action by the United States
which would restrict the right of free speech protected by the Constitu-
tion, laws, and practice of the United States.” Finally, there is language
in the Covenant on Economic and Social Rights which extreme right
wing groups in the U.S. assert could be interpreted to interfere with the
private ownership of property. While this is a far-fetched argument,
language is recommended which would avoid any such interpretation:
“The United States understands that under the Covenant everyone has
the right to own property alone as well as in association with others,
and that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.” In short,
every effort has been made to keep the reservations simple, specific and
consistent with accepted principles of international law.
Bob Lipshutz has reviewed the letter of transmittal as well as
State’s detailed reports, and recommends that you sign the letter of
transmittal. Frank Moore also supports this recommendation. Jim
Fallows cleared the text of the transmittal.

Recommendation:
That you sign both copies of the letter of transmittal at Tab A.

Human Rights
119.

Presidential Directive/NSC–301
Washington, February 17, 1978
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Attorney General
The Secretary of Commerce
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The United States Representative to the United Nations
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director, United States Information Agency
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
It shall be a major objective of U.S. foreign policy to promote the
observance of human rights throughout the world. The policy shall be
applied globally, but with due consideration to the cultural, political
and historical characteristics of each nation, and to other fundamental
U.S. interests with respect to the nation in question.
Specifically:
1. It shall be the objective of the U.S. human rights policy to reduce
worldwide governmental violations of the integrity of the person (e.g.,
torture; cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; arbitrary arrest or im-
prisonment; lengthy detention without trial, and assassination) and, to
enhance civil and political liberties (e.g., freedom of speech, of religion,
of assembly, of movement and of the press; and the right to basic judi-
cial protections). It will also be a continuing U.S. objective to promote
basic economic and social rights (e.g., adequate food, education, shelter
and health).
2. In promoting human rights, the United States shall use the full
range of its diplomatic tools, including direct diplomatic contacts,
public statements, symbolic acts, consultations with allies, cooperation
with nongovernmental organizations, and work with international
organizations.
3. Greater reliance should be placed on positive inducements and
incentives acknowledging improvements in human rights whenever
appropriate and possible, through preferential treatment in political re-
lations and economic benefits.
4. To this end, countries with a good or substantially improving
record of human rights observance will be given special consideration
in the allocation of U.S. foreign assistance, just as countries with a poor
or deteriorating record will receive less favorable consideration. Pro-
grams for each fiscal year shall be reviewed in this light.
5. In the evaluation of the human rights condition of a foreign na-
tion in the course of the implementation of this directive, primary em-
phasis shall be placed on longer term trends and on the cumulative ef-
fect of specific events.
6. The U.S. shall not, other than in exceptional circumstances, take
any action which would result in material or financial support to the
police, civil law enforcement authorities, or others performing internal
security functions of governments engaged in serious violations of
human rights.
7. U.S. human rights actions within the International Financial In-
stitutions shall be designed and implemented so as not to undermine
the essential U.S. interest of preserving these institutions as effective
economic instruments. To this end, future U.S. actions in the Interna-
tional Financial Institutions shall seek to: utilize most effectively both

Human Rights
our voice and our vote; understand and attempt to influence the Banks’
actions as early as possible in the loan process; and, engage the support
of other nations and multilateral organizations.
8. The Interagency Group shall periodically report to the PRC/
NSC on the actions taken or recommended pursuant to this Presiden-
tial Directive. In particular, the Interagency Group shall, within two
months, report on the effectiveness of recent U.S. actions in the Interna-
tional Financial Institutions, with particular attention to: Congressional
attitudes and prospective legislation; views of other nations as to the
propriety and legality of actions we may take; and, the effect of our ac-
tions on the advancement of U.S. human rights objectives.

Jimmy Carter

120.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, February 22, 1978
SUBJECT
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Proposal
The President’s proposal to create a high commissioner for human
rights will be debated at the current UN Human Rights Commission
meeting under Agenda Item 11 which is due to come up late next week.
While we have support for the proposal from our western European
allies and from a few of the non-aligned, Senegal, etc., overall opinion
at the Commission is heavily weighted against us, and it may be better
to postpone the debate on this issue to a different UN forum. The
Cubans have threatened to introduce a resolution to defer consider-
ation indefinitely, but we do not yet know whether they will act on it.

121.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter
Washington, February 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights Foundation
While I share the concerns2 that prompted the proposal for a
Human Rights Foundation, I have serious doubts about it, and would

122.

Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Staff
Washington, undated
[Omitted
here
are
the
table
of
and
Section
“Introduction.”]
II. VALUES
American values provide the base of our policy. Our concern for
the welfare of others coincides with our own national interest:
—to do what we can to alleviate injustice and tension before they
erupt into violence;
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—to help reduce the threat of war and the high cost of military
establishments;
—to contribute to the global economic growth and equity on
which our own national prosperity depends.

Human Rights:
The human rights policy of this Administration most clearly repre-
sents the application of our values to the practical decisions of foreign
policy.

Our concern is for those human rights which have been recognized
internationally—in the UN Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, and other UN covenants and conventions; in the Amer-
ican Convention on Human Rights; and in the final act of the Confer-
ence on Security and Cooperation in Europe. These documents codify
the right to be free from torture or arbitrary arrest; the right to political
freedom; and basic economic rights and opportunities. Our focus on
these human rights is not an attempt to impose the American political
system on others. These rights can be enjoyed under various political
systems and in differing manner. They are rights to which all are
entitled.

It is easy to be for all these rights in our rhetoric. Indeed no civi-
lized nation has ever declared itself against them. It is more complex to
take the human rights dimension into account in the major foreign
policy decisions we take. We are trying to do that. That is how we view
our obligations to American law and tradition.

Human rights concerns have been integrated into all levels of our
dealings with foreign governments—from Presidential exchanges to
the discussions of working level officials. It is clear to all governments
that we consider how they treat their own people as an important factor
in all our dealings with them.

We have affirmed our commitment to formal international stand-
ards—by finally signing the UN covenants on economic, social, and
cultural rights and on civil and political rights and by signing the
American Convention on Human Rights. We are working to improve
the human rights machinery of the UN and the Organization of Amer-
ican States, and to secure better implementation of the human rights
provisions of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
These multilateral efforts are important since they emphasize that
America is not preaching to the rest of the world, but adding its voice to
all the others who are working to improve the plight of individuals.
Words must be supported with actions. Proposals for American
assistance—loans or grants through our aid program; our position on
loans in the international development banks; military assistance or
even sales—are carefully reviewed from a human rights point of view.
This is a time-consuming process, since we analyze the human rights

Human Rights
situation in the country concerned, who will benefit from the assist-
ance, and how we can effectively assist the cause of human rights and
the lot of the neediest.

We have modified aid allocations on human rights grounds and
we are working to ensure that our bilateral programs meet the basic
human needs of the poor for food, shelter, health care, and education.
We oppose loans in the international development banks to countries
with serious human rights problems, unless the loans are aimed at sat-
isfying basic human needs. We have accepted the fact that our relations
with certain countries may be strained as a result of our attention to
human rights. As human rights conditions improve, these strains
should be eased.

It may be of interest to record some of the actual dilemmas we face,
for example, in linking human rights and foreign assistance. We often
ask ourselves: should we oppose a loan which could promote the eco-
nomic condition of poor people, in hopes of influencing their gov-
ernments to permit a greater exercise of political rights? Would with-
holding security aid in a particular situation stimulate a siege
mentality, leading to an even harsher crackdown on dissident ele-
ments, or would its practical effect be to promote human rights? How
can we best show recognition of the progress a society is making, and
thus reinforce that process, even if the general human rights situation
remains unacceptable?

These and other hard questions require case-by-case analysis.
Some observers will find our choices inconsistent. This is because
tactics should be adaptable, although our goals are not. We will take
those actions we believe will be most effective in each country, and
which are consistent with statutory provisions designed to promote re-
spect for internationally recognized human rights.

We must also keep our human rights concerns in balance with
other national interests. We often must determine how best to respond
to the needs of individuals living under authoritarian regimes, while
still retaining the necessary cooperation of their governments on secu-
rity or economic matters that are vital to us. Even in striking this bal-
ance however, our broad goal remains the same: economic and security
policies, as well as policy on “human rights”, are guided by a concern
with the impact of all we do on the welfare of individuals.
We are embarked on a long term endeavor. Progress must be
measured over the long run. This Administration will probably not see
the full results—successful or not—of our efforts in this field. Nor can
we claim credit for many decisions made by sovereign foreign gov-
ernments. But we have contributed to an international climate in which
tangible progress was made in 1977:
—Thousands of prisoners have been freed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Some political systems have become a little more open. States of
siege have ended and elections have been scheduled in a number of
countries.
—International human rights commissions have been permitted to
visit countries formerly closed to them.

The world was not transformed by such events. But many indi-
viduals were better off at the end of 1977 than at its beginning.
This is a sound beginning, but our experience has shown us that
there are sometimes even better ways to proceed:
—In this first year we have most often reacted to human rights vio-
lations by reducing or ending economic or military assistance pro-
grams. We wish to increasingly emphasize positive actions to help gov-
ernments which are trying to improve the lot of their own people. We
are working to find ways to use our assistance affirmatively, to pro-
mote human rights, rather than in ways which are primarily punitive.
—We must work even more closely with international organiza-
tions and foreign leaders to find the most constructive ways to advance
human rights in cultures and political traditions different from our
own.
—In our dealings with other nations and people we must recog-
nize human rights problems of our own. The President’s plans for wel-
fare reform, urban renewal, more jobs for disadvantaged youth, are all
part of a commitment constantly to improve our own human rights
performance.

In sum, there has been a perceptible change in the international
view of what the United States stands for in the world. Our most du-
rable source of strength is the symbol of individual liberty and oppor-
tunity that we represent to others.

[Omitted here are Sections III (“Peace”), IV (“Individual Economic
Well-Being”), and V (“Conclusion”).]

124.

Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
Secretary of State Vance
Washington, March 6, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights Policies and the Legislation for the International Development
Banks
I want to share with you my increasing concern about our current
human rights policies in the foreign assistance field.

Within a week, the Congress will begin to question the Adminis-
tration on how we are implementing the human rights provisions of
Public Law 95–118—on which you and I have a joint responsibility to
report within the next six months. There is increasing dissatisfaction by
some members of Congress that our human rights strategy is being ap-
plied inconsistently and without clear criteria.

As an example, Congressman Charles Wilson of Texas, who until
now has been one of our strongest supporters on the Appropriations
Committee, plans to seek widespread support for a drastic cut in our
requested appropriations for AID and the international development
banks because of his dissatisfaction with the inconsistent application of
our human rights policy. Such a result would, of course, have serious
implications for U.S. foreign policy. I am afraid that a number of other
members of Congress, including some of our best friends in past years,
have similar feelings.

At the same time, our friends abroad, even though they share
many of our human rights objectives, remain concerned about the way
in which we seek to promote human rights in the international financial
institutions and about the consistency of our approach. Several Euro-
pean governments cautioned our recent State/Treasury Consultations
team that human rights sanctions in the IFIs should be applied care-
fully and consistently, and preferably limited to a small number of
countries so as to minimize confrontation and limit the risk that others
may seek to introduce narrow political considerations which might
jeopardize the integrity of the multilateral institutions. They indicated
Human Rights
some willingness to cooperate with us to advance human rights in the
IFIs provided we proceed quietly, selectively, and with sensitivity to
the risks involved. In fact, President Giscard d’Estaing of France has
personally made just these points, in setting French policy on the
subject.

It is urgent, therefore, that we review our present strategy and pro-
cedures for handling human rights in the international development
banks. This will implement the President’s Directive/NSC–30 that
“U.S. human rights actions in the IFIs shall be designed and imple-
mented so as not to undermine essential U.S. interests of preserving
these institutions as effective economic instruments.” Specifically, there
is a need for:
1. Comprehensive human rights strategy papers for problem coun-
tries, which analyze the three key issues; our specific human rights ob-
jectives in such countries, the relationship between human rights objec-
tives and other U.S. national objectives, and the array of policy
instruments which can be used to further the human rights effort.
I believe that U.S. human rights objectives must be part of a com-
prehensive country strategy which takes into account both U.S. goals
and available policy instruments. In certain countries, human rights vi-
olations may be so egregious as to overshadow completely all other
considerations. But only when such a country strategy is delineated can
we decide what U.S. position on prospective IFI loans (and bilateral
assistance programs) is the proper one to achieve our objectives. Our
current procedures focus too much on specific loans rather than on
how, and with what policy instruments, we can most effectively induce
offending governments to alter their human rights practices.
2. A clearer set of criteria for invoking sanctions in the IFIs and for
excepting loans which directly meet basic human needs. In my view,
sanctions in the IFIs generally should be applied only after our several
bilateral policy instruments have been tried.
3. Agreement to limit the use of U.S. votes in the IFIs to clear-cut
situations of gross violations, where we are most likely to be supported
by other members.
4. A systematic effort to keep other like-minded governments in-
formed of our views and intentions regarding loans to countries which
present serious human rights problems, and for ongoing consultations
with such governments aimed at developing greater consensus on cri-
teria and policies for dealing with human rights problems.
We need to develop a clear, consistent, and careful approach for
dealing with human rights in the international development banks

125.

Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State
3851. Subject: 34th Human Rights Commission—Positive Balance
Sheet.

Summary: In terms of U.S. interests and objectives the results of
this HRC session taken as a whole were notably positive. For the first
time action was taken under the HRC’s confidential “1503” proce-
dures2 to investigate the situation in Uganda and Equatorial Guinea
and establish “contacts” with Paraguay through the Secretary-General.
Bolivia, Malawi, Republic of Korea and Ethiopia will be kept under
scrutiny by the HRC, while Indonesia is simply invited to continue co-
operation with the commission. Uruguay has been asked to provide
further information to the HRC. The “public” resolution on Chile was
formulated to meet U.S. conditions for co-sponsorship, forcing out
Cuban and Yugoslav cosponsorship. Moreover an implicitly critical
“decision” on Cambodia was adopted which invites information from
all sources on human rights conditions in that country for inclusion in a
report by the UN Secretary-General. The Soviets elicited no significant
support for an attempt to inject the neutron bomb issue into HRC
business. On the other hand predictable resolutions were adopted on
the Israeli settlements issue and Palestinian self-determination rights
over U.S. opposition, although even here language in the settlements
Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated for information to USUN, Dakar, and Monrovia.
The Department repeated the text in telegram 70504 to all diplomatic and consular posts,

Human Rights
text concerning the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention was
modified to enable U.S. support. The resolutions on the Southern Af-
rican apartheid issues, while unacceptable, were nevertheless pur-
posely moderated to enable U.S.–WEO abstentions. Useful Third
World initiatives on new national and regional human rights commis-
sions were adopted. The U.S. candidate for the HRC’s subcommission
was re-elected. USDel was able to keep the idea of a UN High Commis-
sioner for Human Rights alive. Measured against Soviet wishes to ex-
tinguish the idea, this was an accomplishment. African and other
non-aligned support was key to the success of U.S. and WEO efforts to
achieve the positive actions recorded by this HRC session. The cooper-
ation and skill of the Senegalese chairman was important to the success
of our efforts. Just as important, however, there were clear indications
of a continuing new non-aligned thrust on human rights issues that is
compatible with and contributive to our policies. End summary.
ended March 10 and represented a singularly successful session from
the U.S. standpoint. The following is a preliminary assessment for the
Department’s possible use in transmitting to those posts we ap-
proached on HRC issues. USDel believes that the pre-session ground-
work efforts at USUN and in capitals with other governments contrib-
uted importantly to the overall positive outcome of the session.
2. The conference was generally characterized by an atmosphere of
principled compromise and substantive progress on most of the human
rights issues before it. Confrontations were rare and when they did
occur the Soviets-EE’s and especially the Cubans were more often the
losers than the U.S. and WEO’s.
3. For the first time meaningful follow-up action was taken under
the HRC’s confidential “1503” procedures, i.e., closed debates and
votes. Moreover Uganda was the first country ever to be singled out for
further investigation under these procedures. A “prominent African” is
to be approached to investigate conditions there. Additionally a deci-
sion was taken to require Equatorial Guinea either to respond mean-
ingfully to the complaints against it under the confidential procedures
or be confronted with a public debate at next year’s session. Solid Af-
rican pressure (Ivory Coast, Lesotho, Rwanda, and especially Senegal
and Nigeria) pushed through these decisions over Soviet-EE and some
other Third World opposition. It was decided to ask the Secretary-
General to establish “contacts” with Paraguay to obtain further infor-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
mation on the situation there. Decisions were also taken to keep the sit-
uations “under review” in Bolivia, Malawi, South Korea, and Ethiopia.
Uruguay will be asked to provide additional information on “respect
for human rights” and to provide “fullest possible explanation” re the
“prospects for an early restoration of political rights” in that country.
Their responses will be considered at the next HRC. While Indonesia,
Korea and Ethiopia were treated more lightly than the magnitude of
complaints against those countries would seem to merit, all will be kept
under scrutiny and have been asked to continue their cooperation with
the HRC.
4. Public resolutions were adopted on Chile, Israeli settlements in
the Occupied Territories, Palestinian self-determination rights, South
African apartheid policies and South African-Western “assistance.”
However we believe it is fair to say that when these are considered to-
gether with the 1503 decisions the HRC clearly disavowed selective
morality.
5. Specifically, the Chile resolution was shaped to accommodate
U.S. conditions for co-sponsorship to the extent that the Cubans and
Yugoslavs withdrew their co-sponsorship in the eleventh hour. A par-
ticular point of contention was whether or not the resolution would
“take note” of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission’s most
recent report on conditions in Chile. This was anathema to Cuba which
regards this as an implicit expression of support for the OAS.
6. As in other multilateral fora, the Soviets raised the issue of the
neutron bomb under the item concerning the impact on human rights
of scientific and technological development (see septels). However
their efforts were only rhetorical and tentative and they did not in the
end press the issue via an allegedly Polish resolution (circulated infor-
mally). Indeed the Soviets responded weakly to strong UK and U.S.
statements on the issue.
7. The Arab-Israeli resolutions were tough and clearly unaccept-
able to the U.S. but, in light of particularly strong Arab emotions at this
juncture in the Middle East dispute, they could have been much worse.
Part A of one resolution condemned the Israeli settlements policy and
alleged torture of “prisoners of war.” Part B of the same resolution,
however, was substantively unchanged from the 1977 resolution re-
garding applicability of the fourth Geneva Convention to the Occupied
Territories, in order expressly to enable U.S. participation in a con-
sensus. The final Arab resolution asserted a Palestinian right to self-
determination to be pursued (implicitly) by armed struggle. It was sig-

Human Rights
nificant, however, that the tone of these resolutions was moderated to
split the WEO’s between consistent U.S. and Canadian “no” votes and
other WEO abstentions.
8. The HRC also adopted two South African resolutions. The first
dealt with the HRC working group report on Southern African human
rights violations. However, due to African desires to avoid provoking
outright Western, especially U.S. opposition, it was toned down sub-
stantively and rhetorically from the counterpart resolution adopted in
1977, despite Cuban preferences and pressure for explicit endorsement
of the 1977 Havana Seminar decisions on Africa. Similarly a resolution
concerning WEO commercial-nuclear links with South Africa was also
notably free of anti-Western verbiage. Instead the emphasis was on in-
troducing pressures for practical application of the concept of apart-
heid as an international crime. This was coupled with other resolutions
bearing on implementation of the Anti-Apartheid Convention and the
celebration of 1978 as International Anti-Apartheid Year. It is possible
that for the longer term the Africans have decided to move for in-
creased practical pressures in UN fora rather than indulgence in emo-
tional anti-Western outbursts.
9. UN human rights machinery: HRC actions on improving human
rights reporting and procedural mechanisms were mixed but generally
positive. Other Commission members were clearly unreceptive to en-
dorsing or taking steps toward the creation of the post of a UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights despite our strong urging. This idea
was listed along with a number of other suggestions bearing on prac-
tical aspects of the UN human rights machinery that are to be studied in
an overall analysis to be presented to the next session. However, if con-
sidered against intense Soviet efforts to have the idea either disavowed
or buried permanently, the fact that the concept has been kept alive and
will be discussed further is significant. Clearly a lot more work has to
be done with the Third World countries who seem to perceive a High
Commissioner as being uniquely a high level investigator with a UN
carte blanche to interfere with or embarrass member states.
10. Similarly, a Jordanian proposal to lengthen HRC sessions was
not pressed to a vote, but forwarded as an idea to be considered in the
overall analysis exercise, when it became apparent there was insuffi-
cient Commission support.
11. However, the Commission did adopt an Indian initiated reso-
lution advocating the creation by all UN members of national human
rights commissions. Even more significantly, the Commission adopted
a Nigerian proposal calling for the creation of regional human rights
commissions where none presently exist. It was stated publicly as well
as privately by Third World proponents, e.g., Egypt, that the intended
model for Africa is the OAS Inter-American Commission on Human

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Rights. We consider these ideas sound steps in the right direction and
find even more significance for our long range human rights policy in
the fact that key Third World countries initiated and pressed them to
formal adoption. In sum, others well outside the WEO human
rights “bloc” are independently moving to enhance human rights
mechanisms.
12. The U.S. role as a prime mover in the HRC was preserved by
the re-election of Ambassador W. Beverly Carter, Jr., (23 votes) to the
HRC’s Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities. This body, comprising 26 members serving in a private
expert capacity, is the channel through which complaints of human
rights violations lodged with the UN are directed for scrutiny and rec-
ommendations for transmittal to the HRC.
13. Cambodian human rights violations were eased into the spot-
light of UN attention by consensus adoption of a “decision” that asks
the Secretary-General to submit the relevant records of this session’s
proceedings to the Government of “Democratic” Kampuchea for its re-
sponse. That response together with “all information which may be
available about the situation” is to be reported back to the HRC next
year through the subcommission. The decision was a compromise on a
UK-initiated resolution that called for a more straightforward investi-
gation. However, minimal as the decision was, it was implicitly critical
and seems to permit the consideration by the HRC of information sub-
mitted from all sources, including the detailed charges made in the
UK’s speech. Successful pursuit of the case against Cambodia will re-
quire close and careful coordination before the 1978 HRC session.
14. Additionally, the Commission was able to address, at least ini-
tially, far more agenda items than it has been able to in recent years. Re-
sults were mixed. The most notable failure was the effort to move for-
ward on a draft declaration on religious intolerance. The draft
foundered due to angry Third World opposition (Moslem and Chris-
tian alike), to Soviet insistence on language providing for the freedom
not rpt not to believe in a religion. On other subjects, initial steps were
taken by the establishment of various working groups to come up with
proposals on measures to (a) promote rights of ethnic, religious and lin-
guistic minorities; (b) enhance rights of migrant workers; and (c) recon-
sider the religious intolerance declaration. The Swedish-initiated text of
a draft convention against torture was accepted as a basis for further
discussion by a working group to meet just before the next HRC ses-
sion. UN member states will submit comments that will be compiled
for the working group’s consideration. Under the heading of the role of
youth in promoting human rights, the issue of conscientious objection
to military service was held over for the HRC agenda.

Human Rights
15. One area of particular potential concern for the U.S. emerged at
this HRC: the American Indian issue. A representative of the Interna-
tional Indian Treaty Council spoke twice, as reported septel. Speaking
on the item of the right of self-determination the IITC effectively pre-
sented though exaggerated the argument of consistent USG denial of
this right to our Indian population. They again spoke late in the session
on the topic of alleged calculated judicial prejudice against Indians and
alleged brutal mistreatment of Indian prison inmates. While no resolu-
tions were presented, the statements at this session may well be laying
the groundwork for escalated action at future HRC sessions.
16. Many other delegations were favorably impressed by the
USRep’s reply to the first of the above statements that we welcomed the
Indians’ use of the HRC forum, and promised continued USG efforts to
respond to Indian complaints. However, it was our impression that
most other countries, quite apart from the Soviets-EE’s, believe the In-
dians’ complaints have some validity. Unless we show positive im-
provement in this area, we might find others raising this subject at a
later time.
17. Lastly, the Commission must also be considered from the
standpoint of its function as a forum to expound and exchange views,
as well as to function as a mechanism. From this standpoint the U.S.
also profited considerably. For example, Soviet discrimination against
its Christians and Jews was raised vigorously for the first time in recent
years in strong statements by U.S. Chief Delegate Mezvinsky and
Congressman John Buchanan. Several Christian and Jewish non-
governmental organization reps, as well as the Israeli observer del here,
expressed their deep appreciation. Additionally there were several ex-
changes between the U.S. and the USSR, Cuban and Argentine dels.
None responded and all seemed decisively outpointed when the U.S.
offered to accept HRC investigation of racial ethnic minority human
rights in America upon the expectation that the Soviets, Cubans and
Argentinians would also open their doors to the HRC to investigate the
complaints against them.
18. However, exchanges of rhetorical blows were rare. More
striking, particularly in the closed session debate, was the lead in de-
fense of respect for human rights taken by such developing countries as
Senegal, Nigeria, Colombia, Lesotho and Panama. These responded
strongly to reject Soviet-Cuban arguments that revolutionary situations
Jimmy Durham, representing the International Indian Treaty Council, had delivered a
statement on February 8. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Mezvinsky had delivered a statement to the Commission in response to Durham’s earlier

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“justified” the violation of human rights in the interests of the “ma-
jority.” There was also a notably high level of debate on the Southern
African issues. The theme pressed time and again was that the West
was “guilty” of a double standard on human rights by refusing to take
practical action on South Africa. Even this debate had some comfort-
able moments for the U.S. when, for example, the delegate from Le-
sotho in tracing historic low points of man’s inhumanity to man cited
“Prague, 1968.” Nevertheless, it was clear that South Africa will con-
tinue to be one of the most important measures of U.S. moral credibility
in this forum.
19. Indeed the Africans throughout the HRC were the key, gener-
ally controlling factors. In particular Keba M’baye, Chief Justice of
Senegal, proved himself to be a superb chairman. As Department will
recall, he promised and delivered a credible and creditable session of
the HRC. He was a tough and efficient manager of session proceedings
and yet politically deft enough to pre-empt several developing con-
frontations by work behind the scenes to obtain consensus actions or at
least soften the sting of decisions unacceptable to US (African and
Arab-Israeli issues) and to others. USDel would strongly recommend
that Department consider an appropriate expression of U.S. apprecia-
tion for M’baye’s contribution at the highest levels in Senegal. Indeed
only next year when M’baye is no longer in the chair of the HRC will
we be able to see clearly whether this session was a phenomenon or a
step forward toward a fragile but promising new international human
rights understanding. In any event this session has demonstrated that
human rights objectives in the UN fora can be pursued with, rather
than in spite of, the Third World.
20. The private remarks of a Soviet DelOff to one of our DelOffs
yesterday suggest the Soviets are considerably less than content with
this session. The Soviet observed that the U.S. should be pleased with
the meeting’s result. Our DelOff remarked that share-and-share alike
was presumably acceptable to any Marxist-Leninist. The Soviet re-
sponse was: “yes, but not here.”
Vanden Heuvel
Human Rights
126.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian), the
Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations
(Bennet), and the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake)
to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, March 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Department Position on Fascell/Fraser Bill to Establish an Institute for Human
Rights and Freedom
Issue for Decision
Whether the Department should support the legislation intro-
duced by Congressmen Dante Fascell and Donald Fraser to establish an
“Institute for Human Rights and Freedom.”
Essential Factors
Congressmen Fascell and Fraser introduced legislation on March 7
to establish an independent Federal agency, the Institute for Human
Rights and Freedom. The Institute, modeled in part on the National En-
dowment of the Arts and the Inter-American Foundation, would pro-
vide financial and other assistance to private individuals and groups to
“openly carry out and promote international respect and observance
for human rights and fundamental freedoms.”
Our support is expected on the bill. Endorsing it will yield certain
advantages. Opposing it, however, will certainly entail significant po-
litical disadvantages.

To date this Administration, which has identified itself fully with a
higher priority for human rights, has opposed virtually all legislative
human rights initiatives since taking office, thereby raising doubts as to
our intentions. The Institute bill is receiving wide support on the Hill
ited Official Use. Sent through Christopher, who did not initial the memorandum.
Drafted by Schneider on March 14; concurred in by Runyon and Hume, who did not ini-
tial the memorandum. Kreisberg initialed the memorandum on Lake’s behalf. The date is
hand-stamped.
was referred to the House Committee on International Relations. Zablocki, under a
March 14 letter to Vance, sent a copy of the bill to the Department of State, requesting the
Department’s comments on the proposed legislation. H.R. 11326 outlined the functions,
bureaucratic structure, powers, and responsibilities of the proposed Institute for Human
Rights and Freedom. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780039–
2463)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and has Brzezinski’s support (see attachment). It is being referred to
on the Hill as being a “motherhood” Bill.) Hearings tentatively are
stantial support from the NGO community including church groups,
the International Commission of Jurists, Freedom House, and the Inter-
national League for Human Rights.

The authors of the legislation have emphasized the autonomy and
independence of the Institute. It will be governed by a seven-member
board of directors appointed by the President with the advice and con-
sent of the Senate. It would have a staff of no more than twenty-five
members. The board members are to be chosen from among “indi-
viduals in private life with a demonstrated concern for, and experience
in matters pertaining to, human rights and fundamental freedoms.” No
more than four directors may be in the same political party. The term
would be for six years with appointments staggered every two years.
An executive director selected by the board would be the day-to-day
manager.

The funding of the Institute would be through annual appropria-
tions with a $5 million authorization for FY ’79. It would be a non-profit
corporation able to accept private bequests as well.

The Bill attempts to ensure that the Institute would be aware of
U.S. foreign policy concerns while avoiding the suspicion that it is an
instrument of U.S. policy.

The Bill states “the Secretary of State shall keep the Institute in-
formed on U.S. foreign policy as it relates to activities of the Institute.
The Institute shall give consideration to the foreign policy of the U.S. in
carrying out this act but shall not be subject to the direction of the Secre-
tary of State in carrying out its responsibilities under this Act.”
Possible amendments to this section could range from having the
Secretary’s designee sitting as an ex-officio member of the board, or, as
in the case of the Inter-American Foundation, with voting powers.
More acceptable to the authors might be a provision which stated that
the board should maintain liaison with the Department and invite the
Secretary’s designee to participate in its deliberations.
The Institute’s functions according to the legislation are to provide
assistance to human rights NGO’s “by means consistent with the UN
Human Rights
Charter and other international obligations of the U.S.”, to run or sup-
port conferences and seminars, to provide assistance for the publica-
tion of books and displays of art suppressed for political reasons, car-
rying out research and studies, assisting NGOs which support victims
of political persecution and their families including the provision of
legal aid. Such assistance can only be with the consent of the recipient
and must be provided openly. If activities are carried out in a foreign
country, they must be consistent with the laws of that country. One ap-
proach could be to try to restrict the Institute to informational activities,
including arranging for conferences, and research on human rights,
and even of publication or display in the U.S. of books and art banned
abroad, but eliminate funding for organizations, individuals, and activ-
ities abroad which would provide the greatest chance of seriously em-
barassing our foreign policy. The sponsors of the legislation are likely
to resist such constraints strongly, however, since one of their principal
motivations is to assist the legal defense of individuals and groups im-
prisoned or arrested on human rights grounds abroad.

Possible Options
1. Support the Fascell/Fraser Bill.

Pro
—Such an entity can be helpful in supporting efforts to improve
human rights conditions abroad and in expanding our knowledge and
understanding of human rights issues.
—Places the USG in support of a Congressional human rights
initiative.
—The Institute will be a key mechanism to support those private
NGOs in the human rights field and our support will be viewed favor-
ably by that constituency.
—Will expand U.S. influence with human rights constituencies
overseas.

Con
—Some countries may object to activities of the NGOs which are
supported by the Institute and blame the USG because of our funding
of the Institute.
—There would be no control over the Institute’s activities by the
Department of State so that activities it undertook could cause diffi-
culties in our bilateral relations with repressive regimes.
2. Support the legislation but endorse amendments to increase the
State Department’s role in the direction of the Institute’s activities.
Pro
—It would place the USG in support of the general human rights
thrust of the bill.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—It would provide for the possibility of greater State Department
control over the activities of the Institute and diminish the likelihood of
conflicts with U.S. foreign policy concerns.

Con
—The value of the Institute is in part its independence which will
avoid the appearance of being an instrument of U.S. policy thus permit-
ting activities to be undertaken that the State Department could not
fund and making it more acceptable internationally.
—Since it is unlikely we would get more than one State Depart-
ment board member, we would never have complete control and yet
we would be held far more responsible for all of its activities by others.
3. Support establishment of an Institute but propose limiting its
functions to holding of conferences and conducting of research on
human rights issues, but not providing funding or grants for indi-
viduals or organizations, or sponsoring any activity in foreign
countries.

Pro
—It would provide a basis for individuals concerned with human
rights to meet regularly and exchange views and information.
—It would meet a need for clarifying some basic concepts in the
human rights field, particularly economic and social human rights.
—It would eliminate the chance of serious foreign policy embar-
rassment as a result of disbursement of funds to groups or individuals
whose activities could be strongly resented and objected to by foreign
governments.

Con
—Would not meet the interest of the sponsors in providing
funding for responsible human rights groups.
—May be criticized by some NGOs which look to the funding as-
pect of the Bill.
—Could be criticized as an Administration attempt to “gut” the
Bill and eliminate an independent voice in the human rights field, and
thus “undercut” our human rights policy position.
4. Oppose the legislation and argue that all of its proposed activ-
ities can be undertaken by existing agencies.

Pro
—Clearly places the Department in opposition to the creation of
another agency, one whose ultimate activities through NGOs would af-
fect conditions in other countries and U.S. bilateral interests.

Human Rights
—Avoid the creation of another agency while directing existing
agencies, perhaps the National Endowment for the Humanities, to un-
dertake some of its research and conference supporting functions.
Con
—It would produce a significant opposition on the Hill and in the
NGO community and undercut the Administration’s human rights
policy.
—It would alienate key human rights and foreign policy
supporters.
—Existing agencies, including the Endowment, are both currently
restricted in their funding and would find it difficult to move into this
area even to a limited extent and many of the proposed activities could
not be undertaken under present charters of those agencies.
Recommendation
That you endorse Option 1 (supported by HA, H and L).
That you endorse Option 2.

That you endorse Option 3 (supported by S/P).
That you approve Option 4.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

127.

Memorandum From the Global Issues Cluster of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, March 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Evening Report
Daily Activities
[Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.]
Mathews attended a lunch sponsored by UNA where State-
Treasury-NSC representatives were to brief representatives of the
human rights NGOs on our efforts to broaden international acceptance
for implementing human rights policy through the IFIs. This group is
usually united in its criticism of the Administration’s human rights
policy. After a long discussion of the issues, Nachmanoff asked those
present to say how they would have voted on a recent loan to Chile
which supported basic human needs. The results were little short of as-
tounding. About half said they would have voted for that loan, and
about half against. Even among those who voted the same way, the
reasons were completely different. We then went around the table
twice more—once on a loan for agricultural aid to Laos, and then on a
non-basic human needs loan for Romania—with the same results. Ev-
eryone was sobered by this experiment. I made the plea that they
would take the message to the Hill—that the Christopher Group faces a
fiendishly difficult task, and that much of the recent criticism of it has
been wildly inflated and irresponsible. This discussion demonstrated
again that whenever outsiders sit down and force themselves to ad-
dress the issues in a detailed, case-by-case fashion, they are immedi-
ately hit by the difficulties. The message certainly got through. For my
part, I have never felt so good about the efforts of the Christopher
Group.

[Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.]
Human Rights

128.

Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Luers) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)
Washington, March 23, 1978
SUBJECT
Institute for Human Rights and Freedom
Can we head off the Fascell/Fraser proposal to establish an “Insti-
tute for Human Rights and Freedom”?

There is one series of arguments that just might persuade both Don
Fraser and Dante Fascell to revise their proposal. It goes like this:
—We agree fully that the U.S. Government needs more program
money directed overtly toward the promotion of human rights.
—We have been discussing with the Endowments for the Human-
ities and the Arts, with USIA/ICA, with the Library of Congress, HEW
and other agencies how significantly to increase budgetary programs
for conferences, publication of books, art displays and research into
human rights problems.
—Our approach has been to expand the activities of existing gov-
ernment agencies in all these activities so as to promote an integrated
human rights policy. Our objective is for all agencies of government to
think human rights when they act internationally and domestically.
—Part of the problem in redirecting budgets and programs toward
human rights programs has been one of mandate. How “political”
should the Endowments for example become in their domestic and in-
ternational funding? Another problem has been one of inertia. How to
get agencies and individuals to think “human rights” when they act?
—The best approach would be for the Congress to give a clear
mandate to or indeed instruct specific government agencies to expand
significantly funding of the human rights programs envisaged for the
“Institute”.
—The advantages of such an approach are persuasive:
. . . We would not create still another government bureaucracy that
could consume as much in overhead as in program money.
. . . We would require the major government agencies to develop
programs to promote human rights—thereby integrating human rights
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
more directly into the daily operations and thinking of the bureau-
cracy. Surely this is the major objective.
—We would designate a senior advisor to the President to assure
that the major government agencies carry out this mandate.
—We would be prepared to give you specific draft legislation to
redirect budgets of key agencies to cover virtually all of the programs
envisaged by the “Institute”.
—If in two years time you do not witness a significant expansion of
government positive programs for human rights we will strongly en-
dorse your call for a separate “Institute”.

I have talked to Don and Dante along these lines and found them
receptive to this line of reasoning. It may be too late to head off the en-
thusiasm developing for the Institute. But I am persuaded it is worth a
try if the Executive Branch is prepared to demonstrate it can and will
redirect existing budgets into positive human rights programs. They
should be approached separately and informally.

I have also had discussions over the past four months with the two
Endowments, with USIA/ICA and other agencies. I am convinced that
all the major agencies would be willing and able to expand consider-
ably their funding of human rights programs. I can provide you with a
more elaborate agenda of the possible programs each of the agencies
can and should undertake.

I have also been consulting outside government and have a pretty
good feel for what would be acceptable in the way of U.S. Government
money. Publishers, voluntary agencies, NGO’s and others in this area
are quite justifiably chary of direct funding. But there are solutions and
opportunities which I could suggest.

129.

Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Schneider)
Washington, March 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Critique of Human Rights Reports by Coalition for a New Foreign and Military
Policy, Press Conference, March 22
On March 22, a press conference was held by Congressman Tom
Harkin and The Human Rights Working Group of the Coalition for a
New Foreign and Military Policy (a group of national church and social
action NGOs) to release a critique of the Department of State’s Human
Rights Reports to Congress. Substantive criticism was made of the Re-
ports’ depiction of human rights conditions in the following 13 coun-
tries: Bangladesh, Bolivia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Indonesia, Iran,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Philippines, South Korea, Thailand,
Tunisia (see attached). At the same time, the Coalition acknowledged
“vast improvements” over the Reports issued last year.
Congressman Harkin made every effort to balance the Coalition’s
and his own criticism with positive comments about the Reports and
State Department efforts (see attached statement).

I am submitting the Critique and Congressman Harkin’s statement
to you and would welcome your comments.

The Coalition intends to launch a major lobbying effort with
Congress to oppose the Administration’s Security Assistance program
for Fiscal Year 1979 as it affects these 13 countries. Congressman
Harkin in particular endorsed reduction of security assistance to In-
donesia and the Philippines.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
130.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Holbrooke) to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, March 24, 1978
Position on the Fascell/Fraser Bill To Establish
an Institute For Human Rights and Freedom
The attached memorandum (Tab A) recommending options re-
garding the Fascell/Fraser Bill (HR 11320) to establish an Institute for
Human Rights and Freedom has just come to my attention. Since the es-
tablishment of a U.S. Government-funded organization to provide sup-
port for private (non-governmental) human rights activities in foreign
countries has potential political consequences for our bilateral relations
with a number of East Asian countries, I would like to let you know this
Bureau’s opinions regarding Departmental support for the bill as it is
now drafted (text of bill is at Tab B).

I would like to associate EA with the position taken by S/P4—to
support the bill if certain changes are made. I do believe that such an
Institute could provide valuable support for the Administration’s
human rights policy while enhancing the degree of cooperation with
the non-governmental organizations concerned.

My reservations concern two provisions of the bill, notably a man-
date for the Institute (as an agent of the U.S. Government) to dissemi-
nate material in foreign countries that has been suppressed by their
governments and, secondly, the proposed charter for the Institute to
operate independently of the Secretary of State. Other provisions of the
bill include authorization for the Director of the Institute to “make and
perform contract and other agreements with any nongovernmental
person however designated” (Sec. 7.(a)(3)), authorization for the In-
stitute to draw upon “information, services, facilities, officers, and
employees” of any private or USG organization (Sec. 7.(a)(7)), and
authorization for it to “make advances, grants, and loans to any
nongovernmental person, whether within or without the U.S.”
ited Official Use. Drafted by Martens and Frank Bennett. A typewritten notation on the
first page of the memorandum reads: “This memo has been OBE’d. No further action will
human rights policy, and its credibility in this field, would very likely
be diminished rather than enhanced. We will surely find, for example,
that the actions of the new Institute would be seen by some gov-
ernments as USG support for opposition efforts to overthrow or desta-
bilize them.

Recommendation:
That you convene a meeting of Assistant Secretaries to discuss the
Fascell/Fraser Bill.

131.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, March 27, 1978
The Human Rights Institute
The following is an additional option (option 5) to the memo-
randum sent you by HA, H, and S/P on March 20. It is based on a sug-
gestion by Deputy Assistant Secretary Luers of EUR (attached).
Option 5. Propose, as an alternative to a new Human Rights Insti-
tute, that the Administration and Congress act together to increase the
human rights roles of existing government entities such as the Endow-
ments for the Humanities and the Arts, USIA/ICA, Library of
Congress, and HEW. Congress would give them an express mandate,
and funding, to increase their programs for conferences, publications,
exhibits, and research into human rights problems. A senior advisor to
the President would be designated to oversee and coordinate their
human rights activities.

Pro
—Would integrate human rights more directly into the daily oper-
ations and thinking of the bureaucracy. Might do more to institution-
alize a concern for human rights into American policy than creation of a
separate entity.
—Would avoid the creation of a new bureaucracy which might at
times be at variance with Administration policy.
—Would not risk tarnishing NGO’s with an Administration
embrace.
ited Official Use. Drafted by Jennone Walker. A stamped date indicates the memo-
randum was received in S/S at 7 p.m. on April 4. Additional copies are in the National
Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher,
Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981,
the undated version in Christopher’s files: “I had this on trip; but did not discuss with

132.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher) to President Carter
Washington, March 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Letter from Congressional Group That Recently Visited Latin America
We have reviewed the letter given to you last week by the seven
Congressmen who recently visited Latin America. Their principal
claim is that we have been “overly rigid” in bringing human rights con-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
siderations to bear on economic assistance decisions, especially as to
votes in the IFIs.

We are committed to the proposition that it is preferable to use
positive actions (“rewards”) and normal diplomatic channels rather
than “sanctions” in pursuing our human rights objectives. However, in
addition to the general thrust of our human rights policy, we are explic-
itly required by a wide array of federal statutes to oppose grants or
loans to human rights violators.

We have acted with moderation in these matters. Of the over 400
loans that have been voted on in the IFIs since January 1977, we have
voted against only nine and abstained on only 14 on human rights
grounds. In addition, we have sought to defer consideration of about 20
loans pending human rights developments in the countries in question;
in several of these cases the deferrals were only temporary.
The countries that applied for the loans as to which we cast nega-
tive votes, abstained, or obtained postponements number only 13, as
follows:
No Votes
Abstentions
Postponed
Argentina
Argentina
Chile
Chile
Benin
El Salvador
Paraguay
Central African Empire
Korea
South Yemen
Ethiopia
Nicaragua
Uruguay
Guinea
Paraguay
Korea
Uruguay
Philippines
We have also been moderate in withholding or delaying our bilat-
eral economic aid on human rights grounds. Of hundreds of AID
projects that have been considered since January 1977, we deferred
only 22, five of which were subsequently approved. The very low ratio
of deferral results from the fact that virtually all of these projects meet
basic human needs. Only six countries were involved, as follows:

Human Rights
Central African Empire
Chile
Ethiopia
Nicaragua
Paraguay
Uruguay
The Congressmen allude to “conditions” in the legislation that
would “permit flexible administration.” They are presumably referring
to the fact that the human rights provisions apply only to governments
engaged in “a consistent pattern of gross violations” of human rights
and that even as to such governments the amendment permits ap-
proval if the loan or project would directly benefit the needy. However,
there can be little doubt that the governments of the countries listed
above are (or were at the time of the vote) engaged in serious violations
of human rights, some in greater degree than others. As for the other
“condition” in the legislation—the “needy people” exception—we
have already put as much strain on it as it can bear.

All of our actions in this area are the result of deliberations by the
Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. The
Group was set up last April pursuant to an NSC directive. To promote
better understanding of the lengths to which we have gone to assure
that our foreign assistance programs reflect our human rights concerns,
we have prepared the attached summary of the Group’s background
and operations (Tab 1). This summary stresses that the Group’s main
purpose is to carry out the applicable statutory provisions and that it
has full representation from State’s geographical bureaus as well as
current information from our embassies in the countries involved.
Our human rights policy is by no means all “sanctions”. Consistent
with P.D. 30, we are intensifying efforts to direct a growing share of
our bilateral economic assistance to governments that show respect for
human rights. We are also encouraging the IFI managements to
channel their lending to countries with good human rights records and
to programs that serve basic human needs. We have urged several of
our allies to convey the same message to IFI managements, and we be-
lieve some of them are about to do so. (As you know, in response to
P.D. 30, an interagency study is underway on the effectiveness of recent
U.S. actions in the IFIs, and it will shed further light on the issues dis-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
cussed above.) In general, we believe that greater emphasis on “re-
wards” rather than “sanctions” can lead to beneficial results.
A proposed response to the Congressmen is attached under Tab 2.
sponsibility and authority to oversee the operations of all U.S. civilian
agencies represented in the country to which they are accredited.
134.

Action Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake), the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian), the Legal
Adviser (Hansell), and the Assistant Secretary of State for
Congressional Relations (Bennet) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, April 6, 1978
SUBJECT
The Human Rights Institute
Our suggested modifications to the Fascell-Fraser bill should aim
at enhancing the proposed Institute’s independence of the Administra-
tion (and so limiting our responsibility for its choices of which human
rights causes to take up) and at somewhat insulating the Institute itself
from controversial political issues. We believe such changes would
be in the interest of the Institute; the NGOs it supports; and the
Administration.

This could be accomplished by the following specific changes in
the Fascell-Fraser draft:
classified. Sent through Christopher, who did not initial the memorandum. Drafted by
Jennone Walker. Kreisberg initialed the memorandum for Derian; Marks initialed for
Hansell. Not found attached is a copy of the draft Fascell-Fraser bill.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—The Institute should be authorized to assist only nongov-
ernmental organizations abroad, not individuals, (Sections 3. (a) (1)
—All of the activities and programs assisted by the Institute
abroad should be through NGOs, not directly (Sections 1–7).
—The Institute should not enjoy Executive mail privileges (Section
—It should not have access to Government “information, services,
agencies would have the right to deny this access, doing so would put
them in an uncomfortable position. Granting the access would tie the
Institute too closely to the Executive.

In addition, we think either the bill itself or its legislative history
should make clear that the Institute’s grants to nongovernmental orga-
nizations are to be for generic rather than specific purposes: e.g., to
legal aid in a particular country, but not for defense of a specific indi-
vidual. It should be clear that no arm of the USG will get into the
business of deciding who is a legitimate human rights victim in, for in-
stance, South Korea or Iran—or of telling NGOs whom to consider le-
gitimate victims.

Most of us think the Institute should be specifically prohibited
from assisting groups which engage in or support terrorism or vio-
lence. L believes this is sufficiently covered by the bill’s requirement
that the Institute act in accordance with international law and the UN
Charter, and that trying to define terrorism or violence would only
raise problems.

Finally, we think the Institute should have offices only in the
United States. While it will be operating in foreign countries, it should
not set up permanent shop in any of them, lest it become directly en-
gaged in controversial situations. (Section 7. (b), p. 8).
L sees no legal obstacle to the Institute’s providing legal defense to
human rights victims, via NGOs, as envisioned in the draft bill.
Recommendation:
That the Deputy Secretary propose these modifications to Fascell
and Fraser when he calls them to say he is willing to testify on the Hill.

135.

Memorandum From Roberta Cohen of the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs (Schneider)
Washington, April 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Congressional Hearings on Human Rights Institute Bill, April 13, 1978
Hearings on the Fraser-Fascell bill to establish an Institute for
Human Rights and Freedom began April 13. They were held jointly by
the Subcommittee on International Operations and the Subcommittee
on International Organizations of the House Committee on Interna-
tional Relations.

Five witnesses were heard and all testified in favor of the bill. They
were: Frank Newman (Justice, Supreme Court of California); Alan U.
Schwartz (Counsel, International Freedom to Publish Committee);
Leonard Meeker (Director, International Project, Center for Law and So-
cial Policy); Stephen I. Schlossberg (Director of Government and Public
Affairs, UAW, accompanied by Leo A. Suslow, Director of Interna-
tional Affairs Department, UAW); and Jan Nowak (former Director of
Polish Broadcasting, Radio Free Europe).

Functions of the Institute (Section 3 (a))
Several amendments and suggestions were made with regard to
the functions of the Institute:
1) Conferences and Seminars—One amendment was the deletion of
the provision that the Institute support or sponsor conferences and
seminars on human rights (3 (a) (2)). Frank Newman argued that there
had already been too many conferences and seminars. If the provision
were not deleted, it should be re-worded to provide for conferences
and seminars that “would not just talk about human rights” but give
serious consideration to “how to promote increased respect for and ob-
servance of human rights.”
In contrast, Jan Nowak proposed that in addition to the holding of
conferences and seminars in the United States, they should be held
around the world in order to encourage the establishment of an Inter-
national Institute on Human Rights.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2) Inclusion of Domestic Human Rights—It was proposed that the Bill
refer to domestic human rights. It was felt that either the Institute sup-
port domestic human rights programs or that reference be made to the
fact that this problem was being handled elsewhere. Otherwise, the Bill
would create the impression that the U.S. was interested in promoting
human rights “in foreign countries” but not at home, in contravention
of its commitments under the UN Charter and the Helsinki Final Act.
Frank Newman proposed that the Preamble refer to human rights
and fundamental freedom “for all” so that the Bill could not be con-
strued to focus exclusively on foreign countries.

Alan Schwartz noted that because only limited funds were avail-
able ($5 million), it might be more appropriate to strengthen the Civil
Rights Commission or create a new institution; however, reference
should be made to domestic human rights in the Bill. If a larger appro-
priation were forthcoming, some of the funds could then be donated to
organizations for domestic human rights purposes. Stephen Schloss-
berg concurred with this view.
3) Economic Rights—It was proposed that the promotion of eco-
nomic rights (in particular health care, trade union rights, etc.) should
receive adequate emphasis in the programs funded by the Institute;
civil and political liberties should not be the sole focus. (This point was
made by Stephen Schlossberg—UAW).
4) Creation of New Institutions and Procedures—Attention should be
paid to the creation of national and international machinery and proce-
dures (e.g., 1503 procedures) which would fill gaps in existing interna-
tional human rights protection. Frank Newman2 said that much could
be learned in this regard from the civil rights and civil liberties move-
ments in the U.S. He criticized the State Department for placing insuffi-
cient emphasis on the creation of institutions. He objected to its treat-
ment of human rights as “diplomacy” which bargained human rights
away. The Department, he said, was focusing too heavily in its
speeches on whether prisoners had been released. Warren Christo-
pher’s clearinghouse proposal, he said, was a step in the right direction,
but a very small one.
5) Human Rights Awards—Jan Nowak proposed that the Institute
make annual awards to individuals who made an outstanding contri-
bution to international human rights or for the articles or books they
published. This would protect individuals and also mitigate the effects
of censorship.

Human Rights
6) Assistance to Organizations and Individuals in the U.S.—Alan
Schwartz noted that the Bill specifically mentioned organizations “in
the U.S.” only once (Sec. 3(a) (6)). He urged that the Bill ensure funding
to groups in the U.S. promoting international human rights and to indi-
viduals and their families residing in the U.S. who were the victims of
violations, for example, who had been stripped of their citizenship
while visiting the U.S.

Financial Assistance Provided by the Institute (Section 3 (b))
The following recommendations were made with respect to finan-
cial assistance provided by the Institute:
1) Providing Assistance Openly—Leonard Meeker proposed the de-
letion of the phrase “only with the consent of the recipient” from the
provision: “Financial or other assistance may be provided under this
Act only with the consent of the recipient and shall be provided
openly.” (Section 3 (b) (3)). He said its inclusion implied that the Insti-
tute might try to provide assistance without the recipient’s consent. He
furthermore noted that in some cases, consent could not be gotten. He
considered sufficient the phrase “shall be provided openly”. Jan
Nowak concurred with this deletion and further proposed the deletion
of “provided openly.” He argued that this provision could endanger
victims of political oppression; they would be perfectly free to refuse
help but should not be involved beyond this point.

Alan Schwartz’ testimony to the contrary stressed the necessity for
providing assistance openly. In his opinion, while the Bill’s require-
ment of complete disclosure of grants of the Institute “may well fore-
close the possibility of having grants made to those who require ano-
nymity in order to protect their own security and that of their families,
this limitation is far outweighed by the need to have all of the activities
of the Institute placed on a fully open basis . . . To permit any covert op-
eration in this area, regardless of the motive, would be counter-
productive to the objectives of the Institute.”
In this connection, Mr. Schwartz furthermore proposed that the
“detailed report” to be submitted by the Institute to the President and
Congress be a published report (Section 9). He noted that whereas Sec-
tion 4 on Public Information specifically referred to the publication of
Institute grants, Section 9 could imply a covert relationship between
the Institute and the President and Congress, harmful to the inde-
pendence of the Institute and to the NGOs and individuals it would
support.
2. Consistency with Foreign Laws—Leonard Meeker proposed the
deletion of the phrase “Assistance provided under this Act for use in a
foreign country must be consistent with the laws of that country” (Sec-
tion 3 (b) (4)). He argued that this phrase would encourage gov-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ernments to find reasons for discouraging assistance, i.e., they would
claim that grants made by the Institute violated internal laws. Sec-
ondly, he argued, it would be too difficult to determine what was con-
sistent with the laws of another country, and the Institute was not the
appropriate body to interpret and apply foreign laws.

Jan Nowak concurred; so did Alan Schwartz but he proposed
amending the wording to read that assistance provided for use in a for-
eign country should be consistent with “the various constitutions or
other governing documents of that country.” He noted that repressive
regimes were “notorious in their desire to put high-flown and demo-
cratic phraseology into their constitutions.”
3) Jan Nowak proposed that the Institute “match” privately-raised
funds to NGOs in order to enhance and stimulate public support for
human rights projects rather than replace it.

Relationship to United States Foreign Policy (Section 5)
Most witnesses stressed the necessity of Institute independence
from the U.S. Government. In this connection, Leonard Meeker pro-
posed the deletion of this entire Section. (The Section reads: “The Secre-
tary of State shall keep the Institute fully informed on United States for-
eign policy as it relates to the activities of the Institute. The Institute
shall give consideration to the foreign policy of the United States in car-
rying out this Act, but shall not be subject to the direction of the Secre-
tary of State in carrying out its responsibilities under this Act.”)
Leonard Meeker further proposed for the same reason that the In-
stitute should not be allowed to avail itself of “the use of information,
services, facilities, officers” etc. of the U.S. abroad (Sec. 7 (a) (7)).
Alan Schwartz’s testimony to the contrary supported Section 5 on
the grounds that it gave the Institute governmental “clout” with for-
eign governments and at the same time enabled it to retain its
independence.

Management of the Institute (Section 6)
The following amendments were made:
1) Politicization of the Institute—To ensure that the Institute would
promote human rights globally and not become the tool of either the
right or left (a point raised by Congressman Fraser), Frank Newman
proposed that the preamble of the Bill refer to “universal” respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms and that Section 6 (Manage-
ment of the Institute) read that the Board of Directors have a demon-
strated concern for, and experience in matters pertaining to “universal

Human Rights
respect for” human rights and fundamental freedoms. This, he com-
mented, could help ensure that issues such as preventive detention in
the Federal Republic of Germany, race relations in the U.K. and mi-
grant labor problems in Europe be given adequate attention.
2) Alan Schwartz proposed that all members of the Board of Di-
rectors should not be appointed by the President; some should be ap-
pointed by Congress. This would ensure that the body which created
the Institute would have a continuing voice in its composition.
3) Alan Schwartz further proposed that the Executive Director’s
term of office be limited to 4 years with the right to have his term re-
newed. (The current Bill places no limit on the term.)
4) It was pointed out that the Board should not get locked into
trying to give equal attention to all NGOs. Careful criteria should be
developed for making grants. Emphasis should be on funding projects
that would increase the protection of human rights and not on funding
“pet” NGOs.

Corruption of NGOs
Congressman Fraser raised the problem of whether furnishing
Government funds to NGOs would “corrupt” them. The general re-
sponse was no. Some organizations (e.g., the ICJ) already accepted U.S.
Government funds and this had not prejudiced their policies, programs
or effectiveness. In Alan Schwartz’s view, Government financing
would give greater “leverage” to private groups in their dealings with
foreign governments. It was noted that in some cases, this problem
would not arise because certain NGOs as a matter of principle would
reject Government funds. If corruption took place, it would not be on
the part of the NGOs but on the part of the Board of the Institute for
trying to control the NGOs.

Relationship of the Institute to the Clearinghouse Proposal
Alan Schwartz in his statement seemed to feel that the clearing-
house was in essence created by the establishment of the Institute, since
the Institute would coordinate human rights information.
Jan Nowak questioned whether the clearinghouse would have
more credibility “if taken over by the Institute assisted in this task by
information resources of the State Department” or if it were directly
“carried on by the U.S. Government.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

136.

Memorandum From Steven Oxman of the Office of the
Deputy Secretary of State to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)
Washington, April 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Fraser Amendments
These materials describe the four Fraser amendments to the for-
eign assistance authorization bill. The materials also describe L’s pre-
liminary views on the amendments (set forth as Administration
positions).

We should aim for having a position by Monday morning, H tells
me, since the mark-up will resume on Tuesday morning and both
Fraser and Zablocki will want to know our position at least a day ahead
of time.

I have discussed the amendments with Tony Lake. He feels we
should not support them but neither should we spill blood opposing
them. Rather, we should explain that we think they raise serious
problems. S/P will be giving us a memorandum detailing their views.
My view is that we need not affirmatively support the amend-
ments, but that we should be quite careful in the way we articulate our
problems with them and in proposing revisions. In capsule form my
views on each of the amendments are as follows. The Tab 1 amendment
is palatable and opposition to it would be very hard to explain to the
public or the human rights lobbies. We can say, however, that we think
Human Rights
too far. They would be palatable only if an “extraordinary circum-
stances” exception were added to them, but in that event they would be
unnecessary since the Tab 1 amendment would suffice. The Tab 4
amendment imposes additional reporting requirements: monthly
rather than the current quarterly reports and identification of
end-users. I think we should take the position that quarterly reports
should suffice but that we would be willing to provide end-user infor-
mation. The L paper at Tab 49 says it would be infeasible to provide
such information but I have pressed L on this, and they concede it
could be done without much difficulty.

PM and the regional bureaus oppose the amendments. HA sup-
ports them but would not object to the modifications I have adum-
brated above.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
137.

Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary
of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(Schneider) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, April 29, 1978
SUBJECT
Fraser Amendment on 502B
The following are the reasons why HA believes that the Adminis-
tration’s position should be to support the Fraser Amendment or to
adopt a position of not being in opposition to the amendment.

139.

Report Prepared by the Interagency Group on Human Rights
and Foreign Assistance
Washington, April 30, 1978
REPORT OF THE INTERAGENCY GROUP ON HUMAN RIGHTS
AND FOREIGN ASSISTANCE CONCERNING THE
EFFECTIVENESS OF U.S. HUMAN RIGHTS ACTIONS IN THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Pursuant to PD/NSC–30, the Interagency Group on Human
Rights and Foreign Assistance submits this report on the effectiveness
of recent U.S. actions in the international financial institutions (IFIs)
concerning human rights. As provided in the PD, this report deals spe-
cifically with:
—Congressional attitudes and prospective legislation;
—views of other nations as to the propriety and legality of our ac-
tions; and
—the effect of our actions on the advancement of U.S. human
rights objectives.

Before examining these particular subjects, it will provide context
to take an overall look at the human rights actions the U.S. has taken in
the IFIs since January 1977 and to consider briefly the process by which
these actions have been determined.

I. Overview
In general, we have been moderate in using our voice and vote in
the IFIs in behalf of human rights. Of the over 500 loans that have been
voted upon in the IFIs since January 1977, we have voted against only
10 and abstained on only 17 on human rights grounds. All of these
loans were approved over our objection, although in a few cases we re-
ceived support from other countries. In addition, we have sought to
defer consideration of about 20 loans pending human rights develop-
ments in the countries in question; in several of these cases, the de-
ferrals were only temporary. That the number of loans the Interagency
Human Rights
Group has recommended for approval greatly exceeds the number as
to which abstention or opposition has been recommended results from
three principal factors: (a) many proposed recipients of IFI assistance
have good or improving human rights records; (b) a large proportion of
IFI assistance is designed to serve basic human needs; and (c) we have
confined the use of our vote to instances of serious and continuing
violations.

The countries that applied for the loans as to which we cast nega-
tive votes, abstained, or obtained postponements number only 13, as
follows:
No Votes
Abstentions
Postponed
Argentina (3 loans)
Argentina (5 loans)
Argentina (2 loans,
on both of which we
subsequently
abstained)
Chile (2 loans)
Benin (2 loans)
Chile (2 loans, one of
which we subse-
quently voted
against)
Paraguay (2 loans)
Central African
El Salvador (1 loan,
Empire (1 loan)
which we subse-
quently voted for)
South Yemen (1 loan) Ethiopia (3 loans)
Korea (1 loan, on
which we subse-
quently abstained)
Uruguay (2 loans)
Guinea (1 loan)
Nicaragua (5 loans,
one of which we sub-
sequently voted for)
Korea (2 loans)
Paraguay (8 loans,
one of which we sub-
sequently voted
against)
Philippines (3 loans)
Uruguay (2 loans,
both of which we
voted against)
While this report pertains to our actions in the IFIs, it is important
to note that we have also taken steps on human rights grounds with re-
spect to bilateral development assistance, PL 480 food aid, security
assistance, export licenses for commercially supplied military equip-
ment, Ex-Im financing, OPIC activities, and CCC credits. In addition, of
course, we have used the full range of our diplomatic tools, including

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
direct diplomatic contacts, public statements, symbolic acts, consulta-
tions with allies, cooperation with non-governmental organizations,
and work with international organizations. These steps have involved
the 13 countries mentioned above, as well as others. There is usually a
variety of views within the Interagency Group on whether the mix of
our actions concerning any particular country has been optimal.
We are committed to the proposition that it is preferable to use
positive actions (“rewards”) and representations through normal dip-
lomatic channels rather than “sanctions” in pursuing our human rights
objectives. Along this line, we are intensifying efforts to direct a
growing share of our bilateral economic assistance to governments that
show respect for human rights. We are also quietly encouraging the IFI
managements to channel their lending to countries with good human
rights records and to programs that serve basic human needs. We have
urged friendly nations to join us in conveying this message to IFI man-
agements. These nations also consider this approach to be preferable to
invoking sanctions. The absence of universally agreed upon criteria,
the long lead time for project development, and some resistance on the
part of bank managements and some members indicate that channeling
IFI resources on the basis of respect for human rights and meeting basic
human needs will be a long-term process, the result of which will not
be evident for some time.

While we believe that greater emphasis on “rewards” rather than
“sanctions” can lead to beneficial results, the fact remains that, in addi-
tion to the thrust of our human rights policy, we are explicitly required
by federal statutes to oppose certain grants or loans to human rights
violators.

II. Process
Our efforts to implement this human rights policy and legislative
requirements are the result of deliberations by the Interagency Group
on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. The Group has met regu-
larly since April 1977 when it was established pursuant to a NSC
directive.

As set forth in that directive, the Group has been chaired by a rep-
resentative of the Secretary of State (i.e., the Deputy Secretary) and has
included representatives of the Treasury Department, the Defense
Department, the NSC staff, and the Agency for International Develop-
ment. Participants in the Group’s deliberations have also included
representatives of the Agriculture Department, the Commerce Depart-
ment, the Ex-Im Bank, and OPIC. In addition, Treasury’s repre-
sentatives have usually been accompanied by the U.S. Executive Di-
rectors to the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank.
Thus, several agencies, each with an interest in the subject matter, are
represented at every meeting.

Human Rights
The Group is aided significantly by its staff-level working group.
The working group screens all upcoming bilateral and multilateral pro-
grams and loans for their human rights implications, including
whether they would benefit the needy. The working group recom-
mends approval of the vast majority of the matters it reviews, either be-
cause of the proposed recipient’s favorable or improving human rights
record or because the proposed assistance would benefit the needy.
When there is disagreement on these issues or where there is consensus
that the human rights record of a proposed recipient is so bad as to war-
rant opposing or deferring the assistance in question, the working
group refers the matter for review by the Interagency Group. (The In-
teragency Group also has the option of reviewing matters which the
working group has recommended for approval.)

Prior to each of its meetings, the Group receives extensive agenda
materials. These materials include detailed descriptions of the loans or
grants to be considered, including consideration of whether the pro-
posed assistance would benefit the needy. The agenda materials also
include extensive information on human rights conditions in the coun-
tries proposed as recipients of assistance. In addition, other funda-
mental U.S. interests with respect to the country in question are de-
scribed since the Group pays close attention to the relationship of our
human rights concerns to other critical U.S. objectives. The agenda ma-
terials also include a list of other U.S. or multilateral assistance to the
proposed recipient which is likely to be presented for decision in the
near future, as well as a description of previous U.S. actions concerning
the human rights situation in the country in question.

At the Group’s meetings, each loan or grant on the agenda is sepa-
rately considered. The representative of the relevant State Department
regional bureau leads off the discussion with an assessment of our bi-
lateral relationship with the recipient country, of the human rights situ-
ation there, of our human rights and other objectives, and of the role
our position on the loan or grant under consideration might play. In
short, the regional bureau representative sets forth a strategy for
dealing with the country in question and suggests tactics that would
carry out that strategy. Comments are then called for by other partici-
pants. Typically, the discussion will focus not only on the current situa-
tion but also on whether there is a genuine trend toward or away from
improvements in human rights conditions.

After discussion, the Group frequently recommends that the loan
or grant should be approved: because human rights conditions in the
recipient country are good or are authentically improving; because
other means can and should be used for the time being to indicate our
human rights concerns; or because the assistance will benefit the needy.
When appropriate, the Group may advise that the approval should be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
accompanied by a diplomatic demarche explaining our human rights
concerns and making it clear that we are seriously taking human rights
considerations into account in our foreign assistance decisions. In gen-
eral and where possible under applicable law, we prefer to discuss our
human rights concerns through diplomatic channels before taking any
steps with respect to foreign assistance.

When the human rights situation in the proposed recipient
country is poor and not improving, the Group may recommend that
the U.S. not support the proposed assistance. This will particularly be
the case where the assistance will not be likely to benefit the needy. In
these circumstances the Group will frequently recommend that a diplo-
matic demarche be made to the government concerned, explaining our
position and urging human rights improvements.

The Group stays abreast of human rights developments in the
countries receiving U.S. foreign assistance and has on a number of oc-
casions recommended approval of loans or programs as to which it had
previously recommended opposition, abstention or deferral.
Needless to say, for a variety of reasons, including the range of
human rights violations, no automatic formula can be applied to decide
how to vote on particular loans to particular countries, and inevitably
seeming inconsistencies will appear. But the Group has learned that the
diversity of cultures, the different stages of economic and political ma-
turity, and the range of fundamental U.S. interests make it essential to
treat each country on the merits of its own situation and not to attempt
to pursue our human rights objectives in precisely the same way as to
all countries. Within the limits of applicable law, we are primarily con-
cerned with taking steps that are most likely to promote human rights
in a particular situation. In short, tactics must differ from country to
country, but our goal—to enhance respect for human rights—remains
constant as to all countries.

The Group is continually examining its own procedures to deter-
mine how best to improve its operation and effectiveness. The Group is
conscious that in systematically bringing human rights considerations
to bear on the range of our foreign assistance decisions, it is performing
a new function. Inevitably, performance of this function has at times
been controversial, as the various participants grow accustomed to the
new situation. Nevertheless, we believe it is an important function that
must be performed if we are to comply effectively with statutory com-
mands and to be true to our human rights commitments.

With respect to possible improvements in the process, the Treas-
ury Department believes it would be useful to attempt to develop com-
prehensive human rights strategy papers for some of the major human
rights problem countries. In Treasury’s view, such papers could ana-
lyze three key issues: our specific human rights objectives in such coun-

Human Rights
tries, the relationship between human rights objectives and other U.S.
national objectives, and the effectiveness of the various policy instru-
ments which can be used to further the human rights effort. Treasury
stresses the importance of making individual decisions on whether the
U.S. should support or oppose prospective IFI loans in the context of a
comprehensive strategy and believes this can produce more options for
influencing situations well in advance of a specific IFI vote. While
agreeing on the importance of strategies to guide particular decisions,
some other members of the Group, including the State Department, be-
lieve that human rights situations in other countries are so constantly in
flux that written studies quickly become outdated and are therefore not
as useful as the oral strategy presentation noted above.

To minimize seeming inconsistencies in our use of sanctions in the
IFI’s, Treasury notes the desirability of being more selective in op-
posing loans by establishing a clearer set of criteria (e.g., confined to
rights of the person) for invoking those sanctions and for excepting
loans that meet basic human needs, and by limiting the use of our op-
position to clear-cut situations of gross violations where the U.S. is
most likely to be supported by other member governments. In the State
Department’s view, the criteria governing decisions to abstain on or
vote against IFI loans on human rights grounds are those set forth in
the statute and they must be applied in a manner that takes into ac-
count the differing circumstances of, and our multiple interests with re-
spect to, individual countries. (It should be noted that in the case of
each abstention or no vote there were significant violations of the rights
of the person in the proposed recipient country.) As for the criteria for
defining loans that serve basic human needs, they are being evolved on
a case-by-case basis, in light of the legislative history of the relevant
statutory provision concerning basic human needs. With respect to lim-
iting the use of sanctions to certain countries, the State Department be-
lieves there can be little doubt that the governments of the countries
listed above (p. 2) are (or were at the time of the vote) engaged in se-
rious violations of human rights, some in greater degree than others.
Finally with respect to the Group’s process, it has become increas-
ingly clear that when a convincing case is made that a given loan or
project will directly benefit the needy by serving their basic needs,
assistance should be approved in all but the rarest instances. Since we
consider each loan and project on its merits, we see no need to exclude
the possibility that extraordinary circumstances might warrant the
delay or possible disapproval of a basic human needs loan, but this
would clearly be the exceptional case. At the same time, it is essential
that other countries understand (and we are so advising them) that our
approval of basic human needs loans is not an expression of approval
for the human rights practices of the recipient government.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
III. Congressional Attitudes and Prospective Human Rights Legislation
There is broad support in Congress for giving human rights con-
cerns a high priority in our foreign policy. A growing coalition of lib-
erals and conservatives is prepared to push new human rights initia-
tives. The liberals have a concern for human rights and basically
support the IFIs and foreign aid. Some of the conservatives, while also
concerned about human rights, are essentially anti-IFI and anti-foreign
aid and many see human rights legislation as an indirect means of re-
ducing aid.

There are no signs that Congress is having second thoughts about
the Harkin Amendment which requires that the U.S. oppose IFI loans
to governments engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations of
internationally recognized human rights, unless such assistance is di-
rected specifically to programs which serve the basic human needs of
the citizens of such country.

At the same time, there has been some confusion in Congress as to
the Administration’s efforts to carry out this legislation and as to the
Administration’s human rights policy generally. A common criticism
on the Hill is that the Administration has been inconsistent in applying
its human rights policy, giving harsher treatment to small countries
where we have little security or economic interests, while applying a
different standard to those countries which are important to us. An-
other argument heard on the Hill is that our human rights policy is
jeopardizing “more important U.S. interests.” Some members have ar-
gued that moral suasion and arousal of world opinion are more effec-
tive in achieving human rights progress than “sanctions,” including
opposition to IFI loans. Others are troubled about how our human
rights policy is applied to a particular country or region, even though
they support its application elsewhere. In connection with these criti-
cisms, many questions have been raised as to the mandate and func-
tions of the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign
Assistance.

In response to this situation, we have in recent weeks made a con-
certed effort to explain our human rights actions more fully to the
Congress. We have sent to large numbers of interested congressmen
and senators a detailed memorandum on the Interagency Group. This
memorandum sets forth the statutory framework within which the
Group operates, explains the mandate and composition of the Group,
and describes the Group’s proceedings. Congressman Zablocki has
had this memorandum printed in the Congressional Record and, in gen-
eral, we have had a very favorable response to it. In addition, we have

Human Rights
begun a series of consultations with Congressmen particularly inter-
ested in human rights issues. In this connection, we have arranged
small breakfasts and luncheons where relevant human rights issues, in-
cluding our actions in the IFIs, can be fully discussed.

In our consultations with Congress, we have explained that in
view of the diverse circumstances of the countries proposed as recip-
ients of assistance—as well as the diversity of our foreign policy in-
terests—it is inevitable that we will pursue our human rights objectives
in somewhat different ways as to different countries. As for the claim
that we have been too prone to use “sanctions,” we have explained the
facts set forth above which show that we have been quite moderate in
the use of “sanctions.” With respect to objections from Congress about
our treatment of particular countries, we have made a special effort to
explain our rationale and actions to the members who have raised a
question. While it would be inaccurate to say that our explanations are
always considered satisfactory, it has been our experience that a sincere
effort to explain our position fully has led to increased understanding.
Concern has also been expressed in Congress about the Adminis-
tration’s efforts to block certain restrictive human rights amendments.
Some members feel the Administration’s efforts have been too late and
poorly coordinated. Several members have indicated that they do not
plan in the future to support the Administration’s efforts to block pop-
ular human rights legislation since they think those efforts are likely to
be futile. We have been advised by one congressman who is a strong
supporter of our human rights initiatives that it would be preferable for
the Administration to deal with proposed human rights amendments
while bills are still in committee or in conference rather than when they
reach the floor. He argues that once the bills reach the floor, it is much
more difficult to defeat an amendment. Thus, he has urged that the Ad-
ministration should let human rights supporters in Congress know as
soon as possible which amendments or parts of amendments the Ad-
ministration can and cannot live with. We believe this is sound advice
and are taking steps to implement it to the degree feasible. It must be
noted, however, that in a variety of instances in the past we have made
our views clear in committee—and worked out desirable language
there—only to have such understandings rendered moot by floor
revisions.

We have been advised that a great many human rights amend-
ments may be offered this year in committee or on the floor. Thus far,
however, there have been only a few proposed amendments and initia-
tives as set forth below. Some of them pertain to the IFIs; others to other
forms of U.S. assistance:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of Florida, the ranking minority member of the Foreign Operations
Subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee, introduced a
bill requiring that the U.S. seek to modify the charter of the IFIs to re-
quire that each institution establish a human rights standard to be con-
sidered in connection with every application for assistance. The bill
would also require the President to report to Congress within three
months actions taken to gain acceptance of such amendments of the IFI
charters. It is not clear how much support this proposal will receive in
Congress. On the merits of the proposal, we believe any such effort to
amend the IFI charters would arouse enormous controversy within the
institutions and generate great bitterness towards the U.S. Under
present arrangements, U.S. efforts to bring human rights consider-
ations to bear in the IFIs, while resented by several IFI members, are not
being actively opposed, and in some instances they are being actively
supported by likeminded governments. If, however, the U.S. takes the
major step of seeking an amendment in the IFI charters, what is now
tacit opposition from some governments would likely become vig-
orous and sustained opposition that could have a deleterious effect on
the functioning of the institutions. The fact that some IFI members
would oppose any such effort is not dispositive. But since it is not ap-
parent that such charter revisions are necessary in order to take human
rights actions in the IFIs, there would appear to be no countervailing
benefit in the course the Young bill requires.
—Human Rights Reports: We have reason to believe that several
conservative members of Congress will introduce legislation requiring
that the Administration submit reports on human rights conditions in
all countries that receive IFI loans (currently we are required to submit
such reports on countries that receive bilateral U.S. economic and mili-
tary assistance). Approximately 50 additional reports would be re-
quired. Some countries, especially Brazil, would be likely to react quite
negatively to our submission of such a report. The Administration has
opposed this legislation.
—Harkin Amendment: Witteveen Facility. Over Administration op-
position, the House passed on February 23 by a voice vote a Harkin
amendment to the Bretton Woods Agreement Act. The amendment

Human Rights
would require the U.S. Executive Director of the IMF to initiate consul-
tations to encourage the IMF to formulate stabilization programs which
foster investment and employment, especially where designed to meet
basic human needs. The U.S. Executive Director would also be required
to take all possible steps to see that the Witteveen Facility does not con-
tribute to the deprivation of basic human needs and the violation of
basic human rights and to oppose any loans that would contribute to
such deprivations or violations. Finally, the Secretary of the Treasury
would be required to prepare an annual report evaluating the effects of
the Witteveen Facility on the ability of the poor to obtain (a) an ade-
quate supply of food, (b) shelter and clothing, (c) public services, in-
cluding health care, education, clean water, energy resources and
transportation; and (d) productive employment that provides a reason-
able and adequate wage.

The Senate version of this legislation has been reported by the
SFRC and the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs. The
bill includes no human rights provisions at present, although a Harkin-
type amendment could be added on the floor. State and Treasury are
currently reviewing what position to take if such an amendment is in-
troduced, as well as what position to take in conference.
—Harkin Amendment: OPIC. On February 23, 1978, the House
added a Harkin amendment to the Overseas Private Investment Corpo-
the entire Harkin amendment, was adopted by the Senate on April 5
and by the House on April 11. The amended OPIC legislation was
signed by the President on April 24.

The principal effect of the Harkin amendment is to apply Section
116 of the Foreign Assistance Act to OPIC. Section 116 requires that no
assistance be provided to any country which engages in a consistent
pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights,
unless the assistance would directly benefit the needy. The amendment
also calls for OPIC to take into account in the conduct of its programs in
any country (in consultation with the Secretary of State) all available in-
formation about the observance and respect of human rights in such
countries. Finally, the amendment establishes the following new re-
porting requirements. First, OPIC must include a description of any
project for which it has refused to provide insurance, reinsurance, guar-
antee, financing or financial support because of the human rights pro-
visions of the amendment. Second, OPIC must include a description of
(Graham Hovey, “House Authorizes $1. Billion Outlay to Witteveen Fund,” The New
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
any project for which it has approved such assistance due to a determi-
nation that the project either meets basic human needs or because the
President has decided that approval is in the national security interest
of the United States.
—Institute for International Human Rights. Congressmen Dante Fas-
cell and Donald Fraser have introduced legislation establishing an in-
dependent federal agency—the Institute for International Human
Rights. The institute would primarily provide financial and other
assistance to private individuals or groups working to promote human
rights, including individuals or groups in foreign countries. Specifi-
cally, the institute would provide financial support for a number of
non-governmental organizations and individuals for such purposes as
conducting conferences, publishing books and articles, carrying out re-
search and studies, and supporting legal defense for victims of political
persecution. The bill is expected to receive wide support. The Adminis-
tration has expressed the view that such an institute, if carefully struc-
tured, could make a valuable contribution to efforts on behalf of human
rights but that certain questions must be seriously addressed in consid-
ering creation of such an entity.
—Humphrey Bill. The bill to establish the International Develop-
ment Cooperation Administration (or Humphrey Bill) as introduced by
Senator Sparkman on January 30, 1978, includes with no significant
changes the human rights provisions of Section 116 of the existing For-
eign Assistance Act (i.e., no aid to gross and consistent violators unless
it would benefit the needy). The human rights provisions in the bill are
intended to apply to all forms of foreign assistance covered by the bill.
While the Administration will be making a variety of proposals and
suggestions related to the purposes of the Humphrey Bill, it does not
presently appear that these will pertain to the bill’s human rights
provisions.
—The Tsongas Amendment to the Ex-Im Reauthorization Bill. On April
13, the International Trade Subcommittee of the House Banking Com-
mittee adopted the Tsongas Amendment to the Ex-Im Bank Reauthori-
zation Bill. The operative language of the amendment reads:
“In no event shall the bank guarantee, insure, or extend credit or
participate in any extension of credit to the Republic of South Africa
unless and until the President determines that significant progress
toward majority rule has been made in the Republic of South Africa
and transmits to the Congress a statement describing and explaining
the determination.”

Human Rights
It is not unlikely that the amendment will be accepted by the full
Committee and ultimately on the House floor. The Administration,
which already has the authority to do what the Tsongas amendment di-
rects, opposed the amendment on foreign policy flexibility grounds.
What position the Administration should now take is under review.
IV. Views of Other Nations on the Propriety and Legality of our Actions
Other nations have commented on U.S. human rights actions in
the IFIs during normal diplomatic contacts, as well as during special
consultations on this issue that we have conducted with the gov-
ernments of Canada, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Ger-
many, Sweden, Denmark, France, Belgium, Japan, Australia, and India,
and with the European Commission. We hope to have consultations of
this kind in the near future with other governments, including Senegal,
Kenya, Venezuela, Costa Rica, and others.

IFI donors have reiterated several themes when discussing human
rights and the IFIs with us. There is agreement among those consulted
thus far that human rights concerns should be taken into account in the
IFIs. They place the same high value on human rights as we do. With
different foreign policy agendas, however, no two countries will
always make the same choices between human rights and other
pressing concerns.

There is also agreement that the manner in which human rights
concerns are taken into account in the IFIs should not endanger the in-
tegrity or viability of the institutions. There is concern that unless the
human rights issue is handled carefully, it could cause the IFIs to be-
come highly politicized and to lose their effectiveness in promoting
development.

There is also concern that human rights not become a North/South
issue. Towards this end, we and other donors agree that it would be de-
sirable to have consultations with LDCs such as those we have held
with the donor countries. As noted above, we plan to have consulta-
tions on this subject with certain LDC’s in the near future. Other donors
have also suggested that discussions on human rights among executive
directors in the IFIs should be held outside of the IFI board meetings in
order to minimize confrontations.

Several countries with whom we have consulted noted the desir-
ability of not letting the IFIs become the “cutting edge” of human rights

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
policy. Canada, the UK and the FRG cited the need for actions in the
IFIs to be consistent with a country’s bilateral assistance program, and
France pointed to advantages of using bilateral contacts first. German
officials noted the results of pursuing human rights issues in such fora
as the UN, the Council of Europe, and CSCE.

Some other governments said there may appear to be inconsist-
encies in their actions in the IFIs because of the varying interests they
have in their relations from country to country. Some of the gov-
ernments noted that actions toward different countries which may ap-
pear to be inconsistent if only human rights conditions in the countries
are compared, may actually be consistent if a broader spectrum of for-
eign policy interests is considered.

The more narrow legal issue of whether IFI charters allow human
rights to be taken into account in the IFIs has been raised both in direct
consultations and in other ways. While donor countries with whom
we have consulted often raised the issue, it seems clear to us that the
broad concerns outlined above—rather than questions of legal inter-
pretation—would be the underlying reasons why other countries
might curtail the extent to which they would take human rights con-
cerns into account in the IFIs. On the merits of the legal issue, they ap-
peared to share our view that human rights concerns can legitimately
be taken into account because economic development necessarily in-
cludes questions of equity, welfare and social justice. Consulted donors
appeared to be concerned with the legal issue mainly because affected
LDCs might seize upon it.

In general, it is still too early to know whether other donors will
significantly increase the relative weight they accord to human rights
considerations in the IFIs. Some members of the Interagency Group be-
lieve there is cause for optimism on this issue; others are not optimistic.
We have seen some evidence that some LDCs consider our human
rights initiatives in the IFIs to be both improper and illegal. They be-
lieve it is improper because it introduces a new and extraneous issue
which could lead to confrontation as well as jeopardize country pro-
gram levels. They argue that introducing human rights concerns vio-
lates IFI charters and thus is illegal. They claim the issue threathens the
basic integrity and apolitical character of the IFIs, making it difficult to
discuss development issues rationally and without posturing between
donors and recipients. The issue has generated considerable contro-

Human Rights
versy within the institutions, including accusations that the U.S. is poli-
ticizing them. Korea and the Philippines have considered sponsoring a
“motion of regret” in the ADB Board over U.S. human rights initiatives
in that bank. Nigeria and India have questioned the use of IFIs as a tool
to bring about human rights improvements. Argentina may seek a legal
opinion from the IDB on whether charter provisions prohibiting politi-
cization are violated by our human rights initiatives. There have been
indications that other LDCs may take similar steps.

While we believe it is legitimate to bring human rights consider-
ations to bear in the IFIs, the reaction of various LDCs makes it clear
that we must handle the issue with great—Treasury would say
greater—sensitivity to ensure we do not alter the apolitical characters
of the IFIs and impede their effectiveness in promoting development.
Towards this end, we think it desirable to the extent feasible to imple-
ment our policies discreetly by working behind the scenes rather than
generating open confrontation in the bank boards. Thus, in opposing a
loan because of human rights violations, we have been making our
reasons clear beforehand to the government of the borrowing country
and its executive director, as well as to other governments with whom
we are consulting, but have generally refrained from mentioning
human rights at the board meetings.

To increase the likelihood that other countries will support us, we
will be intensifying our efforts to consult with them on how to reflect
human rights considerations in long-term bank lending programs in
ways which would reduce the number of cases where an opposition
vote of the U.S. would be required. We will also help to achieve this
goal by relying increasingly on “rewards” rather than “sanctions” in
furthering our human rights objectives in the IFIs over the longer term.
Some LDC’s also have argued that donor emphasis in the IFIs and
elsewhere on human rights and basic human needs is, in actuality, both
moral imperialism and an excuse for reducing aid. Frequently LDC’s
have claimed that human rights initiatives stress observance of
“Western-style” human rights, i.e., the rights of the individual and po-
litical rights. They claim this ignores basic economic rights, such as the
right to be adequately clothed, fed and housed, the right to education
and to adequate medical care, etc.

We believe our human rights initiatives do not warrant this criti-
cism. We have repeatedly taken the position that our human rights
policy seeks to promote economic and social rights as well as rights of
the person and civil and political liberties. Our support of bilateral and
multilateral assistance for the needy in countries with questionable
human rights records demonstrates the importance we attach to eco-
nomic and social rights.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Some LDC’s have argued that the emphasis of our assistance pro-
grams on basic human needs is designed to impede Third World indus-
trial development. To the extent our human rights policies stress basic
human needs assistance, they attract the same criticism. Needless to
say, what underlies our approach is not a desire to forestall economic
competition from LDCs, but rather a conviction that a stronger em-
phasis on basic human needs will enhance our effectiveness in pro-
moting overall economic development.

V. The Effect of Our Actions on the Advancement of U.S. Human Rights
Objectives
The United States has used a variety of policy tools to implement
its human rights policy. The use of our “voice and vote” in the multilat-
eral development institutions is only one of these tools, but one which,
in certain circumstances, has been influential. IFI-related actions have
normally been taken in conjunction with or subsequent to other forms
of action or representation. Thus, actions in the IFIs have not become
the “cutting edge” of our human rights policy.

Since, as noted above, our concept of human rights encompasses
economic and social rights, we have in most instances continued to
support IFI loans to countries with serious human rights problems
when the loans are directed at meeting the basic human needs of the
poor; at the same time, we have opposed loans to such countries for
large capital and infrastructure projects. We have explained this dis-
tinction to recipient governments. In our representations we have em-
phasized our belief that policies which foster human rights contribute
positively to economic and social development.

As for the economic impact of our actions in the IFIs, no loan has
failed to be approved because of our opposition, although efforts de-
scribed above to encourage other donor support may lead to the actual
disapproval of loans. However, when countries have withdrawn or de-
layed applications for loans in anticipation of U.S. opposition, there has
been a direct economic impact. (The value of all loans that have been
postponed is approximately $385 million. Of that amount, loans to-
taling approximately $250 million were subsequently approved by the
IFIs.) There has also been an economic effect in those few instances in
which countries, anticipating U.S. opposition to a proposed loan, have
switched the loans from the Inter-American Development Bank’s “soft
lending window” (i.e., the Fund for Special Operations), where the U.S.
has veto power over loans, to the bank’s “hard lending window,”
where interest rates are higher and maturities shorter. U.S. actions in
the IFIs on human rights may also in certain cases affect a country’s
credit-worthiness in the eyes of commercial lenders.

As our actions in the IFIs are almost always accompanied by other
actions or representations, a direct relationship cannot be shown be-

Human Rights
tween our actions in the IFIs and specific human rights developments
in other countries. More basically, we have generally tried to avoid
linking particular actions on our part—in the IFIs or in any other con-
text—to particular human rights improvements in the recipient
country. This kind of quid pro quo approach to human rights, while it
has a superficial appeal, would in our judgment tend to permit and
perhaps even encourage other countries to engage in cosmetic human
rights changes designed to fetch a particular response from us. If, for
example, we made it plain to a country that we would support IFI loans
if a substantial number of political prisoners were released, it is pos-
sible that the country would detain prisoners for the purpose of subse-
quently releasing them in order to satisfy the condition we had laid
down. This type of manipulation is an inherent risk of a quid pro quo
approach.

This is not to say, however, that because we have resisted the no-
tion of trading specific actions on our part for specific human rights im-
provements elsewhere, any particular actions on our part can fairly be
characterized as ineffective. It is necessary to consider all the steps we
have taken to promote human rights. We think it is clear that the to-
tality of our actions—including our actions in the IFIs—has increased
the costs of repression and helped to create an atmosphere in which
human rights progress is more likely to occur. Our actions have
brought about a very substantial increase in world awareness of human
rights issues. This new consciousness not only helps curb existing
human rights abuses; it also acts as a deterrent to new violations.
While it is not possible to say that any particular step we have
taken has led to any particular result, it is probably the case that if we
appeared to be reluctant to bring human rights considerations to bear
in a prominent context—such as the IFIs—we would call into serious
question the depth of our human rights commitment. Thus, if we are
going to continue to be effective in raising human rights consciousness
and nurturing an atmosphere in which human rights progress is more
likely to occur, it is important that we continue to bring human rights
considerations to bear in a conscientious, coherent way on all of our bi-
lateral and multilateral assistance programs.

Even though no one-to-one relationship can be shown between
our actions in the IFIs and specific human rights developments, it is
useful to consider developments in each country as to which we have
taken some IFI-related actions on human rights grounds. A country-
by-country synopsis is included in Appendix A. While improvements

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
are noted for most of the countries in question, human rights problems
persist in all of the countries.

With respect to possible means of enhancing our effectiveness,
Treasury believes there should be a presumption that in the IFIs we will
limit the use of sanctions to promotion of the “first group” of rights, i.e.,
rights of the person. In Treasury’s view this approach will be more
likely to win support from other governments, since they will not see
themselves called upon in a multilateral context to pass judgment on
the political organization and structure of another government. With
such added support, Treasury believes this approach could be more ef-
fective in bringing about human rights improvements in the recipient
country. It will also be more effective, in Treasury’s view, because vio-
lations of rights of the person can be more readily curtailed than other
types of human rights violations.

The State Department believes that to focus in the IFIs solely on vi-
olations of rights of the person would put too narrow a construction on
the statutory language. It would also unduly downgrade the gravity of
violations of economic and social rights and of political and civil rights.
PD–30 makes it clear that all three categories of rights are the subject of
our human rights policy. To downgrade these violations in the IFIs but
not in other multilateral contexts would not be understood, in State’s
view. State believes other countries are willing to support a human
rights policy that addresses all three groups. In addition, State believes
it is not possible to make meaningful generalizations about whether
particular types of human rights violations are more readily remedi-
able than others. In some cases, for example, it may be that violations of
political and civil rights can be stopped more expeditiously than viola-
tions of rights of the person; in other cases, the reverse may be true.

140.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the
Deputy Executive Secretary of the Department of State
(Wisner)
Washington, May 1, 1978
SUBJECT
AID Budget Review
over levels requested in past years. HA believes that the United States
should do much more than it has in the past to help meet basic human
needs throughout the world. This office is concerned, however, that in
developing its strategy, AID take adequately into account the human
rights records of individual countries. This will mean tailoring alloca-
tion levels and program content to reflect human rights considerations.
HA is not arguing that countries with bad human rights records
should not receive any bilateral U.S. assistance. We are arguing that
greater attention should be given to countries whose governments
have demonstrated a real commitment to fostering the rights of their
peoples. It is conceivable that there will be instances where such a gov-
ernment abuses political and civil rights but still has a commitment to
fostering social and economic rights. In such cases, steady levels are the
most which should be provided, but they should be based on a very
strict project by project review to make certain that their impact will be
to foster greater equity and not to reinforce a repressive political struc-
ture. In the absence of such a commitment, AID projects become
stopgap humanitarian gestures with no real impact on development
and too often are anti-developmental in the sense that they help to pro-
long the life of a repressive or apathetic regime. In the absence of a host
government’s commitment to increasing the socio-economic participa-
tion of its poor, only those AID projects which can be shown to act as
catalysts which, in a sense, challenge an inequitable economic struc-
ture, should be funded.

In addition AID should become actively involved in designing and
funding programs geared at preparing people to participate in the legal
and political process and training experts to defend and foster constitu-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tional and other guarantees designed to accord due process to all, but
especially to the underprivileged, who are so-often excluded from fair
and impartial treatment. Greater emphasis should be placed on pro-
grams that work directly with lower income groups, e.g., co-ops, land
tenure, para-legal and para-medicine, basic education. For example,
our Embassy in Rwanda has recently come in with a very interesting
proposal to fund para-legal training. It’s exactly the kind of thing AID
should be doing. Much can be accomplished by increased funding to
private voluntary organizations, both international and national in or-
igin. Indeed, in countries with serious human rights problems, we can
lessen direct links with the Government but continue to assist the
needy by using pros.

HA has consistently fought efforts to create human rights violator
hit lists. We believe that to be effective we must approach the situation
in each country on a case-by-case basis tailoring the use of available
policy tools to a variety of circumstances. To list in this memo a group
of aid recipient countries where we believe FY 80 programs should re-
main at current or lower funding levels would be to take the real risk of
creating just such a list and having it circulate. We are prepared, in the
course of the overall budget review, to make recommendations with re-
gard to specific country programs. Our recommendations will reflect
concerns over funding levels and our desire to examine closely indi-
vidual projects in problem countries to ensure that they maximize
overall human rights/human needs objectives.

HA has no objection in listing countries where we would recom-
mend increases in FY 80 program levels above and beyond that envi-
sioned under the overall program. These countries are: Gambia,
Senegal, Botswana, India, Sri Lanka, Bolivia, Costa Rica and Jamaica.

Human Rights

141.

Memorandum From Robert Maxim of the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to the Assistant Secretary
of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(Derian)
Washington, May 1, 1978
SUBJECT
AID and Implementation of Section 116 (e) of the Foreign Assistance Act:
Derian-Moose Meeting with Governor Gilligan
The following are suggested talking points for your meeting today
with Governor Gilligan:2
—To date there has not been one single project implementing Sec-
thousand to be spent in development assistance programs “which will
encourage or promote increased adherence to civil and political
rights”. A record of non-accomplishment that is potentially highly em-
barrassing for an Administration that has placed human rights at the
center of its foreign policy. (About $100–200 thousand will be given to a
South African legal defense fund but this is not an AID-originated
activity.)
—After weeks of discussion a request for ideas was sent out on
April 22 (attached) by AID’s African bureau. We are unaware if other
geographic bureaus did even this much. Although this message did en-
dorse an Embassy Gaborone (Botswana) it was a proposal submitted
months ago.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—The basic problem seems to be that here, and in the field, AID’s
second-level leadership and below are either uneasy with or opposed
to an explicit human rights aspect to development assistance.
—Apparently it is either feared that recipient countries will object
or that this kind of focus is alien to AID’s operations. (The latter is as
much an obstacle as pointed up by AID inaction on a Rwandan Gov-
ernment proposal for AID training of judiciary cadres (low level magis-
trates). Embassy Kigali has stressed repeatedly the importance of re-
sponding to something proposed by, not imposed upon, Rwanda.)
—While AID now seems to be looking at ideas, given the time con-
sumed by actual project formulation it may well mean that we reach
the end of the Fiscal Year (September 30) without more than a token
project or two, if any, having been actually implemented.
—The language of 116 (e) is broad enough to cover a broad range
of possible activities, but they should have at least an indirect or con-
tributory bearing on civil and political rights. It would not be appro-
priate to label a refugee assistance or other economic-social assistance
activity as filling the bill.
—You would appreciate Governor Gilligan checking into this per-
sonally in view of the congressional interest in the matter.

142.

Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, May 3, 1978
SUBJECT
Fascell’s Hesitation on the Human Rights Institute
John Richardson called today to say that Dante Fascell has been
contacted by representatives of OMB indicating that the President is
Human Rights
opposed to the Human Rights Institute bill. Previously, Christopher
had testified before the Committee indicating Administration neu-
trality on the issue,—a neutrality stemming in part from the President’s
policy against the creation of new agencies. Given the phone calls from
OMB, however, Fascell is now uncertain whether the Administration is
still neutral or is now opposed to the bill. Before pushing ahead with
the bill, he would like to be reassured that the Administration does not
oppose it. John suggested that it would be most desirable (and, indeed,
perhaps critical to the success of the bill) for you to call Fascell and reas-
sure him on this point. I second his recommendation.

In calling Fascell I think the best tack to take would be to empha-
size that the Administration viewpoint is contained in Christopher’s
statement and not in phone calls from OMB. In addition to reiterating
your own personal support for the bill, you might wish to call his atten-
tion to two key statements in Christopher’s testimony:
“In pursuing our human rights policy we are receptive to new and
creative endeavors. If properly structured . . . the Institute envisioned
in your bill could make a valuable contribution to efforts on behalf of
human rights.”
“. . . Creation of the Institute through Congressional initiative would
be viewed as a reaffirmance of our national commitment to the promo-
tion of human rights. The bipartisan nature of this commitment, and
the breadth of its support, are prerequisites to the success of our efforts
in behalf of human rights.

Recommendation
That you phone Congressman Fascell assuring him that Adminis-
tration does not oppose Human Rights Institute.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

143.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, May 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights Reports
As you know, Representative Clarence Long has written a letter re-
questing State to send the Congress human rights reports on those
countries which were not the subject of human rights reports required
by the Security Assistance Act. Similarly, Congress is considering
amendments to the Export-Import Bank Act which would require State
to file human rights reports on all those countries which receive
Export-Import Bank credits. Finally, a new OPIC act has passed
Congress which also requires human rights reports. It is unclear
whether such reports are required for countries which receive new
OPIC insurance or for those which have received OPIC insurance in the
past.

The President is concerned about the reporting requirements cited
above. With respect to Congressional action, the President stated that
we should hold firm on this, including the possibility of a veto.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Human Rights

144.

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, May 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Improved Coordination of Decisions on Economic and Military Programs in
Light of Human Rights Considerations
Cy:
This memorandum analyzes the problems we have discussed con-
cerning the lack of coordination in our decision-making on economic
and military assistance issues as affected by human rights consider-
ations. It then proposes a remedy which I think will be effective and
ought to be implemented promptly.

The Problem
There is a pressing need to assure greater coordination of our deci-
sions on economic and military programs in light of human rights con-
siderations. Under current procedures, human rights review of eco-
nomic programs is essentially divorced from human rights review of
military programs. Moreover, such human rights review as does occur
as to both types of programs has not always entailed coordinated con-
sideration of our other fundamental foreign policy interests, in addi-
tion to human rights.

More specifically, under current procedures, on military assistance
PM conducts a case-by-case review of military issues raising human
rights concerns. This review is conducted in accordance with proce-
dures developed by the Arms Export Control Board (AECB) which pro-
vide for full participation by HA, S/P, the relevant regional bureau,
AID, and ACDA (when the transfer has significant arms control impli-
cations). Where differences of view on human rights issues cannot be
resolved through these procedures, the matter has been decided
through appeal to T and then, if the dispute persists, through Action
Memoranda to the Secretary (or the Deputy Secretary if he is acting for
the Secretary in the matter). Attempts to resolve the differences at the
Bureau level have sometimes produced lengthy delays.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
As for economic assistance, the Interagency Group on Human
Rights and Foreign Assistance, which I chair, currently brings human
rights considerations to bear on bilateral and multilateral economic
assistance programs. (The Group includes representatives of State,
Treasury, DOD, AID, and the NSC staff, as well as participants from
Agriculture, Commerce, OMB, Ex-Im and OPIC. State’s participants in-
clude HA, EB, S/P, L, H, E, P, C, T and each of the regional bureaus.)
The Group is authorized, under a recently adopted procedure, to con-
sider military programs, but only after any dispute as to them has gone
through the usually quite time-consuming PM and T review set forth
above, and upon referral from you. As a result, the Group is not likely
to be seized of military issues in a timely fashion.

In short, we have a situation in the human rights area in which:
(a) decisions on economic matters concerning a particular country are
isolated to a very substantial degree from decisions on military matters
concerning that country, and (b) the full range of our fundamental in-
terests with respect to a particular country is not clearly brought to bear
in the decision-making process. The disadvantages of this anomalous
situation are quite substantial. The risk of making inconsistent deci-
sions is plain. The Congress is particularly aware of the disjunction in
our current procedures.

The Recommended Solution
To remedy this situation, it is proposed (a) that the Interagency
Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance should also review
military issues as soon as it appears that there is an inter-bureau or inter-
agency dispute involving the human rights implications of the issue in ques-
tion, and (b) that when the Group is seized with an appeal on economic
or military programs for a given country, the regional bureaus should
present for discussion by the Group an overall strategy for coordinated
use of economic and military programs for that country.

Under the proposal, PM would continue to conduct its case-by-
case review of military programs, but as soon as any bureau or agency
raised a human rights objection to the case in question, the matter
would be referred to the Interagency Group. (T is currently represented
on the Interagency Group; a PM representative should be added under
this proposal.) The Group would promptly review the matter and
make a recommendation to the Secretary. As part of this consolidation,
the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and Tech-
nology would become Vice Chairman of the Interagency Group. (Let
me say that while I do not covet regularly chairing the group for both
economic and military matters, I think it would be best if I do so, for
two reasons. First, economic and military issues will have to be consid-
ered together as part of a countrywide approach, and it would not be
practical to alternate the chairmanship as one or the other type of issue

Human Rights
is raised in the course of a single meeting. Secondly, there would be
great bureaucratic resistance—both within the building and from other
agencies—to the alternating chairmanship approach.)
In addition under the proposal, the regional bureau’s repre-
sentative at the Group’s meetings would set forth—either orally or in
writing—the range of our fundamental interests with respect to the
country in question and would state the bureau’s views as to the means
by which we can most effectively pursue those interests over time. This
presentation would have to include a complete, detailed inventory of
all impending decisions as to economic and military matters, including
decisions as to particular transactions as well as planned programs and
allocations for the next fiscal year and the next budget. To provide con-
text, the regional bureau’s presentation would also have to include a
detailed specification of relevant decisions of this kind in the recent
past.

In particular, this inventory—which the regional bureaus would
be responsible for preparing in advance for all countries likely to be re-
viewed by the Interagency Group—should include comprehensive
data on the following programs and relationships:
Economic:
—AID development assistance
—PL 480 food aid
—IFI loans
—OPIC programs
—CCC credits
—Tariff treatment
—US stockpile management
—International agreements, e.g., civil air
—Other
Military:
—FMS (credit and cash)
—IMET
—MAP
—Export licenses for munitions list items
—Other
The regional bureau’s presentation would then be discussed by the
Group. Differences of opinion would be fully aired. After full discus-
sion, the Group would make recommendations on the particular
matters under review. To the degree feasible, the Group would seek to
make recommendations that applied to categories of transactions and
programs and that covered the foreseeable future, thus providing ade-
quate guidance to obviate the necessity for frequent meetings of the
Group to consider the same country.

145.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) and the
Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, May 16, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights and the IFIs
Two issues which surfaced at your lunch with Tony Solomon and
Fred Bergsten deserve further attention: the allegation of inconsistency
between our bilateral assistance programs and our voting record in
IFIs; and the question of whether we should ever oppose IFI loans
which meet the basic human needs criteria.

The record to date on the “inconsistency” charge is attached for
your use in future such conversations, or perhaps distribution to the In-
teragency Group. You will note that the best possible face is put on
things, especially military transfers. Nonetheless the overall record is a
good one and we should call attention to it.

The question of whether we ever should oppose basic human
needs loans is more difficult, and controversial within this building. All
agree that we usually should support such loans. But HA believes that
we should leave ourselves the option of sometimes opposing them.
This might sometimes be done to disassociate ourselves from the inhu-
mane excesses of a particular regime (e.g., Argentina) or because of our
past identification with a major human rights violator (e.g., Chile). HA
makes a distinction between abstaining and voting no on IFI loans,
Human Rights
pointing out that abstention is a method of distancing ourselves from a
repressive regime, while not actually voting no on aid for the needy.
The abstention option does not exist for bilateral assistance.
More often, however, opposition to a needy loan would be for tac-
tical reasons: because it seemed the course most likely to produce im-
provements in a particular human rights situation. This approach is
supported by individuals in other Bureaus. At the moment, for in-
stance, our Ambassadors in Chile and Uruguay are recommending that
we oppose all loans to those countries, whether or not they meet the
needy standard. Each believes that our hard line policy may be begin-
ning to show results, and thinks we should keep up the pressure. Am-
bassador White in Paraguay recently urged opposition to all loans
there, not because the hard line is beginning to pay off but because he
feels that the GOP does not appreciate the distinction between needy
and non-needy loans and so is getting confusing “signals” from us
which make human rights improvements less likely.

S/P believes we should always support IFI loans which would
serve basic human needs. If the political situation in a country is such
that the benefits of an assistance program would not actually reach the
needy, the proposal should not reach the Interagency Group; if it does,
that Group should oppose it. But we should have a clear and consistent
record of support for programs which we believe would actually meet
the basic human needs criteria.

S/P believes that to preserve our credibility in the IFIs, we need to
be able to demonstrate that the only difference in our attitude to their
loans and to bilateral programs has to do with the kinds of loans
brought forward. Such nuances as a reduction in some bilateral pro-
grams, or a decision not to begin further new ones, are likely to be lost
on those who see some bilateral programs continuing while we oppose
similar programs in international institutions. (The statement in the at-
tached talking points that “we have signed no new bilateral AID agree-
ments” in Ethiopia may be a useful debating point; but the reason is
Ethiopia’s unwillingness to sign agreements with us. We have been
trying to continue bilateral aid programs in order to preserve some
links with the country, despite our opposition to its basic human needs
loans in the IDA.)

A more consistent record of support for humanitarian loans in the
IFIs might also help encourage other donor countries to factor human
rights considerations into IFI operations; several of the European gov-
ernments already consulted have suggested that the IFIs are too much
the cutting edge of our human rights advocacy.

S/P further believes that consistent support for humanitarian
loans in the IFIs is important to our longer-range human rights efforts.
We need to be able to demonstrate that our quarrel is not with any

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
people (whatever our differences with their government). In some
cases humanitarian assistance will be the only practical human rights
help the international community can give to people living under a re-
pressive regime. Finally, it is important to make clear that economic
human rights are as important to us as any other category, and that we
are not sacrificing their promotion in pursuit of others. When we op-
pose a genuinely basic human needs loan in an IFI, we give ammuni-
tion to those (in LDC governments generally as well as the particular
applicant country) who charge that we are trying to impose Western-
style political values on them at the expense of their economic needs.
P.S. Fred Bergsten has read this memo and supports S/P’s
position.

Attachment
Talking Points Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
TALKING POINTS ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND FOREIGN
ASSISTANCE: THE CONSISTENCY QUESTION
We have a good record of consistency in application of human
rights considerations to bilateral assistance programs on the one hand,
and our role in the IFIs on the other.
—We almost always support economic assistance programs which
serve basic human needs, whether bilateral or multilateral. We define
“basic human needs” as food; shelter; health care; and education. We
also consider that assistance programs with major job-creating poten-
tial in areas of high unemployment meet the basic human needs
standard, since we would rather put people in a position to purchase
essential goods and services for themselves.
—When applying the basic human needs standard, we look
closely at the specific situations. Will a construction loan build hotels
for the tourist industry, or housing for the poor? How many jobs will
an industrial or mineral development loan create? Will an energy loan
increase the number of households that have electricity, or increase
in our decisions than rigid guidelines.
—Any apparent inconsistency between our attitude toward IFI
loans, and toward bilateral aid programs, stems from our ability to de-
sign the latter to ensure they meet the basic human needs criteria. We
must react to IFI loans, on the other hand, as they are presented to us.
—Our support of loans which directly benefit the needy, even in
human rights problem countries, is reflected in our record in the IFIs.
We have, for instance, opposed loans to Paraguay for highway devel-
opment in the IDB and IBRD, but supported loans to it for agricultural
education (IDB) and rural water supply (World Bank). Similarly, we
have opposed IFI loans to the Philippines which would not serve basic
human needs (ADB loans for hydropower development and to the
Philippine Development Bank, and a World Bank loan to the Philippine
Investment Services Organization) but supported those which met the
needy criteria (a World Bank loan for tree farming, and IBRD loans for
educational radio, irrigation, and to the Philippine Development Cor-
poration). We opposed an IDB loan to Uruguay for coastal roads, but
will support one on May 30 for vocational training. We are supporting
a World Bank vocational training loan to El Salvador, but will oppose a
World Bank telecommunications loan and an IDB loan for cattle devel-
opment, if they come to a vote absent human rights improvements.
—On rare occasions we have opposed IFI loans which met the
needy criteria, to express extreme concern about a human rights situa-
tion. But we have never done so when bilateral programs remained un-
changed. We abstained on an AfDf education loan to the Central Af-
rican Empire, but are making no new bilateral AID agreements with it
either. We voted against an IDB rural public health loan to Chile, but it
has been eliminated from bilateral programming. We abstained on an
AfDf loan to Guinea for hemp production, but also reduced its pro-
posed PL 480 allocation. We abstained on IDA loans to Ethiopia for irri-
gation and rural roads, but during the same period have signed no new
bilateral AID agreements there. We voted against an IDA agricultural
loan to the Peoples’ Democratic Republic of Yemen, but have no bilat-
eral relations with it. (We also were uncertain that any assistance, how-
ever described, actually would reach needy people in Ethiopia or the
PDRY.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Human rights considerations are affecting bilateral economic
aid more than our role in the IFIs. This is because AID itself is factoring
such considerations into its country allocations. In 1978 the Central Af-
rican Empire and Uruguay were deleted entirely; levels for Paraguay
were lowered; and allocations to Costa Rica and India were increased,
all on human rights grounds. Human rights concerns are likely to show
up even more in AID allocations in the future, since PD/NSC–30 di-
rects us to intensify efforts to channel assistance to countries with good
or improving human rights records. This will mean reduced assistance
to human rights problem countries, even though assistance could be
designed to benefit needy people there. But these shifts will not be re-
flected in interagency group decisions, because fewer assistance pro-
posals for human rights problem countries will be forwarded by AID to
that group.
—If asked we are working on ways to better factor human rights
considerations into military assistance and sales, and to integrate our
decisions on military and economic assistance. This is difficult, because
important military relationships have been designed to serve our own
security interests as well as that of the recipient country. But even here,
the record already is better than it sometimes is made to seem. Of the
twelve countries whose loans we have opposed in IFIs, we either had
no security assistance programs, or have eliminated or sharply reduced
them, to all but three: South Korea; the Philippines; and Zaire. South
Korea faces an active external threat, and our military assistance is de-
signed to enable it to defend itself without the presence of American
combat troops. Zaire also faces an external threat, from Cuban-assisted
guerillas operating from Angola. Because of human rights and other
considerations, however, our military assistance to it is limited to
non-lethal materiel. And military assistance to the Philippines is impor-
tant to our security interests in the Pacific. The human rights policy,
moreover, has ended or reduced security assistance programs to some
countries whose IFI loans (including non-needy loans) we routinely
support (e.g., Brazil and Guatemala).

146.

Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State and the Mission to the United Nations
8839. IO for Asst Secy Maynes, USUN for Amassador Young. From
Ambassador Vanden Heuvel. Subject: Human Rights—Proposed Stra-
tegy Session.
1. At the IO Chiefs of Mission meeting, we discussed the possi-
bility of a strategy session on human rights so that policies and objec-
tives could be formulated in support of President Carter’s initiative at
every possible level. It is not too early to begin planning our concerns
for the 35th Human Rights Commission session, especially as its
agenda relates to ECOSOC and the General Assembly.
2. I suggest that we take advantage of Ambassadors Young and
Wells’ presence in Geneva during July to convene such a strategy ses-
sion. We should plan several days, understanding that only part of
those days will be available for our discussions because of other
ECOSOC and Mission responsibilities. The dates should be set in terms
of the convenience of Ambassadors Young and Wells, as well, and after
consultation with other key suggested participants, such as, Assistant
Secretary Maynes (and/or George Dalley), Representative Mezvinsky,
Assistant Secretary Derian, Ambassadors Torres and McGhee. I would
also suggest that the presence of Warren Hewitt, Brady Tyson and the
White House representative concerned with human rights would help
the accomplishments of such a meeting.
3. Among the agenda items, I would suggest the following:
A. The possibilities and limitations of the UN and its specialized
agencies in the human rights field,
(1) The UN Human Rights Commission and the UN Human Rights
Division,
(2) UNESCO,
(3) WHO and ILO.

B. The U.S. proposal for a UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights—is this idea still worth fostering after fifteen years of effort, or
should we think in terms of an amended proposal and a different
strategy?

C. How can we enhance human rights by greater accountability
and enforceability in national and international institutions?
Limited Official Use.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
D. Political limitations on U.S. objectives because of Senate in-
ability to ratify human rights commitments.

E. Accepting U.S. commitment to cultural, economic and social
rights as parts of human rights, how can we identify the fora for these
various rights and how can they best be defined and defended?
F. Should we not be working more diligently for regional institu-
tions for the protection of human rights? Does OAS give us an example
of such a regional approach?

G. Should the U.S. Government recommend programs of technical
assistance in the human rights field?

H. How can we better support non-governmental organizations in
the human rights field and what new initiatives might we propose to
strengthen their objective intervention in this problem area?
4. There are clearly many other items that could be discussed in
such meetings, such as, our strategy regarding a convention on torture,
but I would appreciate your advice as to the concept for such a meeting
and if you approve the appropriate time.

Vanden Heuvel
147.

Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(Schneider) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, June 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Improving Human Rights Reporting and Planning
We seek your early approval of a phased process which is
designed:
—to ensure we have adequate and timely information on hand for
a thorough consideration of human rights concerns during the FY 80
classification marking. Schneider did not initial the memorandum. Drafted by Palmer
and Schneider. According to a stamped notation, the memorandum was received in D on
July 3.

Human Rights
security and economic assistance budget review process which is
scheduled to begin this month.
—to build on the already expanded reporting from most posts and
provide some stimulus to the posts when added reporting on human
rights matters might be desired.
—to encourage the further development by the Regional Bureaus
and field posts of human rights programs in countries receiving U.S.
assistance.
—to ensure a mutually supportive relationship between bilateral
efforts and our use of and participation in international organizations,
including regional organizations.

These objectives are treated in the attached memorandum.
A schedule for the orderly preparation of the 1979 Country Re-
ports is to be the subject of a subsequent tasking. We intend to recom-
mend an earlier start and a less onerous production schedule for the
Country Reports than was the case last year, using our last year’s expe-
rience as a guide.

The Regional Bureaus and INR agree with these proposals.
I recommend you approve the attached memorandum.
Approved
Approved with change(s) indicated
Let’s discuss

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Attachment
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to All Regional and Functional
Assistant Secretaries and the Director of the Policy Planning
Staff (Lake)
Washington, July 3, 1978
TO
AF—Mr. Moose
ARA—Mr. Bushnell, Acting
EA—Mr. Holbrooke
EB—Mr. Katz
EUR—Mr. Vest
H—Mr. Bennet
HA—Ms. Derian
INR—Ambassador Bowdler
IO—Mr. Maynes
L—Mr. Hansell
PM—Mr. Gelb
S/P—Mr. Lake
NEA—Mr. Saunders
SUBJECT
Improving Human Rights Reporting and Planning
In order to continue the recent improvements in human rights re-
porting from posts abroad and to use this reporting effectively in im-
plementing our human rights policy, the Deputy Secretary has asked
that the following steps be taken:
—that INR should prepare by August 1 brief summaries of signifi-
cant human rights events since January 1, 1978 in countries selected by
the Regional Bureaus in coordination with HA. IO and the relevant Re-
gional Bureaus should inform INR of any significant actions taken in
multilateral organizations since January 1 with respect to the human
rights situation in the selected countries.
—that the Regional Bureaus, in coordination with HA, INR, IO,
and L should review their posts’ human rights reporting and provide
posts with additional guidance and feedback to close significant gaps.
The need for periodic reports should be considered, particularly where
Human Rights
human rights conditions are changing, where such conditions are a sig-
nificant impediment in our bilateral relationship, or where reporting
has been minimal. Posts should also be asked for their views on what
can realistically be expected in the way of human rights improvements.
Posts should be encouraged to solicit the views of AID and ICA per-
sonnel abroad on human rights conditions. Any additional instructions
should go to the field by July 20.
—that the Regional Bureaus in consultation with the relevant func-
tional bureaus should provide to HA by August 13 a one or two page
summary for selected countries of steps taken and planned for inte-
grating human rights concerns into the development and implementa-
tion of our economic, security, cultural and other bilateral and multila-
teral programs and policies for those countries. The Bureaus may
suggest formats they deem most appropriate for these summary
programs.

148.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva and the Mission to the United Nations
160486. For Ambassador Vanden Heuvel from Maynes. Subject:
Human Rights—Proposed Strategy Session. Ref: Geneva 08839.
1. I appreciate your taking the initiative to follow up on the con-
sensus of the IO Chiefs of Mission meeting that we needed to do more
to ensure that our multilateral efforts in the human rights field ade-
quately reinforce our bilateral policy efforts. In this light, the Depart-
ment therefore welcomes your proposal that we make an intensive ef-
fort to further integrate our bilateral and multilateral human rights
efforts.
2. At the same time, I believe that it will be very difficult to hold the
meeting you suggest in Geneva. Throughout the summer, IO has a very
carefully balanced series of trips planned as part of our pre-General As-
sembly consultation effort with other member governments. It would
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
be extremely difficult to peel off senior officers in IO and HA during the
period in question to attend a human rights strategy session lasting
several days in Geneva.
3. I would suggest, therefore, that the best way to address the legit-
imate problem you raised would be for us in State to prepare a strategy
paper examining the human rights initiatives we might undertake in
the UNGA, the forthcoming UNHRC and how those relate to our bilat-
eral human rights actions. This paper could be sent to you in Geneva
for comment and you could take advantage of the presence of Ambas-
sadors Young and Wells to formulate comments which, in turn, could
be incorporated before we produce a final document. In the meantime,
we would welcome your thoughts on some of the issues that you
identify in reftel. In particular, we would welcome your comments on
the possibilities and limitations of the Human Rights Commission and
UN Human Rights Division.

Vance

149.

Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the
Department of State, the Embassy in Austria, and the
Embassy in Cameroon
2635. Vienna please pass Matteson USDel Women’s Prepcom.
Yaounde please pass Deputy Asst Secretary Dalley. Subject: US
Strategy for Human Rights Initiatives in the UN System. Ref: A) Ge-
Limited Official Use. Repeated for information to the Mission in Geneva, Lagos, and New
Delhi.

Human Rights
1. USUN agrees with reftel A that a strategy session sometime this
summer with at least the presence of Young, Wells, Maynes, Dalley,
Vanden Heuvel and Mezvinsky would be helpful. Obviously, the pres-
ence of Hewitt, Tyson, Matteson and the human rights officer from US
Mission Geneva and perhaps someone from US UNESCO office would
be helpful, also. (Ambassador Young is now tentatively scheduled to be
in Geneva July 3 to July 12.) This message is an attempt to place such a
strategy meeting in the context of 1) a proposed general strategy, 2) a
series of initiatives in which the US could participate and 3) prepara-
tory meetings and consultations both before and after the session in
Geneva.
2. As a general US human rights strategy in UN forums, USUN
suggests that given the overall desire of the US to continue to build
deeper and broader contacts with key non-aligned nations in both the
political and human rights fields, the US should focus on initiatives
which can be promoted with non-aligned as well as Western support. It
appears to us that the major tasks at this time are: A) the building of a
human rights alliance with key non-aligned nations (especially India
and Nigeria) and supporting their human rights initiatives. B) Consoli-
dating the recent increased interest in human rights and the recent ad-
vances under 1503 in the Human Rights Commission (HRC) by
strengthening, upgrading and expanding the Human Rights Division
(HRD) staff (see reftel B), and developing plans for an improved UN
human rights organization and program to be presented to the next
session of the HRC, which will probably be devoted largely to the
overall analysis; and C) developing some positive US responses to the
non-aligned aspirations expressed in 32/1304 for a greater concern with
economic, social and cultural rights without sacrificing commitment to
civil and political rights.
3. Perhaps the major task of the next few months is the develop-
ment of a USG model of an ideal human rights program and organiza-
tion to be the basis for our proposals and responses at the meeting on
the “over-all analysis” of the HRC next February–March. It is here that
the proposals for a High Commissioner, Regional Commission and
Commissioners, Coordinator of Human Rights Programs and Activ-
ities with the rank of Under Secretary General, an enlarged commis-
sion, two sub-commissions, an International Court for Human Rights,
etc., must be evaluated, integrated, and put into a package.
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,” adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 16,
1977. See Document 94.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
4. As some specific initiatives upon which to begin and in addition
to the items contained in reftels A and B, USUN would suggest the
following:
A) Proposal for a new agenda item for the General Assembly: “im-
proving the coordination and communication among UN agencies in
the struggle to promote and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms.” (This would include reports on human rights procedures
and activities from ILO, UNESCO, WHO, regional human rights
commissions, etc.) This proposal originated and is being developed by
IO/HR.

B) A proposal for the General Assembly to authorize and fund a re-
sumed session of the HRC in 1979 should the HRC decide that is cannot
adequately complete the “overall analysis” of United Nations human
rights programs in order to report to the General Assembly in 1979 (as
mandated by 32/130).

C) A proposal (see reftel B) to upgrade the HRD to a department,
to expand the staff of the HRD to include at least the following: four
more officers in the field of private communications, a regional human
rights field officer attached to each of the headquarters staffs of the re-
gional economic commissions, and an additional officer in the New
York liaison office.

D) A proposal to the Third Committee that the panel of experts
created in 1969 be updated, and that its mandate be expanded to in-
clude human rights good offices missions as directed by the SYG, and
that funding be allotted for such missions.

E) A strategy of presenting (or stimulating the presentation) to the
sub-commission all the available documentation on the three or four
most serious human rights national problems, in such a list seeking
both ideological and geographical distribution, and seeking to expand
the number of 1503 cases to include the worst human rights problems,
such as Equatorial Guinea and Argentina.

F) Evaluation of the FRG proposal for the creation of an Interna-
tional Court of Human Rights, that could receive complaints from na-
tional tribunals or commissions, and perhaps the sub-commission.
G) Emphasis on the promotion of local, national and regional
commissions.

H) Two meetings of the HRC per year, with a differentiated
agenda, alternating meetings between New York and Geneva.
I) Discussion of methods to streamline the General Assembly to
avoid current duplication in plenary, Third and Fourth Committees on
such topics as the Middle East, South Africa and self-determination.
5. In addition to these specifics, USUN also sees some other general
problem and or opportunity areas:

150.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, June 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights and OPIC
The Problem
Although the Christopher Committee was created as an inter-
agency group, Christopher has more and more used the Committee in
a purely advisory capacity, making all the decisions himself. I have not
objected to this development since it didn’t seem to me that the group
was likely to do a better job than Christopher has alone, however in this
case, Christopher is leaning towards a decision with which I, and most
of the NSC staff, strongly disagree. The issue is an important one. The
purpose of this memorandum is to acquaint you with it, and to request
your intervention to prevent a bad decision.

A month or so ago, Congress added the basic Harkin language to
OPIC’s authorizing legislation. The law now requires OPIC, in consul-
tation with the Secretary of State, to bring human rights considerations
to bear on its programs, and specifically to deny insurance for invest-
ments in countries which engage in a consistent pattern of gross viola-
tions of human rights, unless: (1) the investment will directly benefit
the needy; or, (2) the national security requires OPIC to support the
investment.

Human Rights
Three weeks ago the Christopher Committee grappled for the first
time with implementing the new provision. A lengthy discussion re-
vealed that it is going to be extremely difficult to implement it in a sen-
sible and consistent manner. Christopher postponed a decision, saying
that he wanted to think about it. I subsequently made clear to his staff
that NSC should be consulted in advance of any final decision. The key
considerations are these:
—OPIC and its programs are designed to help American business:
not the country in which the investment is to be made.
—In most cases, the government of the country in which the in-
vestment is to be made is not involved in the project in any way.
—An OPIC decision not to insure an investment in a particular
country is often viewed as a signal that the US considers that country to
be politically unstable. Thus a negative decision could lead to disin-
vestment, greater economic instability, growing political unrest, and a
general worsening of human rights conditions.
—Since most OPIC-supported projects are designed to be profit-
making, the needy people exemption is very rarely applicable.
—The legislative history of the new amendment indicates that an
exception can also be made where there is an indirect benefit to the
needy, but this is extremely hard to calculate. The SFRC Report sug-
gested such factors as “the appropriateness of the products which they pro-
mote for local mass consumption, performance in the training of workers and
managers, behavior with respect to social policy and wage rates”; etc., as cri-
teria for making this judgment. Clearly, if the Committee were to try to
apply such standards, we would be adopting a standard which we do
not apply to business here at home. That is hard (if not impossible) to
justify.
—If the Committee were to take such detailed factors into consid-
eration, the final results, and the overall policy as perceived by ev-
eryone outside the government, would probably appear even less con-
sistent than it now does.

The Options
As I see it, there are two options:
1. Implement the law literally. This means applying the needy people
exemption—for both direct and indirect benefits—including consider-
ation of the nature of the project, the social behavior of the company in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
volved, its wages, training policy, etc. It also means applying the
amendment to the group of 40–50 “grey area” countries which have se-
rious human rights problems. (This is the group which has been con-
sidered by the Committee at one time or another—it substitutes for a
hit list of “gross and consistent” violators.) In sum, it means imple-
menting the amendment very much as we do the similar Congressional
language limiting assistance in the IFIs.
2. Implement the law narrowly—perhaps not as Congress intended—but
in the light of our own view of the wisdom of the amendment. This would
mean that except in very rare instances the needy people exemption
would be considered inapplicable, and the Committee would therefore
not request supportive background detail from OPIC on company be-
havior, wages structures, etc.

It would also mean limiting application of the amendment to those
projects where the government of the recipient country is involved in
the project. This would immediately rule out about 80% of all OPIC
programs. Unfortunately, determination of government involvement is
not a yes-or-no question. After consulting with OPIC, I would suggest
that the primary criterion for determining involvement be that the gov-
ernment be either an equity holder in the project, or that it have pro-
vided a significant portion of the financing for it. At a decidedly sec-
ondary level, a government might be considered to be involved in a
project: (1) when it was to be a major beneficiary either from tax rev-
enues or production sharing; or, (2) where the project was of extreme
size or political significance for the country involved.
Finally, this approach could mean limiting application of the
amendment to a smaller group (say 10–15) of the most egregious
human rights violators. While this limitation would be consistent with
the overall approach, it would entail major problems in agreeing on
which countries are the worst offenders (after eliminating Uganda,
Cambodia, Chile, etc., with which OPIC does no business). If such a
group was agreed on there would always be the danger of leaks—even
if nothing were put on paper.

The Decision
Christopher has very nearly settled on a final decision for Option
1, while I believe we should follow Option 2. The NSC staff also strongly
favors Option 2, as does OPIC itself. You should note however that Op-
tion 2 might not be very popular on the Hill. If we were to follow this
approach we should brief key members, being quite straightforward in

Human Rights
explaining the discussions we have had, the internal contradictions in
the amendment, and the difficulties and inconsistencies likely to
emerge from a broader application of it. I also believe that as soon as
our Congressional relations allow, we should attempt to get this
amendment repealed—but not before next year.

If you agree with my suggested approach, we can proceed in one
of two ways. I could draft a memorandum for your signature ad-
dressed to the Secretaries of State and Treasury (as was the original
memo setting up the Christopher Committee) directing that the OPIC
human rights amendment be implemented along the lines of Option 2.
Or, you could chair a small meeting with State, Treasury, and OPIC
that would end in the same result, but could save Christopher from
feeling that he was being totally preempted. I favor the meeting—
Henry Owen favors a memorandum.

Recommendation:
That you approve Option 2 as the general approach for imple-
menting the new human rights language for OPIC.

That you direct me to set up a meeting to resolve this issue with at-
tendees from State, Treasury and OPIC.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

151.

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, July 3, 1978
SUBJECT
OPIC and Human Rights
Pursuant to our telephone conversation this morning, I am at-
taching a copy of the arrangements we worked out with OPIC in early
June for bringing human rights considerations to bear on OPIC pro-
grams. These procedures were designed to be responsive to the spirit
and letter of the new human rights provisions in the OPIC legislation
(copy also attached), while at the same time preserving flexibility and
permitting us to avoid publicly identifying other countries as gross and
consistent human rights violators.

You will be particularly interested in the last three sentences of the
procedures.

152.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, July 5, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights and OPIC
The package at Tab A2 from Christopher arrived this morning. It
says virtually nothing. Nothing is said about when the needy people
exemption might be considered applicable and by what standard the
“benefit” would be judged. Nothing is said about what information
would be requested from OPIC in order to judge a particular project,
especially as regards the social behavior of the company involved. It
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
states that “in addition to human rights conditions in the country in-
volved, there are a variety of important relevant factors to be consid-
ered in determining what recommendation to make concerning OPIC
support”, but gives no clue as to what these factors might be. Even on
the standard for judging government involvement, the memorandum
hedges by saying that “This relationship might be gauged by such
factors as . . .”

153.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)
Washington, July 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights and OPIC
Attached at Tab A is the memorandum I sent earlier explaining the
problem. It outlines the arguments and presents an alternative (Option
2) to Christopher’s plans. OPIC agrees with that suggested alternative,
as does Henry Owen who feels very strongly on this issue.
Brzezinski’s response to that memorandum was to talk with Chris-
topher who promised to send over a memorandum outlining his posi-
Human Rights

154.

Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State
11400. For Asst Secy Maynes from Young and Vanden Heuvel.
Subject: Human Rights—U.S. Strategy Consultations.
1. July 21 meeting with members of our staffs resulted in our mu-
tual agreement on the need for joint USUN NY/US Mission Geneva/
Department consultations on U.S. strategy in human rights. In our
view, consultations should focus on the following issues:
A. Strategy concerning proposal for UNHC for HR;
B. Restructuring of the UN Human Rights Division;
C. The convention against torture;
D. U.S. ratification of human rights conventions;
Limited Official Use. Sent for information to USUN.

155.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva and the Mission to the United Nations
188597. Geneva for Amb. Vanden Heuvel from Maynes. Subject:
1. As promised reftel, I am sending at the end of this message a
draft scope paper which is intended to lay out our strategy on human
rights issues for the 33rd UNGA. It builds upon some suggestions and
discussions we have had in IO, including input from USUN. This is not
a final draft. It needs your scrutiny from the vantage point of Geneva,
and we will appreciate greatly all comments you may care to make. I
have noted that the paper omits an action proposal covering the field of
economic and social rights and we are working on an amendment to
highlight a key basic human right in this category, such as the right to
food.

Limited Official Use; Immediate. Drafted by Hewitt; cleared by Dalley; approved by
Maynes.

Human Rights
2. For USUN: The draft reflects the valuable contributions which
we have had from USUN. Any additional comments or suggestions
will be welcome.
3. Since we want to come up with a final version in IO as soon as
possible, hope to have all comments by the end of this week from Ge-
neva and USUN.

The Setting
The preliminary list of items to be included in the provisional
agenda of the 33rd UN General Assembly contains a standard number
of human rights items (14, with a number of sub-items). Many of the
items are repetitive, having appeared on the agendas of the past several
UNGA sessions. The totality of the items will reflect somewhat more
heavily than usual the theme of racial discrimination, with a major
focus being the report on the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination. A special item marking 30 years of the Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights is scheduled for plenary discus-
sion. This item on the 30th anniversary, as well as the items (A) on tor-
ture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
and (B) alternative approaches and ways and means within the UN
system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights stand
out as being of special interest to the United States. Another repeated
item with important human rights content will be the report of the Eco-
nomic and Social Council. Under this item the question of Chile will be
considered, as well as almost any other human rights issue which
members of the General Assembly may choose to raise.

Factors Limiting U.S. Positions
With respect to a number of the items, the ability of the United
States to take a positive position is circumscribed in advance:
A. The two related items on implementing the program for the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination4 and
the report on the World Conference—the United States is a non-
participant in the Decade and the World Conference.

B. The item dealing with adverse consequences for the enjoyment
of human rights of assistance given to Southern Africa will feature a
final report by a special rapporteur—the earlier drafts of this report
have been strongly critical of the Western group of nations, which in
turn have opposed the Special Rapporteur’s findings and conclusions.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
C. The item dealing with the report of the Committee on the Elimi-
nation of Racial Discrimination and the status of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination5—the United States
is not a party to this Convention and is therefore ineligible to partici-
pate in the work of the Committee.

D. The status of the Convention on the Crime of Apartheid6—the
United States is not a party to this Convention and was one of the two
governments to vote against it.

E. The item on self-determination—resolutions under this item
regularly endorse
the right
of
the
Palestinian
people
to
self-
determination and condemn the policies of NATO members, thus as-
suring a U.S. negative vote.

F. The item relating to the report of the Human Rights Committee
under the international covenants on human rights—the United States
is not a party to these covenants and is therefore precluded from partic-
ipating in the work of the Human Rights Committee.

G. The item on alternative approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights will focus upon a progress report from the
Human Rights Commission—since the substance of this item, in-
cluding the High Commissioner for Human Rights proposal, is still
being studied by the HRC, no useful initiative by the United States with
respect to any specific related proposals is likely to be possible.
H. The item on the elimination of all forms of religious intoler-
ance—the drafting of a declaration is still proceeding at a snail’s pace in
the Human Rights Commission; no realistic alternative drafting body is
available.

I. The item on freedom of information—an impasse in the drafting
of either a declaration or a convention was reached many years ago,
with majority sentiment clearly in favor of letting this matter continue
to lie undisturbed.

J. The item relating to Israeli practices affecting the human rights of
the population of the Occupied Territories (to be considered in the Spe-
cial Political Committee)—the United States rejects a priori the findings
of human rights violations made repeatedly by the UNGA and the
Human Rights Commission because of the unacceptable nature of the
fact-finding mechanism.

U.S. Goals
This year’s UNGA agenda of human rights items offers less scope
certainly than that of the last session for U.S. initiatives and positive
Human Rights
input. In too many instances, we will not be able to avoid a negative or
muted stance. Because of our strong support for the human rights pro-
visions of the United Nations Charter and our interest in making the
United Nations a more effective instrument for the promotion of
human rights, we must seek to highlight those items on the agenda
which offer opportunities for positive participation by the United
States. The administration’s commitment to human rights requires that
the United States delegation to the 33rd General Assembly continue to
work for the advancement of human rights, pursuing goals in line with
our own national concept of human rights and, wherever possible, en-
couraging and joining with governments of all regions of the world in
taking actions consistent with our goals.

The limitations inherent in the provisional agenda for the 33rd
UNGA suggest the conclusion that it would be in the United States in-
terest to propose additional matters, either through a new agenda item
or under existing agenda items, for consideration. In determining the
substance of such initiatives, we should use as a principal guideline the
program for action sketched out by the President in his address to the
called for a strengthening of the international machinery for protecting
human rights and, in particular, he suggested (A) that the Human
Rights Commission be prepared to meet more often with all nations
being prepared to offer their fullest cooperation; (B) the move back to
central headquarters of the United Nations Human Rights Division,
and (C) renewed attention and support for the proposal for a United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Specific Action Proposals
In line with our overall goal of promoting human rights and taking
account of the complex of human rights issues which will appear in the
provisional agenda of the 33rd UNGA, the U.S. delegation should seek
to carry out the following actions:
A. Deliver a major statement during plenary consideration of the
30th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as-
sessing the record of the United Nations in the human rights field and
describing our hopes and concerns for the future.

B. Consult with other key delegations with a view to proposing a
new item for the provisional agenda with the title “Coordination and
review of the human rights program and activities of the United Na-
tions system and of other international organizations.” We should pro-
ceed with this new item only if our consultations reveal an adequate
amount of support.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
C. Under the item on torture, prepare a proposal along the lines of
that informally discussed with delegations at the last General As-
sembly for the establishment of an expert group to survey and report
upon the problem of torture as it may exist in the world today.
D. In the context of the resolution which the UNGA will consider
with respect to the report of the Human Rights Commission on its
overall analysis of alternative approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights, propose with other co-sponsors a provi-
sion authorizing the Human Rights Commission to hold a resumed ses-
sion in 1979 to be held at UN headquarters, in case the Commission
does not complete the overall analysis at its regular 1979 session. This
would be an initial step in achieving the President’s aim for more fre-
quent annual sessions of the Commission. In any statement under this
item, the U.S. delegation should express our continuing interest in
further consideration of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
proposal.

E. Consult with other delegations in advance of the 33rd UNGA
session with a view to identifying possible actions which might be
taken at the 33rd UNGA to strengthen and expand the staff of the
Human Rights Division, including the New York liaison office. This
will require adequate budgetary resources which must be shifted from
another part of the overall UN program.

F. Consult with other delegations with a view to the formulation of
a proposal for the establishment of a panel of experts to be used by the
Secretary-General in carrying out a good offices role with respect to
human rights problems. The panel would be made up of persons
named by member governments.

Specific Cases of Human Rights Violations
The provisional agenda contains the usual items dealing with vio-
lations of human rights in Southern Africa and the Israeli-occupied ter-
ritories. The question of human rights violations in Chile will be con-
sidered under the report of the Economic and Social Council. Other
cases involving allegations of serious human rights violations, Demo-
cratic Kampuchea, Uganda, and Argentina, are not specifically identi-
fied on the agenda but could be subsumed under the report of
ECOSOC.

A. Southern Africa
While our differences with African governments over the advis-
ability of economic sanctions will doubtless be highlighted in the dis-
cussion of the item dealing with adverse consequences for the enjoy-
ment of human rights of assistance given to Southern Africa, our stance
on Southern African questions need not be negative. We should be pre-

Human Rights
pared to present our case in defense of our refusal to support the impo-
sition of economic sanctions, our commitment to peaceful change and
our assistance to and encouragement of investment efforts in majority
ruled countries in Southern Africa. At the same time we should be pre-
pared to rehearse and expect full credit for the positive accomplish-
ments which have occurred in Southern Africa, in Namibia, chiefly
through the efforts of U.S. and other Western governments.
B. Israeli-Occupied Territories
We must stress the need for an overall settlement, which is the
only way finally to solve this problem. In the meantime, we should
highlight our support for the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Con-
vention to the Occupied Territories, and the encouraging progress
being made by the ICRC in dealing with the treatment of prisoners
problem.

C. Chile
Discussion of the human rights situation in Chile will center upon
the report of the Human Rights Commission’s ad hoc working group,
which has finally been able to visit Chile. As a co-sponsor of the resolu-
tion on human rights in Chile at the last General Assembly, the United
States should be prepared to engage in consultations on a resolution at
the 33rd General Assembly which will be responsive to such develop-
ments as may be reported by the ad hoc working group.

D. Democratic Kampuchea
The focus of attention in the United Nations with respect to the
human rights situation in Democratic Kampuchea will be the 1979 ses-
sion of the Commission on Human rights, which responded to the
United Kingdom initiative at its 1978 session by deciding to discuss the
question at its 1979 session. We understand that the UK Government
desires that nothing be done at the UNGA to shift the focus from the
Commission on Human Rights. The United States delegation should be
prepared to make appropriate references to our concern over the situa-
tion in Democratic Kampuchea, both in the speech to be delivered
during the general debate as well as in the statement we may make on
the human rights record presented by the report of ECOSOC. The U.S.
delegation should also consult further with the UK and other WEO
members of the Human Rights Commission, both to encourage them to
maintain their active interest in this matter and to explore the possi-
the UN General Assembly on December 16, 1977.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
bility of proposing to the UNGA a procedural resolution expressing
support for the action taken by the Human Rights Commission in de-
ciding to look into the situation in Democratic Kampuchea. The out-
come of the discussion of the question by the Subcommission on Dis-
crimination and Minorities at its 1978 summer session in Geneva will
be relevant to the content of any such resolution.

E. Uganda
In any statement to be made by the United States delegation on the
human rights record under the report of ECOSOC, reference should be
made to our concern over the human rights situation in Uganda, as
well as to our strong support for measures presently under way in the
Human Rights Commission to deal with the situation in that country.
F. Argentina
At the last session of the Commission on Human Rights, the U.S.
representative, in a general statement on human rights throughout the
world, included a reference to our concern over the human rights situa-
tion in Argentina. It is probable that a visit of the Inter-American
Human Rights Commission to Argentina will be arranged and/or take
place during the period when the UNGA is in session. The U.S. repre-
sentative should be prepared to make appropriate reference to the Ar-
gentine human rights situation and to any developments in the OAS in
his statement reviewing the human rights record under the report of
ECOSOC. Should it happen that no movement will have occurred with
respect to a visit of the IAHRC to Argentina during the period the
UNGA is in session, the possibility of proposing some form of action by
the UNGA on the Argentine question should be explored at that time.
Christopher
Human Rights

156.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Deputy Secretary
of State (Christopher)
Washington, July 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Procedures for Handling Human Rights
This is a follow-up to your discussions of this subject with Under
Secretary Solomon and me in May. Our executive directors have again
reviewed ways of obtaining from bank managements information on
prospective loans far in advance of their consideration by the Board so
that there is ample time to consider human rights objectives. Based on
their views, I suggest the following procedure as a means of making
more effective use of our voice and vote in the international develop-
ment banks.

Treasury will provide for each of the banks a list of projects likely
to be presented to the Board during the coming year, accompanied by
brief project descriptions to provide a general idea of the nature of the
proposed project.

Such a list will be provided for each problem country—currently

157.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, August 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights “Sanctions”
We continue to believe that case-by-case decision making holds
the best hope of making our human rights policy effective in varying
situations, and of keeping it in balance with other foreign policy in-
terests. But we also see a need for agreement on some general prin-
ciples which would help guide individual decisions.

Three issues of special concern to us are whether we ever should
deny IFI loans which serve basic human needs to countries under re-
Human Rights
pressive regimes; whether to use economic sanctions to press for polit-
ical change as well as for respect of rights of the person; and how to
coordinate all our levers of influence with a given country.
You have our memorandum of last May on the first issue. The at-
tached paper addresses the second and touches on the third. (Other
work on the third is in train: the Interagency Group meeting planned
for later this month to look at assistance programs a year ahead, and the
papers now being prepared on actions taken or planned to integrate
human rights advocacy into all our relations with selected countries).
The attached memorandum argues S/P’s case for:
—A strong policy bias against opposing IFI loans except in re-
sponse to gross violations of rights of the person;
—Limiting restrictions on programs designed to help American
exporters and investors to the minimum required by law;
—Distancing ourselves from the security forces of countries which
deny freedom of expression;
—Channeling more of our bilateral economic assistance to coun-
tries with a good or improving record in political as well as personal
human rights.

HA has seen this memorandum in draft and will be sending you a
separate paper detailing their agreements and disagreements with it.
Attachment
Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, August 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights “Sanctions”
The Issue
Successes of the human rights policy to date may now confront us
with a new problem: whether to continue denying economic and secu-
rity benefits (opposition to IFI loans; restrictions on bilateral economic
and security programs) to a country if arbitrary arrest, torture, and
other violations of the person are ended but there is no meaningful
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
progress on political rights and the legal and institutional instruments
of repression remain.

Discussion
We believe there should be a strong policy bias against opposing
IFI loans except in response to gross violations of rights of the person
and that in general we should limit programs which are designed pri-
marily to help American exporters and investors (ExIm, CCC, OPIC)
only to the extent required by law. The latter would mean no limits on
CCC credits (since there is no applicable law), and might mean using
the language of the ExIm legislation (to “take into account” human
rights situations “and the effects such exports may have on human
rights”) to deny credits only if the particular export in question might
be used in human rights violations or if chances were high that denial
might actually produce improvements in rights of the person.
This would be consistent with laws which specifically cite viola-
tions of the person as those which require denial of US assistance. It re-
flects various policy statements, beginning with the Secretary’s April
not to maintain maximum pressure until all serious problems are
solved.

Chile could be the hardest test of the policy we are advocating. Vi-
olations of the person have virtually ended, in part as a result of our
pressure. There is a good chance that continued pressure from us could
contribute to further progress toward restoration of political freedoms.
The latter would, inter alia, be the best long-range guarantee of rights of
the person. Chile’s democratic traditions, moreover, make it hard for
that regime to argue that our pressure for a restoration of democracy
reflects cultural arrogance. And our own role in its recent history
makes it impossible for us to be neutral: to begin now to support IFI
loans to it, or to open up ExIm credits, would be seen (in Chile and
abroad) as prematurely rewarding Chile. Finally, those Congressmen
who care about Chile are urging that we intensify pressure until and
unless democracy is restored.

Human Rights
Thus the arguments for keeping the heat on are strong. Similar
cases can be made elsewhere.

Nonetheless we believe that the human rights policy, and Amer-
ican interests in general, ultimately will benefit if we do not seem to be
using economic pressure to bring down a particular government. Re-
pressive governments will be more likely to improve their performance
if they believe something short of suicide will bring a lifting of eco-
nomic sanctions. Other IFI donors will be more likely to join our efforts
if we do not seem bent on using those institutions not just to work for
an end to torture and arbitrary arrest worldwide, but to topple a partic-
ular government of which we most strongly disapprove. And in this
country, a sense that the human rights policy was hurting American ex-
ports (and jobs) could begin seriously to undercut support for the
policy itself.

The strongest argument seems to us to be one of principle. To deny
a country access to international financial support in order to try to
force political change on it is not qualitatively different from the Nixon
Administration’s efforts to “destabilize” the Allende government. We
have not been as successful in cutting off Pinochet’s financial sources as
Nixon was in doing the same to Allende, and our efforts have not in-
cluded jawboning commercial banks. But the difference is of degree
rather than of kind.

In practice of course we cannot suddenly resume economic
business as usual with Chile. Chile is an emotional issue and our atti-
tude toward it is, rightly or wrongly, a symbol to many of our human
rights commitment. Moreover, present sanctions are also aimed at get-
ting Letelier’s alleged murderers extradited. But if the Letelier issue is
satisfactorily resolved and there is no regression on rights of the
person, we should begin phasing in some ExIm and CCC financing and
supporting bhn loans to Chile in the IFIs, carefully explain both to the
Chileans and to human rights activists in this country what we are
doing and why, and test the political waters for the feasibility of begin-
ning to support some non-bhn loans.

Promoting Political Rights
Our position is only tenable, however, if we can also demonstrate
that we are working to promote political rights by other means.
the United States Dr. Orlando Letelier, who, at the time, was a senior policy official at the
Institute for Policy Studies in Washington. A plastic bomb detonated in Letelier’s car,
killing him and his assistant Ronni Moffitt, and injuring Moffitt’s husband. See David
Binder, “Opponent of Chilean Junta Slain in Washington by Bomb in His Auto,” The New
“Ex-Chilean Ambassador Killed by Bomb Blast,” The Washington Post, September 22,

159.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
204786. Subject: World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial
1. ASAP after receipt of this telegram, Ambassador or Charge
should, at his discretion, deliver aide memoire along following lines to
the Foreign Minister or most appropriate senior Foreign Ministry
official:
“The World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimina-
tion, convened by the United Nations General Assembly, will meet in
Geneva August 14–25. The United States will not participate in this
Conference. Our decision not to participate was reluctantly taken, but
we had no choice in view of our total and firm opposition to the action
taken by the United Nations General Assembly on November 10, 1975,
determining that ‘Zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimina-
tion.’2 The Assembly adopted this resolution notwithstanding the fact
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hewitt; cleared by Maynes and Dailey and for infor-
mation by Harris, Cheshes, Goot, Lister, and Veliotes; approved by Newsom.

Human Rights
that the Jewish people embrace many races and colors and themselves
uniquely suffered from the evils of racism. More than any other action,
this decision served to shake the faith in and support for the United Na-
tions on the part of the American people. Our Congress, in particular,
unanimously adopted a resolution requesting that all U.S. participation
in the Decade Against Racism cease until the link between Zionism and
racism and the Decade was severed.

“The United States Government wholeheartedly supports the un-
relenting efforts being made by United Nations organs to combat the
evils of racism and racial discrimination as these terms were under-
stood when the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Dis-
crimination was launched in 1973. We earnestly hope that these cru-
cially important efforts in the struggle to promote human rights will
not be upset or diverted by decisions taken at the World Conference.
Therefore, on the eve of the opening of the Conference, the United
States Government appeals to your government to use its influence in
order to prevent any action by the Conference which either explicitly
reaffirms the Zionism-racism decision or could be understood as
having such an effect. This appeal rests upon the firm conviction that
the resurgence of the Zionism-racism decision at the World Conference
will not only grossly undermine United Nations efforts to cope with the
serious problems of racism and racial discrimination which exist
throughout the world, but will further seriously shake the confidence
which the American people, and people of good will everywhere, have
in the United Nations organization as an instrument for the establish-
ment of peace based upon justice for all people. It comes, however,
when strong efforts are being made to advance the cause of peace in the
Middle East.”
2. For EC–9 posts: EC post capitals all strongly opposed the GA’s
decision on Zionism-racism. However, in intervening period Africans
succeeded in subsequent GA resolutions in watering down references
to Zionism-racism to indirect mention of “relevant resolutions.” This
permitted Arabs to say relevant resolutions meant Z–R and for Euro-
peans to say it did not. Europeans have thus continued to participate in
activities of the Decade such as the upcoming World Conference by in-
terpreting indirect references as sufficient to break the linkage while
U.S. and Israel have insisted that Z–R resolution be specifically repudi-
ated. At recent Havana and Belgrade meetings of NAM, however, the
NAM endorsed direct reference to Z–R and urged that it be raised at
the World Conference Against Racism. EC participants are therefore
faced with possibility of reaffirmation of the 1975 resolution equating
Zionism with racism by direct reference and capitals should be made
aware of the need to develop a strategy to prevent such explicit
reference.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
3. In delivering foregoing message to the Foreign Minister, you
should accompany your delivery by expressing the hope that the dele-
gation of host government will make known to the key African partici-
pants at the World Conference, who are likely to be most desirous of
avoiding a reemergence of the Zionism-racism issue at the Conference,
that any action taken by the Conference to reaffirm the Zionism-racism
decision will create serious problems for the Conference. We would
hope the WEO countries will make it clear they are prepared for a
walkout if necessary to forestall any explicit reaffirmation of the
Zionism-racism decision.
4. You may have noted that the German Chairman of the European
Community at the Conference and the Italian Chairman of the WEO
caucus have informed us, that on behalf of the EC–9 and the WEO
group, they have told the ranking Secretariat official at the Conference
that “the participation of the European Community in the Conference
is based on its ‘old program’ and that any introduction of elements
causing Zionism and racism to be related could only have a destructive
impact on their participation in the Conference.” We greatly appreciate
the firm line that Geneva representatives are taking and hope that ex-
plicit instructions from capitals will back up this strong position.
5. For Amman, Cairo, Jidda, Rabat, Algiers, Tunis, Khartoum, Ku-
wait, Abu Dhabi, Manama, and Tel Aviv. Separate instructions have
been sent to you for action. This message is for information only.
6. For Damascus and Tripoli: This message is for your information
only as we anticipate host governments will co-sponsor effort to inject
Zionism-racism issue into World Conference.

Christopher

Human Rights

160.

Paper Prepared by the Global Issues Cluster of the National
Security Council Staff

161.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews and Robert
Pastor of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)
Washington, August 23, 1978
SUBJECT
The OAS and Human Rights
Attached at Tab A is a letter to the President from Secretary Gen-
eral Orfila officially informing him of the entry into force of the Amer-
ican Convention on Human Rights and thanking him for his attend-
ance at the OAS meeting. We believe that no reply is necessary.
In sending the letter to State for comment, we also asked for sug-
gestions of steps which could be taken by the Administration to en-
courage Senate ratification of the OAS Convention. Now that the Con-
vention is officially in force, thanks in large part to our efforts, we look
a little silly in not being able to take part in its implementation since we
have not ratified. State discussed ratification with Church’s staff and
reports that prospects are not bright. The Convention contains many
Human Rights
controversial provisions including those on abortion and capital pun-
ishment, and there is also the question of whether the Genocide Treaty
and other UN documents should be handled first. State’s assessment,
with which we agree, is that nothing could be accomplished unless we
assign ratification a relatively high priority and in particular, unless we
enlist the vigorous support of the human rights community—of whom
many have a special interest in Latin America.

If you approve, we intend to work with State and Madeleine Al-
bright in undertaking additional informal consultations with Senate
leadership and staff concerning the possibilities of moving ahead with
ratification. In parallel, we would also meet with the human rights
community, and would then submit a suggested priority assignment
for ratification.

It doesn’t appear at first glance as though ratification of all the
human rights treaties is a terribly important issue, but as the current
Pravda propaganda campaign illustrates, our failure to ratify these in-
ternational documents makes us vulnerable to the argument that our
human rights policy is “solely for export”. It is incongruous when set
alongside our aggressive human rights policy.

Also, the Senate’s failure to act provides the President with a potent argu-
ment against those who maintain that Congress is the chief actor on human
rights. In this case at least, the President has taken important solid ini-
tiatives which the Congress has failed to follow through on. This is an
argument we should make much better use of, and we will think about
ways to do so.
capitalized upon an August 9 speech Young delivered in New York, in which he refer-
enced the failure of the United States to ratify the Genocide Convention as “the taking off
point for an aggressive attack on the administration’s human rights policy.” The Em-
bassy summarized an August 17 Pravda column, noting that Pravda’s Washington corre-
spondent had asserted that “Americans are beginning to understand, however, that the
human rights policy proclaimed by the administration is intended exclusively ‘for ex-
port’ and has no influence in the U.S. itself.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
noted that the Soviet press “continues to belabor propaganda theme that the U.S. abuses
human rights at home while promoting them for selfish (usually anti-Soviet) purposes
NSC Global Issues Cluster’s evening report for August 21, Tuchman Mathews referred to
the “propaganda campaign” and the failure to ratify various human rights agreements,
adding: “but it is clear that the continuing failure to ratify does not comport well with an
aggressive policy on our part. This argument falls on receptive ears in many Third World
countries and it is therefore perhaps worth considering whether to raise the priority of
these agreements in next year’s legislative reports.” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening

162.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in
Geneva and the Mission to the United Nations
Washington, September 7, 1978
226448. Subject: Human Rights Initiatives at the 33rd UNGA.
chaired by Assistant Secretary Maynes to discuss the human rights
scope paper that was circulated in July. All of the IO agency direc-
torates were represented, as were the Office of the Legal Advisor, the
Bureau of Humanitarian Affairs, Mission Geneva, and USUN. The fol-
lowing items were discussed, with decisions reached to move forward
on some initiatives and to further explore the feasibility of others. The
United States overall position is to build upon and preserve the posi-
tive accomplishments which have been made during the past year,
both at the last UNGA session and especially at the 1978 Human Rights
Commission session. We hope that the discussion of the 30th anniver-
sary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which is to be considered in plenary meetings, will be the occasion for a
general stock taking on the part of all members and serve as the plat-
form for renewed efforts at international cooperation in promoting
human rights.
2. The scope paper was endorsed as a sound approach for the U.S.
at the General Assembly. It was determined that it could be strength-
ened, however, by adding an initiative concerning the development of
Confidential; Stadis. Drafted by Dalley; approved by Maynes.
Human Rights
social indicators to enable better measurements of human rights
progress.
3. We decided that an initiative on the “boat” people should be ex-
plored, leading perhaps to a resolution calling upon the UN High Com-
missioner for Refugees to draw up a proposed code of conduct for all
ships at sea who encounter boat refugees, and for nations upon whose
shores refugees land. We will also explore the possibility of a resolution
speaking to the problems of relocating refugees to receiving nations.
4. To strengthen our initiative in the social development area, we
will explore a resolution to establish the struggle against hunger as a
major human rights priority of the General Assembly and urge consid-
eration of the establishment of an international volunteer food corps.
5. We decided that the torture initiative should be strengthened by
the proposal of a resolution establishing torture, missing persons and
the treatment of political prisoners as major priorities for consideration
by the General Assembly and the formation of a committee of experts
to report each year to the General Assembly on urgent measures and
problems, with recommendations to the General Assembly.
6. Concern was expressed that in responding to Southern African
initiatives, the United States finds itself reacting negatively on matters
which are of great importance to Africans and the majority of the
United Nations. In addition to determining what it is in such a resolu-
tion that we cannot accept, alternate language should be developed on
such resolutions to propose positive approaches compatible with U.S.
goals and interests. In this regard, the questions of endorsement of the
Sullivan Code and the closing of the Rhodesian information office
should be reopened. Because of our inability to participate in the activ-
ities of the Decade Against Racism, we should be aggressively
searching for other means of participating domestically and interna-
tionally in the effort to combat racism and apartheid.
7. On the anticipated resolutions condemning Israeli practices in
the occupied territories, it was generally recognized that there will be a
more rigid position on both sides at this UNGA, making it more diffi-
cult to negotiate acceptable language in resolutions directed against Is-
raeli practices in the occupied territories. It was decided that a paper
should be developed addressing itself to likely alternatives available to
the U.S. in approaching such anti-Israel resolutions.
8. Although the discussion at the UNGA on Chile may be influ-
enced by the report of the working group sent to Chile by the Human
Rights Division, it is thought unlikely that the report will be ready for
distribution before the end of October. When the report is submitted,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
there will be a debate over whether the working group should be con-
tinued, replaced by a rapporteur or abolished. The issue of a special
human rights trust fund for the families that have disappeared in Chile
will be before the UNGA. The U.S. objects to the formation of such a
fund which singles out the human rights victims in Chile, but we
should review our policy and decide whether we want to develop a
U.S. proposal for the creation of a trust fund for the victims of all
human rights violations.
9. There will be increasing pressure for the United States to “do
something” in the UNGA concerning the human rights violations in
Kampuchea. There will be no resolution on this subject introduced by
Western European nations and the question is whether the United
States should take action unilaterally at the UNGA against Kampu-
chea. The consensus decision was to limit our efforts at this point to
making the case against Kampuchea at the Subcommission on Discrim-
ination Against Minorities which is presently meeting in Geneva. The
U.S. has submitted over 300 pages of material on human rights viola-
tions in Kampuchea to the Commission and Ambassador Carter be-
lieves there is sufficient evidence before the Subcommission to justify a
recommendation by the Subcommission to the Human Rights Com-
mission concerning follow-up action to investigate the allegations
against the government of Kampuchea. Ambassador Vanden Heuvel’s
suggestion that the material be distributed to all members of the Third
Committee was endorsed.
10. Regarding Uganda, it was agreed that if Uganda reneges on its
earlier agreement to permit a representative of the Human Rights Com-
mission to enter Uganda to investigate allegations of human rights vio-
lations there, it will be necessary to “do something” about Uganda in
the upcoming General Assembly.
11. On Argentina, there was advocacy for specific reference to
human rights violations in Argentina because of the seriousness of the
continued and persistent violations. This was generally resisted on the
grounds that we should focus our efforts on attempting to strengthen
the objective human rights machinery of the UN and resist the political
pressures to single out nations individually for condemnation. The alle-
gations of violations in Argentina are before the Organization of Amer-
ican States and there are current negotiations to secure the admission of
the Inter-American Human Rights Commission. In addition, there is
pending jurisdiction over Argentina by the UN Human Rights Com-
mission; so it was decided that an Argentinian initiative would not be
productive in the upcoming General Assembly.
12. There was substantial discussion of the continuing need to de-
velop an improved procedure for responding to human rights commu-
nications sent to the United States by the United Nations. We are not

Human Rights
presently responding adequately to communications in the human
rights area and need to develop a means of obtaining assistance of ex-
perts from other Federal agencies and the private sector to respond to
questionnaires and other requests for information as well as individual
complaints alleging violations of human rights. Ideas explored include
contracting for expert assistance with individuals, developing a
working relationship with the international law and criminal justice
human rights committees of the American Bar Association, and estab-
lishing formal relationships with other Federal agencies under which
they will agree to provide responses for the Department of State to for-
ward to the UN. It was also agreed that we need to investigate the es-
tablishment of a more effective means of monitoring U.S. compliance
with the human rights conventions.
13. It was recognized that U.S. human rights initiatives will be in-
evitably undermined by the U.S. failure to ratify most of the existing
human rights conventions. It was agreed that a paper should be devel-
oped to urge the administration to make ratification of the Genocide
Convention an immediate priority for the next Congress.
14. We decided that the U.S. should participate fully in the 30th an-
niversary commemoration of the adoption of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. A prominent U.S. citizen active in the U.S. civil and
human rights movement will be invited to deliver the U.S. address
during the commemorative meeting that will be presided over by the
Secretary General to celebrate the 30th anniversary in December. We
will submit U.S. nominees for the award of the UN human rights prizes
in connection with the commemoration, and will be participating in the
30th anniversary seminar on national and local institutions for the pro-
motion and protection of human rights in September. Plans for an ap-
propriate national commemoration, possibly involving the President,
are being developed.
15. This summary of the decisions taken regarding possible human
rights initiatives at our August 9th meeting to review the human rights
scope paper is provided for your information and comment only and
does not constitute instructions to pursue the initiatives discussed. Spe-
cific instructions will be developed and sent following receipt of your
comments and the preparation of the final draft of the scope paper con-
taining the final decisions on human rights initiatives.

Christopher

163.

Editorial Note
In July 1978, the Working Group on Communications of the
United Nations Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities received a communication from the Memphis,
Tennessee, Committee on Human Rights, the Bridgewater Shelby
County NAACP, and Church of Human Development alleging that Af-
rican-American residents of Memphis and Shelby County had been
subject to discrimination by the Memphis police and denied due
process. Such an allegation meant that the United States was cited as a
“gross and consistent” violator of human rights under ECOSOC 1503
procedures. The National Security Council Global Issues Cluster’s Au-
gust 30 evening report noted that the Working Group voted unani-
mously to cite the United States for violations. In the report, National
Security Council Staff member Leslie Denend indicated that the United
States, the Soviet Union, Colombia, Nigeria, and Pakistan comprised
the Working Group membership, adding: “Ambassador Carter, our ex-
pert on the group, is the only member who carries such a direct link to
his government and who is not able to follow developments in this
forum full-time because he is our current Ambassador to Liberia. Once
the current situation is resolved, we should give this staffing arrange-
ment a careful review.

“State is hard at work preparing our case for the Sub-Commission
on September 11. According to Mezvinsky who sat in on these pro-
ceedings last year, even if Ambassador Carter reverses his position and
makes a strong presentation on behalf of the US, the Sub-Commission
is likely to forward the working group recommendation to the full
Commission. The problem is that it will be very difficult to turn around
a unanimous working group recommendation. (Even Argentina only
received a 3–2 vote.)

“All the outcomes I envision from this entire process have negative
consequences for the President and the policy. Although we have been
trying to strengthen the UNHRC process, we should be prepared to
step sharply away from it if the Sub-Commission cites the US and
moves the case to the full Commission.” (Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Sub-
In telegram 221106 to Geneva, August 30, the Department of State
responded to the complaint, received in the Department on July 26,
terming the citation against the United States as “surprising” and indi-
cating that a formal response to the Working Group, then meeting in
Geneva, would be forthcoming. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
tember 2, the Department indicated that the response would be sent via

Human Rights
separate telegram and requested that the Mission delay transmission of
the report until September 6, as Department officials planned to discuss
the substance of the report with Department of Justice officials on Sep-
tember 5. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
the draft text of the U.S. response, which stated, in part: “The United
States seriously questions whether a single complaint which makes ref-
erence to only a few specific allegations, all of which are claimed to
have occurred in a single city, which have been and are being investi-
gated by Federal, state, and local officials, and which are the subject of
amelioratory action, can meet the standard required by resolution
1503.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
In telegram 13482 from Geneva, September 8, the Mission pro-
vided the Department with the version of the response delivered to the
Director of the United Nations Human Rights Division, Theodore Van
Boven, on September 5. The response summarized efforts taken to in-
vestigate police brutality and drew attention to the anticipated Sep-
tember 6 release by the Tennessee Advisory Committee to the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights of a report entitled “Civil Crisis—Civic
Challenge: Police-Community Relations in Memphis,” which purport-
edly would refute the allegation that there had been no response to the
complaints. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Prior to the Subcommission’s consideration of the U.S. response,
National Security Council Staff member Jessica Tuchman Mathews
communicated with U.S. Representative to the UN Human Rights
Commission Edward Mezvinsky and U.S. Representative to the Mis-
sion at Geneva William vanden Heuvel concerning Ambassador Bev-
erly Carter’s actions as a member of the Working Group. In the NSC
Global Issues Cluster’s September 5 evening report, Tuchman Ma-
thews commented that she had spoken to Mezvinsky regarding the ci-
tation issued against the United States, which she believed was “poten-
tially devastating to the [administration’s human rights] policy,”
noting, “we can’t pursue an aggressive human rights policy until our
own house is basically in order, which means ratifying the major inter-
national covenants and treaties, and staffing our UN missions so that
we avoid shooting ourselves in the foot at regular intervals.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Tuchman Mathews again expressed concerns to Vanden Heuvel
on September 6, as she informed the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski: “Vanden Heuvel is in a very del-
icate situation in that the Sub-Commission is supposed to be composed

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of uninstructed experts and therefore we can’t lobby openly. However,
he will talk to some key delegates with whom he has personal relation-
ships, and he is more optimistic about the outcome than I had expected.
I assured him of the White House’s strong support for the most vig-
orous possible efforts to avert a negative vote against the U.S. (despite
State’s lukewarm approach to this mess) and promised to talk with him
after the vote (Monday) about changes in staffing and procedures that
will avoid this kind of thing in the future.” (NSC Global Issues Cluster
September 6 evening report; ibid.)

The Subcommission considered the complaint against the United
States during a September 11 closed meeting. In telegram 13662 from
Geneva, September 12, the Mission reported that the Subcommission
voted not to elevate the communication regarding the United States to
tions. (National
Archives,
RG 59,
Central
Foreign Policy
File,
D780370–0575) Tuchman Mathews and Denend summarized the out-
come in the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s September 15 evening report:
“The vote of the UN Human Rights Sub-Commission on whether the
US should be cited as a gross and consistent violator of human rights
we will not be cited. However the incident reveals many things that
need changing, particularly our staffing of these Commissions (it is a
contradiction in terms to have an FSO, not to mention an Ambassador,
functioning as an ‘uninstructed expert’). Also our procedures for re-
sponding to complaints against ourselves and for helping others to file
complaints (e.g., against the USSR) are woefully inadequate. The inci-
dent also revealed a profound difference of opinion within the gov-
ernment (and the NSC staff) as to what our posture should be with re-
spect to our own human rights record. At our request, Ambassador
Vanden Heuvel, who did an excellent job in dealing with this problem
will be sending in his suggestions for steps that should be taken.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global
Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports:

Human Rights

164.

Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to Jessica Tuchman Mathews and Robert Pastor
of the National Security Council Staff
Washington, September 13, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Jessica’s remark in her nightly report about her “shock” at yes-
terday’s discussion of human rights prompts me to caution both of you
against an overreaction to the events in Geneva and likely comment in
the Press. Sure, we will be criticized by Errors and Nofax3 and others
of their ilk but that in itself should not determine our own actions.
The President has never said that the United States has a perfect
human rights record. Our current performance is flawed and in any
historical perspective we are no better than many other countries.

165.

Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron) to Jessica Tuchman
Mathews of the National Security Council Staff
Washington, September 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights PRM
I believe I have identified a good and finite subject for a2 PRM on
Human Rights. It is the issue of the Human Rights Conventions and In-
stitutions and what our strategy is going to be in regard to them.
Bill Maynes pointed out to me that the Soviets are staffing up these
new Human Rights Institutions (the ones designed to “implement” the
various Conventions—genocide, political and civil rights, economic
and social rights, etc.). The net result is that we can expect to be called
on the carpet much more frequently and to be condemned, etc., for sys-
tematic violations of some of these rights simply because the deck is
stacked against us.

I have suggested to Bill the possibility of a PRM which would
look at
(1) the problems associated with signing the Human Rights Con-
ventions and whether we can go forward with a major effort in the next
Congress;
(2) our strategy in dealing with Soviet efforts to put us in the dock;
(3) what we can do to put the Soviets in the dock and what aspects
of human rights we ought to emphasize and how we can go about it.
Please follow up with Bill Maynes.

Human Rights

166.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, September 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights and The Olympics
In winning their bid to hold the Olympics in Moscow the Soviets
scored a great potential coup for both their foreign exchange earnings
and international prestige and propaganda interests. However it is also
a big risk, for the spotlight could easily shift from the Games to the
human rights issue. I believe we should be looking at ways to exploit
that risk, and to exact the highest possible price in terms of advancing
our own human rights interests.
—There are already rumors in the USSR that Jewish emigration
will be cut off some time before the Games. Some believe that the high
current rate of emigration is designed to ease the tension before the
Games (though visas are being granted only to first time requesters and
not to any refuseniks or to any prominent dissidents). Are there ways
to exploit this situation: Can we accelerate emigration between now
and 1980? Should we suggest to the Soviets that they grant visas to a
particular list of individuals who are of concern to us, with the quiet
implication that otherwise these individuals will be a focus of attention
at the Games? Are there other ways to reach the same end?
—What about access to Russian citizens by press and athletes
during the Games? Should we be pushing for maximum access in the
true Olympic spirit? What are the terms of the NBC contract? After
paying through the nose (a record high price) for the broadcast rights
has NBC insisted on anything in the way of freedom of coverage or will
they only be allowed to film designated glories of Soviet culture? If you
watched any of the last several Olympics you will remember all the
“color” stories—scences in Munich beer halls, the quaint beauties of
Innsbruck, Canadian folk dancing, etc., etc. There will be an even
greater incentive to do such coverage of a country that is of such great
interest to Americans about which they know so little. Should we be of-
fering NBC any help in these negotiations and in their subsequent plan-
ning? For example, if they do a piece on Soviet ballet, should they also
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
have film (taped in advance) on the stories of Nureyev, the Panovs,
etc.?2 The same with music, science, etc.
—What will be our policy if RFE/RL are denied press credentials?
What about other individual press? Should we quietly encourage the
media to send a few of their Soviet experts—perhaps including indi-
viduals who were earlier asked to leave the USSR? What about denials
of visas to individual spectators? In short, should we push the USSR to
the maximum extent to live up to the spirit in which the Games are sup-
posed to be held and to the promises they must have made to the Inter-
national Olympic Committee, or should we just accept the fact that
these Olympics will be different from those held in the West? I think we
should push.
—What will be our policy if the Israeli team or the South African
team is banned from the Games—especially if the Soviets announce the
decision at the last minute?
—What will we do during the Games if an American or other par-
ticipant gets into trouble of some kind that relates to human rights (e.g.,
press interview with a forbidden dissident) and gets deported? If we
can develop an answer should we inform the Soviets in advance so that
they will have no doubt as to how we would react?
—Should we do anything in the way of informing American par-
ticipants about this issue—perhaps briefings made available to those
who are interested? Or perhaps that is going too far.
—Finally, beyond the human rights issue, what about the intelli-
gence opportunity? With security and administrative forces strained to
the limit—or beyond—and so many people in Moscow, there are
bound to be opportunities that are not otherwise available. Are we pre-
pared to exploit this to the maximum?

Human Rights

167.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, October 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights: Country Reports, the UN Treaties and a New Strategy
The Foreign Assistance Act requires the Department of State to
submit reports by January 31 of each year concerning “the observance
of and respect for internationally recognized human rights” in every
country proposed as the recipient of either economic or security assist-
ance. The amendments requiring these reports were enacted before this
Administration took office. Last year’s reports covered 106 countries.
In 1976 we submitted reports drafted by the Ford Administration
since they were due one week after the Inauguration. These reports
were widely attacked as inaccurate, a sham and a whitewash. Last
year the reports went to the opposite extreme. Christopher insisted that
they be detailed and that serious problems be treated with candor. Pub-
lication of the reports caused many problems. On the whole they were
praised at home—favorable comparisons were drawn with the 1976 re-
ports—but there were many objections from abroad. The Greece-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Turkey-Cyprus reports were a particular source of trouble. So was the
report on Israel (the West Bank). And there were several others.
The Administration is caught in a Catch-22. If the reports are
honest enough to satisfy the domestic constituency, they will disturb
important bilateral relations. If they are diplomatically drafted, they
will be attacked in Congress as coverups. This year, in my judgment,
the countries which clearly are sensitive, or may be so (depending on
events between now and the end of the year), include: Zaire, Ecuador,
Nicaragua, South Korea, Cyprus, Greece, Portugal, Turkey, Afghani-
stan, Egypt, Iran and Israel.

I have two concerns: the immediate problem of how to approach
this year’s reports; and the longer range question of what our policy
should be towards the enactment of statutory reporting requirements?
With regard to this year’s reports, I recommend that the NSC ask
to review State’s semi-final drafts before they are sent back to the em-
bassies for comment. This may be sensitive since the documents will
not yet be cleared and will be the subject of hot intra-State controversy,
but if we wait until the end of the process it will be too difficult to make
major changes. The schedule is as follows: The embassies have until
October 13 to return their reporting (detailed questionnaires covering
every aspect of human rights). The regional bureaus at State have until
November 1 to comment on them. The Human Rights Bureau (HA) has
until November 20 to comment on those drafts. Then INR, together
with the bureaus and HA puts together semi-final drafts for Christo-
pher’s final cut by December 20. I recommend that we ask to see the
drafts by the end of November, i.e., after HA has worked over the re-
gional drafts.

Regarding the more general problem, I can sympathize with Chris-
topher’s conclusion of last year that we had to make the reports as thor-
ough and accurate as possible in order to meet Congressional criticism
of Administration weakness on human rights. To a certain degree we
are still in the same position vis-a-vis the Congress this year, but I think
the time has come to adopt a more sophisticated policy. Specifically, I
recommend that this year we link (1) an aggressive (and if need be a
critical) stance urging Congress to take meaningful action on human
rights by ratifying the 5 international treaties which lie before it; with
(2) a campaign to stop and then reverse the trend of enacting manda-
tory reports on the human rights behavior of foreign countries. (This
year two new reporting requirements were added—to OPIC and Ex-Im

Human Rights
legislation. Next year there could be more.) I suggest that these be
linked so that there will be no question that in opposing the reporting
requirements the Administration is really trying to back away from
human rights. We need to be taking positive actions while we are
pushing this “negative” action.

Our effort on the treaties should begin with the Genocide Treaty
since it has seniority and the most support. Once that hurdle is passed,
and sufficient strength has been demonstrated by the pro-ratification
forces, it may prove much easier to ratify the others. Ratification is cer-
tainly possible. Last spring, I organized an Administration-NGO
group which undertook a vote count on this issue. Letters were sent to
every Senator, and only an explicit answer was counted as a positive
leaning towards, and 5 undecided. For final passage, (67 votes re-
quired) we counted 55 solids, with 14 undecided or leaning towards.
Garnering 7 votes for cloture and a maximum of 12 for final passage
(absentees lower the total required), should not be very difficult. The
elections will change these counts to some degree, but we are clearly al-
most there.

Our job can be made easier by keying it to the observance of the
30th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (De-
cember 10). In recognition of this event, the public interest groups, led
by the Coalition for a New Foreign and Military Policy, are launching
an effort this fall to build public support for the Treaties and Cov-
enants—the first such public effort. See Tab A for the first publication
of many. It occurs to me that a good day for the President to make his
first statement would be October 11, Eleanor Roosevelt’s birthday.
The whole effort could be made a tribute to her memory, which would
popularize it and perhaps help to get active support from women’s
groups, civil rights groups and others. If we miss the October 11 date,
the anniversary of her death is November 7, election day this year and
therefore appropriate since it is in a sense the birth day of the new
Congress that would vote on the Treaties.

On the negative side, our effort to stem the tide of mandatory re-
porting requirements would center on the argument that the informa-
tion can be made available on request to any member (or on request by
a relevant Committee, depending on how tough we want to be), but
that wholesale publication of these types of reports does not promote

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the observance of human rights in particular, or US foreign policy in-
terests in general. One of many good examples is the break with Brazil
which was the direct result of the publication of the 1976 report. If we
make a firm decision to adopt this strategy, I believe we can make a
convincing case that these kinds of public reporting requirements ac-
complish little and are often actively counterproductive. But this time
we have to be united in what we are doing and not apologetic about ap-
pearing to “oppose human rights”.

The most limiting factor in this strategy is timing. There is an ob-
vious gain to be had from taking advantage of the UN anniversary of
the Treaties, but more important is the fact that the groundwork must
be laid now so that the issue can be taken up first thing in the next ses-
sion. Otherwise it will get hung up behind SALT and they won’t get to
it for yet another year. Committee consideration of the Treaty should
take very little time (SFRC reported it out last year), and the floor de-
bate could then be scheduled while the Committees are having exten-
sive hearings on SALT.

Recommendation:
1. That you approve a formal Dodson-Tarnoff request for NSC
clearance on the draft country reports before November 30.
2. That you give me guidance on the proposed longer term
strategy.

Do you like the idea?

Do you want a memo presenting it for the President’s approval?14
3. It would be possible to make a strong effort on the treaties
without trying to revoke the reporting requirements.

Do you prefer this option?15

168.

Memorandum From the Global Issues Cluster of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, October 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Priorities
HUMAN RIGHTS
Priorities
—Raise global awareness of human rights so that the issue is a reg-
ular concern of all governments and an expected component of rela-
tions both with other countries and with the international community.
Met.
—Organize U.S. foreign policy making so that human rights con-
cerns are taken into account in all relevant decisions including foreign
assistance, political actions and economic benefits. Partially Met—ex-
cessive delays and inconsistent decisions persist, mostly from uncer-
tain direction at the top.
—Begin the lengthy process of strengthening the international in-
stitutions (including the UN and its Commissions, the IFIs, and the re-
gional human rights organizations) so that ultimately they can become
the primary focus of international human rights activity. Partially
Met—UN and OAS Commissions are vastly improved, some progress
in gaining support in IFIs, long way still to go.

Our greatest weaknesses have been in the multilateral forums, par-
ticularly in coordinating those activities with bilateral policies, and
making our level of representation in these forums commensurate with
their growing importance. Increasingly in the months ahead we can ex-
pect to be attacked for hypocrisy in pursuing an aggressive human
rights policy while we have still not ratified any of the many major in-
ternational HR treaties. The Soviets will lead the way on this, followed
eagerly by others whose pride has been hurt by our policies.
Consequently, as outlined in an earlier strategy memorandum,2
we see two key initiatives for the next year: ratification of the Genocide
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Treaty with preliminary hearings on the UN Covenants and the Racial
Discrimination treaty; and, a campaign to repeal those HR amend-
ments we feel are counter-productive, namely the public reporting re-
quirements and the OPIC amendment.

[Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.]
169.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the
Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, October 30, 1978
SUBJECT
degrading treatment or punishment, prolonged detention without
charges, or other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty, and the secu-
rity of person, unless such agreement will directly benefit the needy
people in such country. An agreement will not directly benefit the
needy people in the country for purposes of the preceding sentence
unless either the commodities themselves or the proceeds from their
sale will be used for specific projects or programs which the President
determines would directly benefit the needy people of that country.
The agreement shall require a report to the President on such use
fidential. Drafted by Bova on October 25; concurred in by Zak, Jennette, Shurtleff,
Buncher, Lister, Cleveland, Graham, and EB/OFP. Schneider initialed for Derian. An un-
known hand initialed for the clearing officials.

Human Rights
within six months after the commodities are delivered to the recipient
country.

In response to this requirement, the Department, in consultation
with AID, made a determination that for Fiscal Year 1978, language in
accordance with the above requirement would be placed in agreements
with countries where serious human rights problems exist or are
widely perceived to exist by the public or Members of Congress. This
liberal application of the statute would ensure compliance while
avoiding the creation of a public “hit-list” which could follow from a
narrower interpretation. It would also, on the other hand, minimize the
accounting workload placed on our AID Missions and Title I recipient
governments. Accordingly, language was placed in one third of the
Fiscal Year 1979 Title I Agreements and specifically in agreements with
the following countries: Bangladesh, Guinea, Haiti, Indonesia, Philip-
pines, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Zaire, and Korea.

The PL 480 I list for Fiscal Year 1979 has recently been submitted to
the Congress. It contains twenty-nine countries. Consensus has been
reached within the Department to maintain language in the agreements
with the following countries on that list: Guinea, Haiti, Sierra Leone,
Philippines and Zaire. There is also a consensus to maintain the lan-
guage through the side-letter arrangement with Indonesia and Korea
as long as it is not necessary to negotiate new agreements. There is also
a consensus, in view of changing circumstances, to drop the language
from the agreement with Somalia. HA proposes maintaining language
in the Title I Agreement with Bangladesh and adding language to the
Title I agreements with Pakistan, Syria and Tunisia. All four were Title I
recipients last year. The NEA Bureau is opposed to re-inserting lan-
guage in the Bangladesh agreement and to adding language in the
other three.

New agreements under PL 480 Title III will be negotiated with In-
donesia and Bangladesh later in the year. With HA consensus, lan-
guage was not included in the 1978 Title III agreement with Bangla-
desh. Title III by its nature ensures that the assistance provided is used
to directly benefit the needy and, accordingly, it is questionable
whether separate human rights related language is required. AID’s
General Counsel has been asked to provide guidance on this point. If
needed, a separate memo on this issue will be provided subsequent to
the receipt of this legal guidance.

[Omitted here is information concerning specific Bureau positions
with regard to the Title I agreements anticipated for Bangladesh, Pak-
istan, Syria, and Tunisia.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The Options
1. Add the language to the FY 1979 Title I agreements with Pak-
istan, Syria and Tunisia and maintain the language in the Title I agree-
ment with Bangladesh. Papers describing the human rights situation
are attached.

Advantages
—This approach will ensure continued compliance with the legis-
lative requirement.
—The language reinforces the Administration’s efforts to make
Title I more directly benefit the poor.

Disadvantages
—Addition of the human rights clause could cause friction with re-
cipient governments and lead to delays in negotiating Title I
agreements.
2. Do not include language in the FY 1979 Title I agreements with
Bangladesh, Pakistan, Syria and Tunisia.

Advantages
—This approach would not jeopardize our bilateral relations pro-
grams as indicated above, nor would it delay the negotiation of the
agreements.
—The Department would be in compliance with the letter and
spirit of the legislation by excluding countries which do not engage in
“a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized
human rights.”
—We would avoid confusing the leadership for countries where
there has been progress in human rights observance.
Disadvantages
—Non-inclusion of language in all but the most serious cases
might give the impression that a “hit-list” has been created.
—The accounting workload of our AID missions would not be
minimized although, with the exception of the mission in Dacca, nei-
ther would it increase.

Human Rights
Recommendation
That you authorize inclusion of the human rights language in Title
I agreements with all or some of the four countries discussed.
Bangladesh
Pakistan
Syria
Tunisia
Somalia
cording to an additional stamped notation, Christopher approved this option on No-
vember 16.

170.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews and Leslie
Denend of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)
Washington, November 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights Meeting—November 222
Genocide Vote

171.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the
Senior Deputy Assistant of State for Economic and Business
Affairs (Hormats)
Washington, November 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights and A.I.D.

This Administration’s commitment to working for human rights
improvements is founded upon the established premise that as the
richest nation in the world, the United States should use its vast re-
sources to promote the economic and social rights of all people.
Toward this end the USG has provided sizeable amounts of assistance
to their nations. However, when considered as a proportion of our na-
tional wealth, our contributions lag far behind those of many gov-
ernments. To insure that the U.S. comes closer to meeting its responsi-
bility for promoting a more equitable international economic order, the
Carter Administration has undertaken to increase international and bi-
lateral economic assistance to poor countries.

The Secretary articulated the administration’s aid policy when, in
a 1977 address, he told the American Bar Association: “The United
States looks to the use of economic assistance—whether bilateral or
through international financial institutions—as a means to foster basic
human rights”. In my own efforts to promote human rights, I have con-
sistently and publicly endorsed the President’s stated commitment to
Human Rights
doubling the bilateral development assistance budget by 1982. Thus I
am particularly concerned that efforts to cut back bilateral develop-
ment assistance may be underway. The level agreed upon for Fiscal
Year 1979 and proposed for Fiscal Year 1980 are already well below
those originally deemed necessary to the President’s commitment. Fur-
ther cuts would seriously jeopardize the effort to reach the level set for
1982. Failure to reach our assistance goals would have seriously ad-
verse repercussions for our human rights policy.

Development assistance is the most visible of our aid policies. To
other donor countries, to the Third World, and to critics such as the
USSR, U.S. commitment in this area is seen to indicate that the U.S. is or
is not ready to put its “money where its mouth is.”

172.

Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Inderfurth) to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)
Washington, December 1, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights Performance
For background purposes I have prepared the attached unclassi-
fied paper on “Human Rights Performance: January 1977–December
1978.” It is based on CIA’s “confidential” study which the Agency (Bob
Bowie) refused to declassify. I suggest that you—and others—use this
information to background the press on human rights improvements
during the Carter Administration. We do not want to appear to take
credit for all such improvements, but the fact remains that the Presi-
dent’s human rights policy has made the world a better place to live in
and he should get some of the credit for this.

In addition to discussing worldwide improvements (and regres-
sions) in human rights, you might also use the following, which is
based on an earlier memo from Jessica.

The Carter Administration has three human rights objectives:4
—To raise global awareness of human rights so that the issue is a reg-
ular concern of all governments and an expected component of rela-
tions both with other countries and with the international community.
We have met this objective.
—To organize U.S. foreign policy making so that human rights
concerns are taken into account in all relevant decisions including for-
eign assistance, political actions and economic benefits.
We have partially met this objective. Excessive delays and inconsist-
ent decisions still persist.

Human Rights
—To begin the lengthy process of strengthening the international in-
stitutions (including the UN and its commissions, the IFIs and the re-
gional human rights organizations) so that ultimately they can become
the primary focus of international human rights activity.
We have partially met this objective. The UN and OAS commissions
are vastly improved and some progress has been made in gaining sup-
port in the IFIs. There is still a long way to go.

Recommendation:
That you use the attached paper to background the press at the
time of the December 6 White House human rights event.

Attachment
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, undated
Human Rights Performance: January 1977–December 1978
Over the past two years the human rights situation worldwide has
improved but in several countries deteriorated. Worldwide trends indi-
cate significant patterns of change. Since January 1977 there have been
human rights improvements in 41 countries where 2½ billion people live.
Most of these countries, however, still have less than good human
rights records. In at least 10 countries, the standards of human rights
have declined, affecting almost half a billion people. On a regional basis,
these changes have been noted:
—Yugoslavia’s human rights record is by far the best in Eastern Eu-
rope and it has improved in the last year. Hungary has improved on
such issues as emigration, family reunification and travel. Human
rights abuses have increased in Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union’s
record has deteriorated, although the regime has apparently liberalized
its Jewish emigration policy.
—There have been a few changes in human rights practices in the
Middle East over the past two years, although some improvements have
been noted in Morocco, the Sudan and Syria.
—Although many of the nations of East Asia and the Pacific region
have found themselves at odds, to varying degrees, with U.S. human
rights policy, improvements have been evident in South Korea, the Phil-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ippines, Indonesia, the Republic of China (ROC), and Thailand. In addition,
there have been indications of improvement in the People’s Republic of
China (PRC). Conditions have deteriorated in Vietnam and continue to
be deplorable in Cambodia, where Western influence generally has
made no impact.
—In South Asia, India’s return to constitutional practices dramati-
cally improved its human rights record. Conditions have also bettered
in Iran due to the Shah’s program of liberalization. Bangladesh has seen
some improvement. The human rights situation in Afghanistan has de-
teriorated since the April 1978 military coup.
—Over the past year human rights practices in some African coun-
tries have improved, including Benin, Djibouti, Ghana, Guinea, and the
Ivory Coast. Nigeria has welcomed the U.S. emphasis on human rights
and has proposed a regional UN human rights commission for Africa.
There have been some improvements in Rhodesia but no real change in
South Africa. Uganda and Equatorial Guinea remain two of the worst vio-
lators in the world today.
—Of the 26 countries in Latin America, human rights progress has
been made in 12. There has been a marked decrease in the worst kinds
of abuses, such as officially condoned killings, torture and prolonged
and illegal detention. International and regional human rights organi-
zations have taken a more active role in the region and have been re-
ceiving cooperation from many governments. Peru, Ecuador, and Brazil
have all taken steps toward more constitutional procedures. Improve-
ments have been noted in Chile, Uruguay, Honduras and Guatemala. Re-
cently there has been a deterioration in Nicaragua.
—In Western Europe there have been two positive developments.
Spain’s overall human rights rating has clearly improved. A new consti-
tution, soon to be submitted for ratification, contains comprehensive
guarantees of democratic freedom. In Cyprus, the human rights situa-
tion has improved markedly during the past 18 months.

The causes of the changes cited above are complex. Increased U.S.
attention to human rights practices have contributed to a global climate
of greater sensitivity to the issue and to the heightened concern of a
large number of countries. In a number of cases, U.S. bilateral repre-
sentations have been an important factor in the improvements noted.
In other cases, governments that have rebuffed direct U.S. initiatives as
interference in their internal affairs have, as a compensating action, per-
mitted Amnesty International or some regional human rights organiza-
tion to conduct its own investigation.

In many cases, however, especially where substantial and far-
reaching improvements have taken place (for example, India and
Spain), these changes have reflected dramatic internal political devel-
opments. Similarly, the several instances of retrogression can be ex-

Human Rights
plained largely by internal dynamics, though at times fear or tradi-
tional resentment of international pressures have played a part.

173.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Assistant
for Communications (Rafshoon) to President Carter
Washington, December 4, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights Speech

174.

Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, December 5, 1978
SUBJECT
The President’s Meeting with Secretary Vance and Assistant Secretary Patt
The President will meet with Secretary Vance and Assistant Secre-
tary Derian to discuss the Administration’s human rights policy. They
Human Rights
will want to review briefly the guiding principles of the policy as it has
developed over the past two years, the effectiveness of tools we have
used to implement it, the impact it has had in the United States and
abroad, and our outlook for the future.

The Guiding Principles
—We are concerned with all three categories of fundamental
rights: the right to be free from governmental violations of the integrity
of the person; the right to fulfill one’s vital needs such as shelter, food,
health, and education; and civil and political rights.
—These rights are internationally recognized in the Universal Dec-
laration of Human Rights, adopted by the UN in 1948, and other inter-
national instruments.
—We prefer to use positive measures to promote human rights in
other countries, but where these have no effect we will not shrink from
consideration of sanctions or other ways to distance the United States
from human rights violations abroad.
—We apply our human rights concerns flexibly and realistically to
the particular circumstances presented by the country in question,
taking account of our interests with respect to the country and the his-
torical and cultural conditions involved.
—We encourage other countries that share our human rights
values to join us in our efforts to promote human rights.
Tools for Advancing the Human Rights Policy
—Private diplomatic discussions with virtually all countries.
—The Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assist-
ance, chaired by Warren Christopher, which brings human rights con-
siderations to bear on our foreign assistance projects in accordance
with legislative restrictions on providing assistance to countries with
serious human rights problems, and in keeping with the Presidential
directive to adjust our assistance levels to reflect positive or negative
human rights performance.
—Symbolic acts, such as meeting with opposition leaders or in-
viting foreign leaders to visit the U.S.
—Public comment, for countries such as Uganda and Cambodia,
where our private diplomatic efforts are unavailable or unavailing.
—Approaches in multilateral bodies, such as the UN, the OAS, the
multilateral development banks, and the Belgrade conference to review
implementation of the Helsinki accord.

Impact of the Human Rights Policy
—There has been an increase in awareness of human rights issues
throughout the world, which helps to curb existing abuses and acts as

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
an important deterrent to new violations. There have been releases of
many political prisoners in over a dozen countries and movement
toward restoration of democratic rule by a number of military regimes.
We do not take credit for particular improvements but believe we have
helped to create an atmosphere in which human rights progress is
more likely to occur.
—At home, the human rights policy is very popular with the
public. It is seen as a personal initiative of the President and a strong
plus for the Administration. There has been some criticism of the policy
from segments of the business community who are concerned that the
policy might interfere with trade. Labor is strongly supportive of the
policy. Other criticisms sometimes heard are that we concentrate on
right-wing, anti-Communist governments and that we do not apply the
policy forcefully enough in countries where we have important secu-
rity interests. The Congress continues to be generally supportive, with
the exception of some members who are responsive often to particular
business interests among their constituents.

Efforts in the Period Ahead
—We will continue to implement the policy in accordance with the
principles that have guided us thus far. We will work to articulate the
basis for the policy to international and domestic audiences.
—We will address problems that have emerged in implementing
the policy to date. Two particular concerns will be our failure to ratify
the Genocide Convention and our efforts to improve our ability to re-
spond to complaints and questions about human rights conditions in
the United States.

Peter Tarnoff

Human Rights

175.

Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting on Human Rights Policy
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ms. Patt Derian, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights
Leslie G. Denend, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Assistant Secretary Derian began the meeting by reviewing imple-
mentation of the policy over the past two years. She stressed the sus-
tained high level of public support for the policy, and the importance of
including an adequate assessment of the human rights situation partic-
ularly in decision papers to the President concerning military exports.
The President indicated that he felt he was receiving this kind of infor-
mation particularly in sensitive cases. Secretary Vance confirmed this
procedure to the President. The President cited Argentina as a clear case
where his approvals are specifically designed to encourage progress in
human rights. He went on to describe the support of the European and
Japanese leaders for human rights.

Ms. Derian indicated that the policy is misunderstood by some and
wondered if it would not be possible to release an unclassified version
of PD–30 which is now classified Confidential. The President thought
the idea had merit and directed Dr. Brzezinski to review PD–30.
The President then turned to the role of diplomacy in advancing the
cause of human rights. Using the example of the Soviet Union, he indi-
cated that he had learned a great deal about Soviet reactions to U.S.
human rights initiatives and felt that more had been accomplished re-
cently in the emigration of Soviet Jews, for example, through quiet di-
plomacy than through more public measures.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Ms. Derian responded by characterizing her meetings in Singapore
and the Philippines. The President reflected Senator Inouye’s concern
that our more confrontational approach in the Philippines had set the
U.S. back there. Secretary Vance said that he would follow that point up
with Senator Inouye and attempt to allay his concern.

The President reiterated his view of the value of quiet diplomacy
citing our recent experience with Libya. He offered support for Ms.
Derian’s efforts and encouraged her for the future. Secretary Vance em-
phasized the President’s observation, noting that where we could talk
to people there was a chance to influence their behavior. He felt that
was an argument for universal diplomatic recognition.

The President asked Ms. Derian to prepare a brief report outlining
recommendations for possible changes in our human rights approach
to those countries where she thought it might be improved.

176.

Editorial Note
Following their December 6, 1978, meeting on human rights (see
Document 175), President Jimmy Carter, Secretary of State Cyrus
Vance, President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbignew
Brzezinski, and Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Hu-
manitarian Affairs Patricia Derian participated in a White House East
Room ceremony commemorating the 30th anniversary of the adoption
of the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Approximately 250
representatives from domestic and international human rights organi-
zations attended the ceremony, which took place from 11: a.m. to
12: p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily
Diary)
After a short statement by Vance, Brzezinski indicated that he
would devote his remarks to the introduction and development of
three basic propositions regarding human rights. Brzezinski’s first
two propositions focused upon the historical inevitability of human
rights and the centrality of human rights in America’s relevance in a
“changing world.” In describing the third—the indication of progress
in the enhancement of human rights—Brzezinski asserted:

Human Rights
“Last year has seen some tangible progress in the human condi-
tion. There are different ways of assessing that progress. There are dif-
ferent groups which, from time to time, make estimates. Collating some
of these reports together, we do have the impression that not because of
our efforts, either alone or at all, but because of this increasing rele-
vance of the human rights condition which we have helped to stimu-
late, there has been progress in a number of countries.

“It is difficult to measure it but as a rough approximate estimate I
would say in at least 40 countries around the world in which two and a
half billion people live there has been tangible progress—in some cases
more, in some cases less, in some cases certainly not enough, but
progress nonetheless. And it has expressed itself in even greater respect
for rights or less oppression of political opposition or in the release of
victims or in a generally more sensitive attitude toward established
procedures.

“This is something of which we can be proud, though of which we
should not take credit. We are part of the process. We are part of a polit-
ical and historical process, and we live in a time which is often short in
hopeful perspectives in the future. I would submit to you that this is
one of the more important reassuring ones because it tells us something
about what a human being is. It tells us that ultimately the human
being in whatever the social, economic, or cultural conditions, yearns
for something transcendental, yearns for some self-definition with re-
spect to his uniqueness, yearns for something which dignifies him as a
spiritual being. And if that, in fact, is increasingly the human condition,
it ought to be a source of tremendous pride and reassurance to us as
Derian attempted to address four major questions associated with
human rights policy, including the rationale for policy, means of imple-
mentation, achievements, and sincerity of conviction. In discussing the
question of policy implementation, Derian sketched out the various
mechanisms employed by the United States, noting:
“Our approach has not been limited to quiet diplomacy. We have
practiced vigorous diplomacy in which all available instruments are
used. They include symbolic affirmations of our concern. The President
says something, the Secretary says something, it is in a speech, it is in a
press conference, it is in a press release, it is in a casual comment, it is in
a letter, it is whatever way you can find at some point when it seems
like the right instrument to have a strong public gesture. When there is
no response to quiet expression of human rights concerns and when
there is no response to a symbolic speaking out, our law and our policy
demand that we examine our assistance relationships, both economic
and military.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“We will continue to assert human rights concerns as vigorously as
we have during the past 2 years in our dealings with all governments.
The fundamental objective of this policy is to do what we can as a gov-
ernment and as a people to improve the observation of human rights by
governments toward their people. That is essentially what it is that this
policy is to do, and we do that in all the ways that you know.
“At the same time, the human rights policy has another important
effect; it strengthens our position and influence in the world. Human
rights is an area where our ideals and our self-interest strongly
coincide.

“The fact of it is that that is a side effect and the only way we really
get that side benefit is to be as straight as it is possible to be with our
policy implementation. That is our intention. That is our endeavor.
That is our constant struggle, because I don’t need to tell anyone in this
room that it is also incredibly complex to balance all of the things that
are of great concern to the United States with all the other things.
Human rights now sits at the table and that is a change.
“Our well-being and security are enhanced when there is greater
respect for human rights in the world. Our policy is important to the
health and integrity of this society within the United States. Support for
or indifference to oppression in other countries weakens the founda-
tion of our democracy at home.

“We have increased awareness of and concern for human rights
among governments and peoples throughout the world and in interna-
tional organizations such as the United Nations.

“Finally, besides growing awareness, there are indications of con-
crete progress for many regions. The U.S. Government is careful not to
claim credit for influencing specific steps. When a country is making
improvements, it is the result of decisions made by its government and
people. And how many events would have occurred in the absence of
U.S. human rights policy, we have no idea. But the policy has helped
to create a climate in which such changes are more likely.” (Ibid.,
pages 6–7)
Following Derian’s remarks, President Carter reaffirmed his pre-
vious public statements regarding human rights, asserting: “As long as
I am President, the Government of the United States will continue,
throughout the world, to enhance human rights. No force on Earth can
separate us from that commitment.” After highlighting his administra-
tion’s redoubled focus on rights, Carter expressed his hope that
Congress, during the next legislative session, would ratify the Conven-
tion on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
noting that the United Nations had adopted it at the same time it
adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and that 83 na-
tions had ratified it during the intervening 30 years. The President also

Human Rights
pledged to support Indochinese and Lebanese refugees and Cuban po-
litical prisoners. Describing the accomplishments related to the cen-
trality of human rights in U.S. foreign policy, Carter opined:
“The effectiveness of our human rights policy is now an estab-
lished fact. It has contributed to an atmosphere of change—sometimes
disturbing—but which has encouraged progress in many ways and in
many places. In some countries, political prisoners have been released
by the hundreds, even thousands. In others, the brutality of repression
has been lessened. In still others there’s a movement toward demo-
cratic institutions or the rule of law when these movements were not
previously detectable.

“To those who doubt the wisdom of our dedication, I say this: Ask
the victims. Ask the exiles. Ask the governments which continue to
practice repression. Whether in Cambodia, or Chile, in Uganda or
South Africa, in Nicaragua or Ethiopia or the Soviet Union, gov-
ernments know that we in the United States care; and not a single one
of those who is actually taking risks or suffering for human rights has
ever asked me to desist in our support of basic human rights. From the
prisons, from the camps, from the enforced exiles, we receive one mes-
sage—speak up, persevere, let the voice of freedom be heard.
“I’m very proud that our nation stands for more than military
might or political might. It stands for ideals that have their reflection in
the aspirations of peasants in Latin America, workers in Eastern Eu-
rope, students in Africa, and farmers in Asia.

“We do live in a difficult and complicated world—a world in
which peace is literally a matter of survival. Our foreign policy must
take this into account. Often, a choice that moves us toward one goal
tends to move us further away from another goal.

“Seldom do circumstances permit me or you to take actions that
are wholly satisfactory to everyone. But I want to stress again that
human rights are not peripheral to the foreign policy of the United
States. Our human rights policy is not a decoration. It is not something
we’ve adopted to polish up our image abroad or to put a fresh coat of
moral paint on the discredited policies of the past.

“Our pursuit of human rights is part of a broad effort to use our
great power and our tremendous influence in the service of creating a
better world—a world in which human beings can live in peace, in
freedom, and with their basic needs adequately met. Human rights is
the soul of our foreign policy. And I say this with assurance, because
human rights is the soul of our sense of nationhood.” (Ibid., pages 1–2)
The President concluded his remarks by referencing the 1978 Bill
of Rights Day and comparing the 187-year history of the Bill of Rights
with the 30-year history of the UN Declaration of Human Rights,
underscoring:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“I do not draw this comparison because I want to counsel patience.
I draw it because I want to emphasize, in spite of difficulties, stead-
fastness and commitment.

“One hundred and eighty-seven years ago, as far as most Amer-
icans were concerned, the Bill of Rights was a bill of promises. There
was no guarantee that those promises would ever be fulfilled. We did
not realize those promises by waiting for history to take its inevitable
course. We realized them because we struggled. We realized them be-
cause many sacrificed. We realized them because we persevered.
“For millions of people around the world today the Universal Dec-
laration of Human Rights is still only a declaration of hope. Like all of
you, I want that hope to be fulfilled. The struggle to fulfill it will last
longer than the lifetimes of any of us; indeed, it will last as long as the
lifetime of humanity itself. But we must persevere. And we must perse-
vere by insuring that this country of ours, leader in the world which we
love so much, is always in the forefront of those who are struggling for
that great hope, the great dream of universal human rights.” (Ibid.,
page 2; the President’s remarks are also printed in Public Papers: Carter,

177.

Memorandum From Leslie Denend of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, December 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Public Statement of US Human Rights Policy
As a result of the President’s meeting with Patt Derian, I have
begun the review of PD–30 to develop a version for possible release to
the public.

Human Rights
The draft at Tab A is a minor rework of the PD which softens the
language slightly and places it in the context of an ongoing policy.
Jerry Schecter and Madeleine Albright’s comments were that the draft
seemed fine but they advised against a release now because of the deli-
cate situation in Iran.

I agree with the implicit thesis in Madeleine and Jerry’s comments
that without a recognized event or reason for the release, the media will
invent one which may work against our original intentions for a public
statement.

178.

Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to William Butler,
David Hinkley, and Jerome Shestack
Washington, January 22, 1979
Gentlemen:
It is with great pleasure that I reply to your letter of December 1,
1978 to President Carter concerning ratification by the Senate of the In-
ternational Covenants on Human Rights.
classification marking. Drafted by Roberta Cohen. According to a Department of State
Executive Secretariat transmittal form, the Department sent a copy of Derian’s letter to
Brzezinski on January 24. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Human Rights
We could not agree with you more that Senate ratification of these
treaties is imperative to the pursuit of a persuasive and constructive
human rights policy. As President Carter stated in his letter submitting
the Covenants to the Senate for ratification in February 1978: “While
the United States is a leader in the realization and protection of human
rights, it is one of the few large nations that has not become a party to
the three United Nations human rights treaties. Our failure to become a
party increasingly reflects upon our attainments, and prejudices
United States participation in the development of the international law
of human rights.” The President concluded his letter of transmittal by
recommending “prompt consideration” by the Senate of ratification of
the Covenants as well as the UN Convention on Racial Discrimination
and the American Convention on Human Rights. He said this would
“confirm our country’s traditional commitment to the promotion and
protection of human rights at home and abroad.”
In furtherance of this action, the President, on the occasion of
Human Rights Day, issued a Proclamation stating that “there could be
no more appropriate gesture to mark the anniversary” of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights than Senate ratification of the Genocide
Convention and “early hearings” to permit adherence to the Conven-
tion and other remaining human rights instruments. The President
once again spoke out on behalf of ratification of the international
human rights treaties at the special White House Commemoration of
the 30th Anniversary. He urged the Senate to ratify the Genocide Con-
vention “at the earliest possible date” as the first step toward the ratifi-
cation of the Covenants and other human rights instruments.
The President, thus, has expressed clearly and emphatically that
one of the goals of his Administration is the ratification by the Senate of
the Covenants and other international human rights treaties in support
of our commitment to promote human rights internationally.
With regard to the signing of the Optional Protocol to the Cov-
enant on Civil and Political Rights, we agree with you that the right of
individual petition is essential for the safeguarding of human rights. It
is in fact the cornerstone of redress for human rights grievances. For
this reason, the United States played an important role in the drafting
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of the Optional Protocol and voted for its adoption by the United Na-
tions in 1966.

The United States decided it advisable to address itself first to the
Covenants’ ratification before considering the Optional Protocol. At
that time, we would expect to sign and submit it to the Senate for
ratification.

The President in his statement commemorating the Universal Dec-
laration’s 30th Anniversary, highly commended the work of your orga-
nizations, the leading ones in the field of international human rights.
Part of your efforts have included the launching of campaigns to stimu-
late broad public support for U.S. ratification of the human rights
treaties. We hardly can emphasize enough the importance of your ini-
tiatives and of your constituencies’ making their views known to
members of Congress on the crucial need for U.S. adherence to the
human rights treaties.

This Administration strongly supports your endeavors with re-
gard to ratification and would welcome the opportunity to discuss with
you further ways in which we could be helpful in achieving our mutual
goal of adherence by the United States to the international human
rights treaties.

With warm personal regards,
Cordially,
Patricia M. Derian
and opened for signature (by any party that had signed the covenant), ratification, and
tered into force on March 23, 1976.

Washington, January 24, 1979
Human Rights and Multilateral Development Banks: Procedures for
Securing Support from Other Governments for U.S. Positions
Issue for Decision
Governments of several major countries acknowledge that human
rights are a legitimate concern in consideration of MDB projects, yet we
have had only partial success in securing their opposition to specific
projects we oppose on human rights grounds. The issue for decision is
whether, beyond notification of an intent to oppose a loan in a reason-
able number of instances, we should seek the support of like-minded
governments in opposing such loans.

Background/Analysis
Over the course of the past two years, we have opposed about 48
loans to 15 countries for human rights reasons. These actions are in ac-
cord with our Congressional mandate and with Administration policy.
In our Congressional presentations a year ago we asserted that the Ad-
ministration actively had pursued its human rights objectives, in-
cluding in the MDBs, and had made a start in attracting international
support.

Other countries have joined us in opposition on approximately 25
loans to five countries. In only one case, however, have we received
enough support to have a loan withdrawn by the African Development
Fund to Equatorial Guinea. With regard to assistance financed by the
Inter-American Development Banks’ Fund for Special Operations, over
which the U.S. holds a veto, the U.S. has been able to keep certain loans
from coming forward. Also, it is probable that loans to Chile have not
come forward in the World Bank because of the belief that U.S. and
other donors would disapprove them. To the degree that increased in-
fidential. Drafted by Watson on January 22; cleared by Winder, Bushnell, Jennone
Walker, and Canner. Watson initialed for Winder and Bushnell; Schneider initialed for
Walker. An unknown hand initialed for Derian. Perry and John Spiegel also initialed the
memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ternational support can be generated and other countries also demon-
strate their opposition to particular loans, it will strengthen the mes-
sage of concern with human rights communicated to the violating
governments, underline our concern to bank managements about the
flow of resources to the government, and enhance Congressional ap-
preciation of our efforts, reducing the likelihood of additional legisla-
tive requirements.

Consultations by State and Treasury officials with counterparts
from other countries on human rights and foreign assistance including
an extensive exchange of views in Paris last month (reporting cable at
Tab 1) have revealed several points:
(1) Major industrialized and some developing members of the
MDBs are committed to trying to enhance respect for human rights
throughout the world and agree that human rights is an appropriate
and legitimate consideration on decisions concerning foreign assist-
ance, including MDB projects.

(2) In factoring human rights concerns into their decision on spe-
cific MDB projects, the industrialized countries want to avoid a “hit
list”.

(3) Other governments make their decisions on a case-by-case
basis and, in determining whether to support or oppose a specific
project in a country with gross human rights violations, they weigh the
seriousness of the violations against the extent to which the project will
contribute to the country’s development. This criterion is less narrow
than our basic human needs exception and, therefore, leads them to
consider opposing fewer projects. Moreover, they seem willing to con-
sider opposition only to projects in countries in which the more egre-
gious human rights violations have occurred. In some cases, however,
they will oppose even bhn projects because of the seriousness of the
violations.

(4) They are very concerned about undermining the apolitical and
developmental integrity of the MDBs. Their caution in this regard also
leads them to limit, at least initially, the number of countries for which
they will oppose MDB projects.

(5) All agreed that consultations were useful but that they should
be principally bilateral and that those on specific projects should take
place as far as possible before the projects are brought before MDB
boards. They observed that our present procedure of advising them of
the U.S. position on projects shortly before their consideration by the
boards did not allow them sufficient time to formulate their own posi-
tions. Our interlocutors agreed that lack of detailed information on
projects until only a few days before board decisions was a serious
1978, reporting upon a December 12 meeting at the Embassy among U.S., UK, Canadian,
West German, Dutch, Swedish, and Japanese representatives concerning human rights,
foreign assistance, and the MDBs.

Human Rights
hardship, but suggested that perhaps we could obtain from MDB staffs
preliminary or working documents which would provide enough in-
formation for our purposes.

(6) They also want to know when we are seeking their support be-
cause of the depth of our concern as opposed to simple notification.
(7) Most other governments do not examine documents on MDB
projects as carefully as we do; nor do they have coordinated procedures
for consideration of human rights issues. Consequently, in order for
our solicitations of support to be effective, they must include more
complete information on our analysis of projects and human rights
conditions.

Given the reluctance of other governments to oppose projects ex-
cept in the most serious cases, we must select very carefully the in-
stances on which we will solicit their support. Of course, we should
continue to advise them when we decide to oppose a project even if we
do not explicitly seek their support for our position. Once others be-
come accustomed to opposing projects, we may wish to solicit their op-
position on a broader range of projects. As our embassies approach
governments on specific projects, we also should advise relevant exec-
utive directors at the MDBs and perhaps their embassies here and even
in the prospective recipient countries.

At Tab 28 is a list of forthcoming MDB projects in countries with se-
rious human rights problems. We could select a few of these now and
begin to collect information and prepare our analysis for presentation
to other governments. Since we have already decided to oppose the
IBRD Railways II loan to Argentina and its consideration by the Board
has been postponed until January 30, EB, HA, S/P and Treasury believe
that it might be a good first case. This is particularly so, since even our
simple notification drew preliminary positive responses from the UK
and the Scandinavian countries.

ARA, however, believes that this case is not an appropriate one on
which to solicit support by other countries as the U.S. is only abstaining
rather than voting no.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Recommendation
That you authorize the Working Group on Human Rights and For-
eign Assistance:
(1) to select from the list at Tab 2 several MDB projects (subject to
your approval), including the IBRD Railways II loan to Argentina,
which the U.S. will oppose; and
(2) to prepare comprehensive descriptions of our views on them
for presentation to a few governments in an effort to solicit their oppo-
sition to them. (This recommendation is strongly supported by the
Treasury Department.)

180.

Memorandum From the Global Issues Cluster of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, January 29, 1979
SUBJECT
Evening Report
[Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.]
Human Rights Country Reports. Over the weekend and this
morning, we finished up all 115 country reports. On the whole I’d say
(recognizing the inherent difficulties of this public, sensitive kind of re-
porting) that the quality is very good. Certainly much better than the
two previous years. There are striking inconsistencies between reports
which derive from three main sources: very different amounts of access
and knowledge; political importance of the country to the U.S.; and
personal interest in a particular country (positive or negative) by a
Human Rights
powerful individual somewhere in the process. In the most difficult
cases, the problems between competing interests were solved by bal-
ancing every negative statement with a positive statement, resulting,
particularly in the East Asian reports (Korea, Philippines and In-
donesia) in extraordinary length. In the Korean case for example, the
report goes into ridiculous detail about Korean educational, welfare
and health programs (down to numbers of people covered), blowing
the ROK’s horn, in order to balance everything HA wanted in. Some of
the Latin American reports are also unbalanced—reflecting greater
personal interest than exists say for African countries. Nevertheless, the
process is clearly maturing, and we can be satisfied that a balanced se-
rious effort was made to produce honest reports without trodding on
sensitive toes in other capitals.

[Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.]

181.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, January 31, 1979
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Thirty-Fifth (1979) Session
Scope Paper
Pursuant to Article 68 of the United Nations Charter, the Commis-
sion on Human Rights was established in 1946 “for the promotion of
human rights.” Our overall purpose at the 35th session will be to lend
all appropriate support to the achievement of this objective. Our partic-
ipation will be guided by two basic assumptions: (a) the human rights
to be promoted are those possessed by all the peoples of the world, not
those of a select few, and (b) our aim will be truly effective action
through the United Nations, so that the situation of the particular
peoples concerned will be improved. We want to encourage the devel-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
opment of a less selective approach by the Commission so that it will
focus its attention upon a wider range of serious human rights viola-
tions in the world.

In determining our positions on individual issues our own con-
cepts of basic human rights, as enshrined in our Constitution and de-
veloped from the beginnings of our nation, will provide the controlling
guidelines. This does not mean, however, that we will seek to achieve
uniform acceptance of our own standards. We recognize the virtues of
diversity and will actively seek to learn, understand, and to take ac-
count of the points of view of other governments represented on the
Commission. In particular, this will mean that our concern for the pro-
motion of human rights will include the whole gamut of internationally
recognized standards referred to under the headings civil and political
and economic, social and cultural. We will acknowledge our ac-
ceptance of the proposition that basic civil and political human rights
reinforce and promote basic economic rights and needs of peoples, and
vice versa.

The 35th session will have the usual overly long agenda, of which
probably not more than half will receive detailed consideration. Our
principal concern at the outset, therefore, will be to assure that those
items to which we attach special importance are so placed in the
agenda which the Commission adopts that adequate discussion of
them will be assured before the close of the Commission session. Since
the crucial recommendations on the order of the items are made by the
Commission’s Bureau (the Chairman, three Vice Chairmen and Rap-
porteur), we must conduct early consultations within our own regional
group to assure that the regional group representative on the Bureau
this year (who will be the Commission Chairman) will act appropri-
ately to assert group interests in the order of the agenda items.
Among the matters to be discussed by the Commission the fol-
lowing will be of greatest interest to us and will present opportunities
for achieving specific goals:
(1) Question of the Program and Methods of Work of the Commission;
Alternative Approaches and Ways and Means Within the United Nations
System for Improving the Effective Enjoyment of Human Rights and Funda-
mental Freedoms. Under this item we must assure the adoption of a bal-
anced, constructive plan for the future work program of the Commis-
sion as well as for United Nations human rights activities overall. We
will seek to advance as far as possible certain of the suggestions made
by President Carter in his United Nations address of March 17, 1977,
viz., another regular annual session of the Commission on Human

Human Rights
Rights; move back to United Nations Headquarters the UN Secretariat
component, the Human Rights Division; and the establishment of a
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Particularly
with respect to the High Commissioner proposal, in consultation with
other supporters, we must develop tactics to assure that its essential el-
ements remain unchanged so that the proposal can again be considered
by the General Assembly, if possible at its 1979 session. We must also
assure that the United States sponsored item at the 33rd UN General
Assembly on review and coordination is adequately highlighted in any
proposals for strengthening United Nations human rights machinery.
Finally, under this item or under a related item on the agenda which
deals with the Advisory Services in the Field of Human Rights, we will
be seeking to encourage greater utilization of and expansion of the
United Nations Advisory Services Program.

(2) Question of the Human Rights of All Persons Subjected to Any Form
of Detention or Imprisonment, in particular: Draft Convention on Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. We ex-
pect to participate actively in the working group which will be set up to
draft the Convention on Torture and we will seek to achieve as much
progress as possible in completing the drafting exercise at the 35th ses-
sion. We will carry on consultations already pursued under the aegis of
the Council of Europe with a view to assuring the inclusion in the Con-
vention of effective implementation provisions.

(3) Question of the Violation of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms in Any Part of the World, With Particular Reference to Colonial and
Other Dependent Areas and Territories, Including: Study of Situations Which
Reveal a Consistent Pattern of Gross Violations of Human Rights. This item
presents the greatest challenge of any item on the agenda since here
will be discussed the cases referred to the Commission under ECOSOC
Resolution 1503. Our support for the 1503 procedures has been strong
since they were approved in 1970 because we have seen in these proce-
dures the principal means whereby the focus of the Commission could
be turned away from the traditional three cases (occupied Arab terri-
tories, Chile and South Africa) which have received repeated attention
toward the examination of other instances of gross violations of human
rights. Experience has shown that the Commission approaches its re-
sponsibilities under the 1503 procedures with exaggerated caution and
concern for the sensitivities of the governments involved. Our goal will
be to encourage decisions for study or investigation of all those cases in
Rights Programmes of Organizations in the United Nations System and Cooperation
With Other International Programmes in the Field of Human Rights,” adopted by the UN
General Assembly on December 14, 1978.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
which governments failed to produce convincing evidence that the al-
leged violations are being corrected. Foremost among the cases which
will command our attention is that concerning the human rights situa-
tion in Uganda. Action which we will support on the Ugandan case will
depend largely on recent developments which will be reported to the
Commission by the Secretary-General. Other serious cases requiring
adequate action will be Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, and Uruguay.
In addition to the confidential 1503 procedures, there will be dis-
cussed in public forum the situation of the violation of human rights in
Democratic Kampuchea. We must assure that appropriate action is
taken by the Commission to follow-up its decision to look into the
matter which was taken at its last session.

(4) Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and
on Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief. We intend to give our strong
support to the achievement of forward progress in the drafting of the
Declaration, which has been proceeding much too slowly. We will em-
phasize our belief that the issue of religious freedom is among the most
important human rights issues in the world today and requires effec-
tive attention by the Commission.

(5) Study of Reported Violations of Human Rights in Chile. We intend
to assure the maintenance of adequate monitoring by the Human
Rights Commission of the human rights situation in Chile. As proposed
in the resolution adopted by the 33rd UN General Assembly, we will
support the substitution of a Special Rapporteur for the Ad Hoc
Working Group and the establishment of machinery to deal with the
problem of disappeared persons in Chile.

(6) Report of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities. Because the Subcommission plays a key role in
the implementation of the procedures established in ECOSOC Resolu-
tion 1503 and because much of its expert work provides an essential
basis for follow-up recommendations by the Commission, we must as-
sure that adequate time is allocated for discussion of the Subcommis-
sion’s report. The Subcommission has been improving in effectiveness
and therefore has drawn upon itself undue criticism by governments
(such as Argentina) which have been the object of its attention at recent
sessions.
eral Assembly on December 20, 1978.

Human Rights
(7) The Problem of Disappeared Persons. As a follow-up to the resolu-
tion adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, we will be con-
sulting with the resolution’s original sponsors, Canada and the United
Kingdom, with a view to the establishment by the Human Rights Com-
mission of an effective mechanism for dealing with the problem of dis-
appeared persons throughout the world.

(8) Importance of National Institutions in the Field of Human Rights.
We want to give every encouragement to the initiative being pursued
by the Indian delegation to strengthen the role which can be played by
national institutions supporting the international human rights activ-
ities of the United Nations. A related area which we will also seek to
promote will be the establishment of regional human rights organs.
Tactical Situation:
In pursuing the goals which we have set for ourselves in the 35th
session of the Human Rights Commission, full account must be taken
of the setting. The Commission operates pursuant to the Rules of Proce-
dure of the Functional Commissions of ECOSOC and it takes decisions
by majority vote. Of the 32 members on the Commission, 8 are from Af-
and 4 from the Socialist States of Eastern Europe. Of the present mem-
bership, the following have been the object of formal complaints of
human rights violations which have been before the Commission in re-
cent years: Brazil, Iran, Burundi, Uganda, and Uruguay.

To achieve a working majority in the Commission our contacts
must take account of the key position occupied in the Commission by
the countries of the Third World. It is only from the members of this
group that we can hope to find the support which we will need if we
are to achieve our goals through the adoption of resolutions by the
Commission. In the consultations which we must carry out before the
opening of the Commission session as well as during the period of the
session itself, we must identify at least 8–10 of the Member States from
the Third World with which we must work to develop common posi-
tions in pursuit of our objectives.
on December 20, 1978.

182.

Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State
2571. For Deputy Secretary, Counselor Nimetz, and Assistant Sec-
retaries Maynes, Vest and Derian from Mezvinsky. Subject: (C) Human
Rights Commission: Genocide Report.
1. (C) Entire text.
2. Having been in Geneva only a few days for the 35th Human
Rights Commission (HRC) session which opened February 12, I have
become even more acutely conscious of the serious implications which
will flow from the position the U.S. delegation will take when the Re-
port on Genocide, which has been endorsed by the Subcommission on
Discrimination and Minorities, is considered by the Commission. The
agenda item under which this report will arise is scheduled to be taken
up by the Commission during the latter half of the week of March 5. I
understand that the issue is now being considered in the Department
on the basis of the draft position paper prepared in IO2 and supported
by HA. The position paper contains all relevant background details of
the simple issue of whether or not the U.S. delegation will publicly state
that the Genocide Report should have retained in it an appropriate
mention of the massacre of Armenians as having constituted the first
instance of genocide in the 20th century. I note that this simple refer-
ence does not assign blame for the genocide to any government.
3. Included as a valued member of the U.S. delegation to the 35th
session of the HRC is Mr. Set Momjian, a public member designated by
the White House. Mr. Momjian, who arrived in Geneva February 13, re-
ports that he has already received numerous queries from Armenian
leaders in Europe and in the United States concerning the position the
USDel will take. He also tells me that there appeared in last Sunday’s
Human Rights
issue of the “Washington Post” a full page appeal addressed to
members of the U.S. delegation to the Human Rights Commission re-
garding this issue. Mr. Momjian informs me that over 10,000 letters
have been sent to the White House on the issue and that congressional
interest in it is building up to a high point. Statements in support of the
Armenian position are expected to be issued soon by a number of
NGO’s in Europe. Other delegations here in Geneva are expressing an
interest in the matter.
4. Needless to say, I strongly support the position advocated in the
draft position paper prepared in IO, and I am firmly convinced that the
position represents the absolute minimum which the USDel should
follow if we are to assume a credible posture in a discussion in the
Human Rights Commission of the question of genocide. This is a basic
human rights issue which still besets the 20th century world and it is
one which cannot be usefully discussed without reference to factual sit-
uations as they have occurred during this century.
5. I urge that a decision be made soon and that the USDel be fully
and promptly informed of that decision as well as of all relevant devel-
opments on this issue, such as congressional interest and letter writing
and publicity campaigns. Mr. Momjian has expressed to me his special
personal concern that the U.S. position be decided soon. Obviously, his
future role on this delegation will hinge upon the nature of the decision
which is to be made.

Vanden Huevel

183.

Memorandum From Michele Bova of the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to John Spiegel of the
Office of the Deputy Secretary of State
Washington, March 9, 1979
SUBJECT
Suggestions for Improving the Procedures of the Inter-Agency Group on Human
Rights and Foreign Assistance
Mr. Vest’s recent memo2 reiterates some of the problems and frus-
trations faced by your office, our bureau and all those involved in the
interagency review process of human rights and foreign assistance. The
problems are not new. Some of them can probably never be resolved
satisfactorily. Others can. From the perspective of someone who has
been dealing with this process since its inception and who will soon be
leaving for another tour, I would like to offer some frank suggestions
on what can be done and some observations on how to minimize dis-
satisfactions with what will always be a less than perfect procedure.
This is not an official memo. I have not cleared it with anyone and
it is not in the “system”. The principals in my own bureau would prob-
ably not agree with some of my points. I offer it as the last salvo of a de-
parting bureaucrat who has seen much progress in implementing a
new, controversial and broad reaching policy but who is also disap-
pointed that so much of what has been done depends on the initiatives
of individuals rather than the existence of institutionalized procedures
or the inadequacy of those which have been established. This lack is not
fair to busy men like Mr. Christopher and it is not good for the human
rights policy.

If you conclude that some of the suggestions which follow should
be implemented, I believe the most effective way to achieve this end
would be for Mr. Christopher to direct that they be done. If you would
like a more democratic approach to be followed I suggest that an ad hoc
group be called which would be tasked with preparing a paper on
methods of improving current procedures. Such a paper should repre-
sent the consensus of the group and should not take the form of yet an-
other Solomon’s choice options memorandum. The attached list of sug-
Human Rights
gestions, or a modified version thereof, could serve as the starting point
for discussion.

One last observation is that we have a sound procedural basis on
which to build—i.e. the Working Group, the Inter-Agency Group, and
the close consultation and information transfer process already estab-
lished with Treasury and A.I.D.

Suggestions for Improving the Procedures of the Inter-Agency Group on
Human Rights and Foreign Assistance
—The Working Group should identify upcoming projects at least
two months before action is due to be taken to implement them. (In the
case of MDB projects this will result in some inefficiencies as projects
identified even this close to Board action will sometimes slip or be
re-structured).
—The State Department should develop action plans on a quar-
terly basis which include current assessments of the human rights situ-
ation and set forth recommendations on appropriate action on all
upcoming assistance for the following quarter. Such action recommen-
dations will be based on an analysis of tactical and legal considerations,
both bilateral and global. Action plans should be prepared on all coun-
tries to which the U.S. has opposed assistance over the past two years
as well as those countries which have come up consistently for review
by the Inter-Agency Group3 for the Word Committee.
—The Inter-Agency Group should review projects identified by
the Working Group in the context of the State Department’s Action
Plans. In the case of MDB projects, the group will make a recommenda-
tion on appropriate USG action, at least one full week in advance of
Bank Board consideration.
—In cases where dates for project consideration by MDB Boards
slip into the timeframe of the next quarterly review of the action plan,
and if there is no State Department consensus as expressed in the action
plan to support the recommendation of the Inter-Agency Group, the
Working Group shall re-submit the project for Inter-Agency review in
accordance with the above delineated time constraints. Other agencies
participating
in
the
Working
Group
can
also
recommend
re-
submission to the Inter-Agency Group.
—In those few cases where major and essential changes occur in
the human rights situation in a country prior to Bank Board consider-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ation, if a Group member believes that the decision reached is no longer
justified, that Group member shall initiate an action memorandum,
and clear it with all interested Group members. This memorandum
must reach the Deputy Secretary at least one full week and preferably
two weeks before Bank Board action.
—A.I.D. or Treasury5 will be designated to recommend whether a
project meets BHN criteria in time for this determination to be included
on the agenda of the Inter-Agency Group.
—The BHN determination will be based on information available
at the time. Treasury will cooperate by obtaining information from
bank staffs if necessary. (This will have the added spin-off of sensi-
tizing the Banks to the USG interest in questions of equitable develop-
ment and greater attention to meeting basic human needs, a stated goal
of Treasury in its policy speeches and reports to the Congress. If, how-
ever, Treasury wishes to minimize the need of going directly to Bank
staffs, an alternative would be to have the Banks submit final project
papers to all Executive Directors at least four weeks prior to Board con-
sideration. Currently, there is a ten working day rule in the World Bank
and the IDB. Often lesser lead time is available in the ADB and we usu-
ally can’t get information in the AFDF until the last minute).
—In the absence of sufficient data to support the conclusion that a
project meets the BHN exception provided in the law, the recommen-
dation of the designated agency (A.I.D. or Treasury) will be that the
BHN exception does not apply. Such a project will be considered by the
Inter-Agency Group as if it were a non-BHN project.

184.

Telegram From the Mission at Geneva to the Department of
State
4619. Subject: (C) Human Rights Commission—35th Session
Wrap-up.
1. (C—Entire text).
2. Summary: In comparison with sessions of the past few years,
this session was more confrontational and political, but it must be
judged against the background of unsettling events occurring simulta-
neously in the Middle East, Southeast Asia and Southern Africa. The
Arab group became more militant, the Non-Aligned wanted to avoid
an airing of the Southeast Asian situation, and the Africans remained
silent as one of their worst human rights violators, Uganda, was in-
vaded by a neighbor. From our perspective, a larger number of cases
were handled under the confidential 1503 procedures, with Equatorial
Guinea later being discussed publicly. Progress was made on the
drafting of legal instruments such as the torture convention, draft dec-
laration on religious intolerance, and a good airing by many countries
of the Genocide Report took place. Helsinki monitors were specifically
mentioned by name, and countries were encouraged to set up national
institutions dealing with human rights. Negative aspects of the Com-
mission’s work were the sad spectacle of cutting off debate on flagrant
human rights violations in Cambodia, and the disheartening failure
that no action was taken on missing persons and on the mass exodus of
refugees. The consideration of overall analysis of human rights in the
UN system led to adoption of a text which will hopefully strengthen
the UN human rights sector and promote the objectives as the estab-
lishment of the post of High Commissioner. End summary.
3. General overview: The first two weeks of the Commission ses-
sion saw more aggressive actions by Arab members on Middle East
issues than in the past and a less polemical treatment of Southern Af-
rica issues. In the succeeding three weeks the atmosphere heated up
considerably as the Commission went into confidential session to deal
with violations in individual countries under the 1503 procedures. The
confidential sessions were followed by a final week of widespread
name calling as most of the political conflicts of the moment, and some
from the past, were aired and reflected in resolutions. At mid-session
the Latin states seemed to be suffering the heaviest criticism and were
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the object of the majority of resolutions, mainly produced by Cuba. The
Latin group, however, eventually began to assert itself and became ac-
tive in protecting its own. Treatment of human rights cases under 1503
produced some progress on several cases and at least one precedent
setting action, the decision to remove the case of Equatorial Guinea
from the confidential proceedings and deal with it in public session.
4. The Commission made progress on the drafting of the legal in-
struments on torture and began unenthusiastically to work on a con-
vention on the rights of the child. The West achieved some satisfaction
on the drafting of a declaration on religious intolerance by forcing to a
vote over strong Soviet objections the texts of the first three articles.
And the Commission’s consideration of economic, social and cultural
rights centered on a discussion of the right to development, a concept
which the Commission referred to governments for further comment.
The majority of Western, and some developing countries such as Brazil
expressed uncertainty over the need to establish new “rights” but indi-
cated they were prepared to take constructive approach. Resolutions
on the overall analysis of human rights in the UN, national institutions,
and the Human Rights Yearbook were also adopted.
5. One of the most frustrating aspects of the session was the failure
of the Commission to take any action on Cambodia. The procedural
maneuvers of this issue left everyone a loser. The Non-Aligned pushed
through a motion to adjourn debate and take no action concerning the
report on Cambodia, even before the debate had begun. The West ob-
jected vehemently to this move, but were overruled at the time. This
imposition of a gag rule made some delegates from all groups uneasy.
The silencing of the debate proved shortlived. The Chairman later al-
lowed the representatives from Democratic Kampuchea, China, and
Vietnam to speak, thus opening the way for a full exchange of insults
among those three plus the USSR, Mongolia and Bulgaria. Two addi-
tional disappointments were: (1) the failure of the Canadian initiative
on the causes of mass exodus, which was withdrawn in order to pre-
vent it from being distorted with Syrian amendments, focussing the
resolution on the Palestinian question, and (2) the initiative on disap-
peared persons which was deferred until next year. The Canadians de-
cided to opt for deferral rather than accept a watered down result.
6. The discussion of the Report on Genocide involved the partici-
pation of a significant number of delegations speaking out in support
of the original par. 30 relating to Armenian massacres. The decision
ended with a statement by the Chairman of the HRC endorsing our ob-
Mission indicated that Mezvinsky had spoken in favor of the reinstatement of paragraph

Human Rights
jective of securing a reexamination by the Special Rapporteur of his
omission of para. 30.
7. Political climate: A mood of political confrontation took root
early in the session as the Arab group ran rough-shod over the proce-
dures during the first day of debate on the question of the occupied ter-
ritories by pushing to a vote a telegram directed against the Govern-
ment of Israel. This was in spite of objections by Western and even
some Latin delegates that they had not had time to consider the text. In
the third week of the session as the confidential meetings on the partic-
ular countries got under way, political hostilities greatly increased. The
Latin group felt suddenly betrayed and became temporarily trauma-
tized at what they considered the failure of other groups, particularly
the African group, to implement the same standards of objectivity and
universality which certain Latin delegations were trying to employ.
The Ambassador of Colombia openly expressed his disgust with the
African delegation and the socialist bloc countries for protecting their
own region and their own political self-interests, thereby preventing
strong action in the case of Ethiopia, all the while pretending to take an
objective stand and support firm action against Paraguay and Uru-
guay. In response to what he considered the double-standard, the Co-
lombian Ambassador announced that he would no longer serve as a
member of working group on communications. At the same time, the
Cubans were tabling drafts for public debate on the case of Nicaragua
and Guatemala, further convincing the Latins that they were the only
vulnerable group for attack. Some Latins complained to us that the Af-
rican group lines up with the socialist bloc for self protection against
Western demands for investigation of cases such as Ethiopia while the
Latins are left with no protector. However, the Latins, led by Panama,
Colombia and Peru, eventually became more active and achieved what
they considered more balanced results on Latin country cases. The case
of Argentina is somewhat different as they continue to succeed in pre-
venting action on violations, by seeking the help of the most hardline,
non-aligned countries. The Argentine counter-amendments on disap-
peared persons included Algeria, Iraq, Syria and Yugoslavia as
co-sponsors.
8. The highly politicized atmosphere of this session resulted in the
Commission moving away from exclusive consideration of Chile,
sent a letter to the Special Rapporteur, asking him to reinsert the text of paragraph 30.
from Geneva, May 30, noted that Van Boven had yet to receive any response from the
Special Rapporteur, despite the fact that Van Boven had sent two additional letters re-
questing that the Rapporteur review the Genocide Report. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790247–1117)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
South Africa and Israel. As previously noted, the US brought up spe-
cific cases in the Soviet Union and elsewhere, as well as mentioned
problems in other parts of the world. The US was in turn criticized for
our treatment of the American Indians.
9. With the present atmosphere fostering political comfrontation
and with the Economic and Social Council likely to expand the Com-
mission from 32 to 43 members, we should begin early charting our
course and adapting our style accordingly.

Vanden Heuvel
185.

Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary
of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(Schneider) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, March 20, 1979
SUBJECT
Human Rights Reports
The third annual volume of public human rights reports recently
was submitted to the Congress. These reports, mandated under Sec-
tions 502B and 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act, have improved each
year in thoroughness and specificity.

Debate over the costs and benefits of these reports has continued
since the previous Administration sought to maintain them on a confi-
dential basis and was rebuffed by the Congress.

The following benefits flow from the preparation and submission
of these public reports.

Human Rights
First, the Department’s view on current human rights practices of
foreign assistance recipients does provide the Congress with data to
evaluate our budget requests.

Second, the preparation of the report stimulates within the Depart-
ment a disciplined and regular fact-finding and analysis process which
might not otherwise be present.

Third, the reports enumerate human rights practices in consider-
able detail, communicating to those governments our concerns with a
degree of specificity which generally is lacking in bilateral consulta-
tions. Also, by being mandated by law, some of the onus for raising
these specific abuses is removed from the executive branch.
Fourth, the publication of the reports at times permits information
about the human rights conditions to make its way into the host
country’s media encouraging human rights constituencies.
Fifth, the reports themselves provide an impetus for bilateral dis-
cussions with host governments concerning the specific abuses cited.
Sixth, the American public is better informed regarding these con-
ditions as a result of the publication of the reports.
Finally, the reports have come to symbolize the continuing impor-
tance of human rights concerns to our foreign policy decision-making.
Any Administration effort to see them removed as a requirement
would be read as a lessening of that concern.

With regard to costs, the initial dire predictions of irreparable
harm have not been realized. Nevertheless, the following disadvan-
tages have been argued to exist.

First, the preparation of the reports involves a considerable expen-
diture of time and resources, at embassies, within regional bureaus and
most particularly, within our Bureau.

Second, by limiting the countries covered to those receiving aid, as
specified by statute, many countries with poor human rights records,
particularly the eastern bloc governments, are not covered.
Third, we cannot control the timing of the public release of the re-
ports and therefore the publication of the reports can conflict either
with the timing of other bilateral pursuits or with the timing of the
human rights strategy itself in a particular country.

Finally, the public release of the reports produces some friction in
bilateral relations with some countries although the attached summary
of host country reactions to this year’s submission demonstrates that
they are becoming accustomed to this mid-winter ritual. It is note-
worthy that all but one of the countries which initially stated they could
not participate in assistance programs if reports were to be submitted
on them have reversed that position.

Modifications which have been suggested include the following:

186.

Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of
State (Nimetz) to the Special Adviser to the Secretary of State
(Shulman)
Washington, June 8, 1979
SUBJECT
CSCE, Human Rights and the Summit
I have reviewed the talking points paper on these subjects for the
Summit. I fear if the President does not approach the human rights
issue more straightforwardly, he will look weak in the eyes of the So-
viets and will find it harder rather than easier to manage a sustained re-
lationship, especially in so far as CSCE is concerned. Moreover, you
should not underestimate the public impact of factors related to
CSCE—including human rights and military security—both for impor-
tant domestic groups and abroad.

The President came into office with human rights as the “soul” of
his foreign policy. He has sent us all out to pursue it vigorously. If, in
his one chance in four years to talk to the Soviet leadership personally,
he does not mention it officially, he will demonstrate inconsistency and
give the Soviets the impression that he lacks the courage of his convic-
tions. I do not want the President to moralize or launch a propaganda
attack against the foundations of the Soviet system. I do believe, how-
ever, that the President should in a plenary session, with others
present, offer a non-defensive explanation of his human rights policy
which ties it to a balanced approach to CSCE, including improved im-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
plementation and enhanced dialogue before the Madrid meeting. If he
merely expresses a few generalities privately to Brezhnev, it would
seem apologetic and may be worse than not mentioning these subjects
at all.

As far as the talking points themselves are concerned, I would
favor an effort to explain our approach simply and in an intellectually
honest way. I think the points included in the background paper on
CSCE, if combined with elements in the background paper on human
rights, would be appropriate. In any event, I believe strongly that you
should delete the peculiar statement that human rights are “internal
matters” which is contained in the summary talking points. It is our of-
ficial position that matters involving implementation of international
agreements like UN Covenants and the Helsinki Final Act are legiti-
mate for discussion between states.

Concerning human rights, I think the reference to the four
freedoms and jointly fighting fascism is good and I would suggest re-
taining it. I would also find a way to use the following contingency
points, which I have altered somewhat:
—U.S. human rights policy is based on our commitment to inter-
national standards, including the joint pledges our two countries have
made in the Helsinki Final Act. It is necessary and proper for one signa-
tory of that politically and morally binding document to raise with an-
other signatory its concern about the implementation of all elements of
that agreement.
—In so doing, we are not seeking unilateral advantage from our
human rights policy. There is great domestic U.S. interest in human
rights throughout the world, including our own country. This attitude
is based on real concern and on our belief that, to be lasting, de´tente
must involve improvements in the spiritual and material lives, as well
as the security, of ordinary people. Within the spirit of the Helsinki
Final Act, progress on human rights clearly strengthens de´tente.
Post Script: There is a section on Working Conditions for U.S. Jour-
nalists which appears too positive about Soviet behavior. I believe in

Human Rights
the carrot more than the stick, but I think it is just not right to “wel-
come” the improvements in this field when the period since Helsinki
has seen, inter alia, legal action against journalists, backsliding in the
GDR, and allegations that journalists have been poisoned and
harassed.
187.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to
Acting Secretary of State Christopher
Washington, June 13, 1979
The Non-Governmental Community’s Recommendations for
Strengthening U.S. Human Rights Policy
In a series of discussions by Roberta Cohen of HA with leading
human rights organizations, the following perceptions and recommen-
dations emerged. The groups included: Amnesty International, the In-
ternational Commission of Jurists, the International League for Human
Rights, Freedom House, the Lawyers Committee for International
Human Rights, the UNA–USA, the Washington International Human
Rights Law Group, Internet, the National Council of Churches, the
World Council of Churches, the B’nai B’rith International, the United
States Catholic Conference, the American Jewish Committee, the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, the Council of
Hemispheric Affairs, the American Association of Publishers, and
Khronika Press. Without an attempt to screen, the following are their
views:
I. Perceptions: NGO’s, while strongly supportive of the policy and
the establishment and activities of the Human Rights Bureau, are
deeply disturbed by what they perceive as the policy’s declining visi-
bility. The following was cited as evidence of a clear backing away from
strong human rights advocacy:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—The failure of the Executive Branch to strongly work for the rati-
fication of the Genocide Convention, International Covenants and
other human rights agreements.
—The uneven application of the policy. When security or eco-
nomic interests are involved, human rights are ignored.
—The absence of anyone in the White House or National Security
Council strongly supportive of human rights.
—The continued insensitivity to and lack of knowledge about
human rights by many foreign service officers here and abroad.
—Diminishing U.S. pressure on major violators, in particular
South Korea, Argentina, Indonesia, Nicaragua, the Philippines, South
Africa, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Rhodesia (Freedom House ex-
cepted on Rhodesia).

II. Recommendations: Because the Executive Branch is viewed as
having passed through its “human rights phase,” “triumphs” were
said to be needed to demonstrate the importance of the policy and to
make clear that it was not on the wane but on a new plateau.
The triumph that virtually all NGO’s recommended was ratifica-
tion of the human rights treaties. Specifically, NGO’s urged intensive
Executive Branch “lobbying” with the Senate to ensure prompt passage
of the Genocide Convention and recommended that the Secretary for-
mally request the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to hold hearings
on the Covenants.

Other recommendations were:
—A major speech by a high-level USG official (Christopher, Vance,
Brzezinski, or Carter) realistically setting forth the future direction of
the policy and its accomplishments and setbacks to date.
—The appointment of a human rights advocate to the White
House and National Security Council.
—The enlargement of the Human Rights Bureau to enable its ade-
quate handling of the enormous task before it.
—A massive foreign service education program aimed at institu-
tionalizing the teaching of human rights as a regular feature of foreign
service training.
—A vigorous effort to enlist Congressional support for human
rights issues.
—Provision of strong support and encouragement to countries
with good human rights records and those in which major advances
have occurred.
—The clear reflection in U.S. aid patterns of an alliance with demo-
cratic nations or those in which such processes are developing.
—The re-formulation of the human rights policy to include:
a) Greater attention to the promotion of civil and political liberties and

Human Rights
democratic institutions. (The policy to date, it was noted, had been im-
plemented with prime focus on first category rights); b) A clearer state-
ment of the correlation, or lack of, between economic and social and
civil and political rights and how U.S. policy could promote both. (It
was noted that countries which respected civil and political liberties
did not necessarily promote economic and social rights); c) An evalu-
ation of U.S. obligations under the proposed New International Eco-
nomic Order; d) A clear statement on how U.S. military sales and aid
impacted on human rights; and e) A clear definition of the kinds of po-
lice equipment the U.S. was sending abroad and how this impacted on
human rights.
—The maintenance of a tough human rights stance toward major
violators, in particular, Argentina and Nicaragua (where the USG is
perceived as having backed down), the Philippines, South Korea
(where the President’s forthcoming visit was strongly criticized, partic-
ularly in the absence of any known commitments by the South Korean
Government to improve its record prior to or in conjunction with the
visit), South Africa, El Salvador, Guatemala, Rhodesia and Indonesia.
In the case of the USSR and CSCE, the following recommendations
were made: the designation at an early stage of an Ambassador and a
task force for Madrid4 to give focus to the forthcoming meeting; the in-
clusion of human rights questions on the summit agenda; the under-
taking of efforts to improve phone and mail communication with the
USSR; a review of the programs broadcast by Radio Liberty, Radio Free
Europe and the Voice of America to ensure their adequate reflection of
human rights concerns; and the adoption by the U.S. Embassy of a
more open attitude toward contacts with unofficial Soviets.
—At the UN, the appointment of an individual of stature and ex-
pertise to represent the U.S. at the UN Human Rights Commission and
other human rights bodies; and a more responsive position on
Southern Africa, economic rights and the human rights implications of
the NIEO.
—The revision of immigration policies to make them less restric-
tive geographically and more responsive in political asylum cases. In
addition, the facilitation of the granting of visas to communist party
members for visits.
—More outreach: NGO’s requested that the Department inform
them more quickly about changes in human rights conditions and con-

188.

Paper Prepared by Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff
Washington, undated
HUMAN RIGHTS
I have been holding this horse for you only since Jessica’s depar-
ture; hence, I have not been deeply involved in a number of aspects of
it—substantive or procedural. It is very important that you get together
soon with Jessica and have her fill you in. I do have a number of obser-
vations to make however; perhaps you will find some of them mildly
interesting.

Human rights is probably the main success story of this adminis-
tration’s foreign policy, at least in a long-term historical view. We have
developed a policy in which we can take pride. We have made human
rights an issue of international standing. We have had a definite benefi-
cial impact on the lives of thousands of people throughout the world.
And we have created a basis for mutual respect with leaders such as
Morarji Desai, Julius Nyerere and others who were alienated from the
Human Rights
previous administration. Most important, perhaps, we have stuck with
the policy. The President continues to support it strongly (more so than
many of his would-be advisers) and the administration in general has
not gotten too “bored” with the issue.

Clearly, not all is roses. There are quixotic aspects to the policy and
quixotic people associated with it. There has been some misdirection of
our efforts. And, of course, there are many areas that we simply cannot
affect.

Sometimes the quixotic elements are positive. Our single-minded
voting against loans to HR violators in the IFIs has no impact on the
loans since they are approved anyway. It is important, however, that
we portray a picture of consistency as part of our overall campaign.
You are going to have to risk looking quixotic yourself, if you are
going to do this job adequately. The human rights portfolio is an adver-
sarial one. Your geographic colleagues will often have good political
reasons not to push human rights too hard. Don’t let them get away
with it. Sometimes you will have to take fairly extreme positions just to
force a reasonable compromise. Your function (and this is true of
non-proliferation as well) is to keep your teeth firmly dug into others’
heels. Otherwise you will be disregarded—even by people who are at
least as warm-hearted as you, but who are faced with a different set of
issues. And not all of them are quite that warm-hearted. There are
plenty of people in State—and not only there—who consider human
rights a misguided effort and play along with it only to the minimum
extent necessary to humor a President who “doesn’t understand” the
realities of international politics. Kissinger lives.

A major problem at the beginning of the administration was the in-
ability of some to understand that there are different categories of
human rights; that there are differences among torture, lack of free
press, and inadequate access to pure water. Fairly early on, we were
able to get the theoretical distinction accepted, and not too long there-
after, even Patt Derian was brought around to the belief that some vio-
lations had priority over others. It is an issue that needs to be watched
constantly, however, for there are still many who simply aggregate all
human rights listed in the UN declaration.

An unfortunate example (albeit one that the Administration is not
responsible for) is our concentration on Jewish emigration from the So-
viet Union. There are many worse things that happen to people in the
Soviet Union than (a) being Jews and (b) having to stay there. Many
much worse things happen to people outside the Soviet Union. Obvi-
ously Jewish emigration is a legitimate human rights issue. It should
not, however, enjoy the priority that it gets.

An example of ineffectiveness is not hard to find. We are unable to
do anything about Equatorial Guinea and never did much about Pol

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Pot or Amin, although there may have been some glimmering in the
latter case. The point here is that we are able to do less about countries
that (a) receive no aid or other benefits from the US and/or (b) are
ruthless enough to keep outsiders from finding out what is going on in
their countries. Clearly Chile and Korea are less egregious offenders
than Kampuchea or Eq. Guinea. But you would never know it by
reading the international press or reviewing the list of US actions taken.
Unfortunately, there is no ready answer to this. Nor, for that matter, to
the unwillingness of LDCs to cast stones at others’ glass houses. We just
have to keep plugging away.

Another weakness of the policy is that we find it much easier to
punish than to reward. I know, offhand, of no case where a country has
unambiguously gotten a larger aid program because it performed well
on human rights. On the other hand, the generosity shown to Sri Lanka
and India is not unrelated to human rights considerations. Some crea-
tive thinking about this would be very useful—assuming, of course,
that we will have any money available! Another scarce but extremely
important resource in this regard is Presidential attention.
About the only substantive things that I have gotten involved in at
all relate to the two Presidential trips that occurred in the past month—
the Vienna Summit and Korea. In both of these cases the bureaucracy
was prodded to take adequate note of human rights considerations
(Mark Schneider of Derian’s staff is excellent at this) and in both cases
the President performed admirably, probably going beyond what any-
body expected of him. This points up one thing that you should follow
carefully—whenever the President is meeting with somebody who has
a human rights problem, insist on getting a shot at the briefing book
and talking points. See that they give the President some tough things
to say, if he feels so inclined.

A large volume of work is generated by people who write letters
on human rights issues—overwhelmingly Soviet cases. Generally this
is handled directly by State with an info copy to us. You will want to
monitor this though. Occasionally, especially on Congressionals, an an-
swer from here is more appropriate. Don’t, however, spend too much
time on it.

There are some issues that I have not gotten involved with but will
concern you. One is the Madrid CSCE conference and our preparations
for it. There was a lot of flak about Belgrade and Arthur Goldberg’s per-
formance there. And, of course, the Congressional group is hovering in
the wings. Another one is the Moscow Olympics—freedom of access
issues, etc. There is a certain amount of file material available on this
but, again, get Jessica to brief you.

There are two major operational issues. One is the annual submis-
sion of a human rights report to Congress on countries receiving US

190.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts and the Embassies in Cape Verde, the
Republic of Congo, and Uganda
203431. Inform Consuls as appropriate. Subject: Annual Country
State 207310.
1. Summary: 1979 Human Rights Country Reports will be required
on all UN member countries (other than the U.S.), including by Con-
gressional direction countries that do not receive assistance from the
U.S. Government. Reports will also be provided on North Korea,
Zimbabwe-Rhodesia, Taiwan, and Namibia, as well as on all U.S. aid
recipient countries whether or not they are UN members (i.e., all those
covered by 1978 reports). First drafts (in most cases provided by posts)
should be received in Washington during September and October on a
schedule to be established by regional bureaus, who will provide sup-
plementary guidance to this cable by septels.
2. The 1978 Country Reports on human rights practices, which
covered one hundred and fifteen countries, were a clear advance over
those submitted previously. As Deputy Secretary Christopher stated in
ref (A), the 1978 reports were “the most balanced and complete set of
reports that we have sent to Congress.” The 1978 reports demonstrated
increased recognition of the issues involved in advancing human rights
and, in most cases, a more complete and objective description of the
classified. Repeated for information to the consulates at Durban, Johannesburg, Kaduna,
and Lubumbashi. Drafted by Sieverts; cleared by Derian, Schneider, Vogelgesang, Run-
yon, Bushnell, Paul Molineaux (M/MO), Cleveland, George Lambrakis (NEA/RA), Zak,
Alden Irons (AF/I), Hewitt, John Sylvester (INR), Kenney, and Jennone Walker; ap-
proved by Christopher.
partment transmitted Christopher’s appreciation for the collective efforts of posts in pre-
paring the 1978 human rights country reports. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D790070–1020)
Christopher’s desire that posts produce “first rate” country reports on human rights
Stat. 359–378), introduced by Zablocki in March and signed into law by the President on
August 14, amended certain provisions of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, requiring
the Secretary of State to transmit a full and complete report regarding the status of inter-
nationally recognized human rights in countries receiving U.S. foreign assistance. The
bill also required reporting on the human rights practices of UN-member nations, even if
the nations were not recipients of U.S. foreign assistance. (Legislation on Foreign Relations

Human Rights
human rights situation in the countries covered. (All posts should have
copies of the 1978 reports. Any that do not should request them by
cable from the Department or from a U.S. Mission closer at hand.)
3. We want the 1979 reports to be as good as posts and the Depart-
ment can make them. We recognize this imposes a significant work re-
quirement on many posts, and assure all posts in advance that their
contributions to this project are essential and appreciated. This will be
especially true this year for the countries on whom reports were not
submitted in 1978. For those especially, we recommend that posts
begin immediately to gather information for the draft reports.
4. The format and presentation of the 1978 reports is applicable to
the 1979 reports and should be followed in both form and substance,
with changes noted below. In most cases posts can base their 1979 re-
port on the 1978 report as submitted to the Congress. The new reports
should recapitulate information from previous reports essential to pro-
vide context for the 1979 period, and should concentrate on trends, con-
period.
5. The following guidelines refer to general areas in which we
would like the 1979 reports strengthened:
A) Introductory section. It is important that this section provide a
brief overall human rights description of the country. While avoiding
detail, it should provide a capsule assessment of the current overall
human rights situation and trends. The country should be described in
general terms so that the human rights situation can be seen in the per-
spective of such factors as the country’s history, political and educa-
tional levels, financial resources, judicial institutions, and religious or
cultural context. The reader should be able to judge how well the
country is doing on human rights in light of available resources and
past performance.

B) In discussing political prisoners, posts should distinguish if ap-
propriate between “prisoners of conscience” and those who have been
convicted or detained because of politically-motivated acts of violence,
and comment on the fairness of treatment and trials of both categories.
Any other distinctions posts deem relevant should be included.
C) The existence of discrimination on grounds such as race, lan-
guage, religion, economic or social class, or national origin should be
described as may be relevant.

D) In preparing section 2., posts should draw on AID’s country de-
velopment strategy statements.

E) We are deleting the reference to freedom of “thought” under
section 3.A., since this concept does not lend itself to objective analysis.
F) Women’s rights. This needs to be covered with greater speci-
ficity in all reports. We do not wish to create a separate section for this,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
so the subject should be covered as appropriate under all headings, and
particularly under section 3.C. (see checklist below).

G) Labor rights. Greater attention should be paid to labor, in-
cluding freedom of association and protection of the right to organize,
the right to bargain collectively, abolition of forced labor, and the right
to equal employment opportunities. This information also should be
included under section 3.C.

H) Posts should consult reports on each country by responsible
non-governmental organizations, such as Amnesty International, the
International Commission of Jurists, and the International League of
Human Rights; and by appropriate organs of official international or-
ganizations such as the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights,
the UN Human Rights Commission, the European Human Rights
Commission, the International Labor Organization, and UNESCO.
These reports should be quoted when that is a good way to make a
point. Where there are significant charges in such reports, the charges
should be reported, with comments supporting or not supporting the
charges as the case may be. Country reports will be compared with
NGO and other reports, and we need to be sure our reports take ade-
quate account of what has been said in the other reports. (Country
desks will have the reports and will assure posts have them if needed
for drafting.)

I) Length. Reports should be concise but long enough to provide
thorough coverage of the human rights situation. Final 1978 reports
generally were appropriate in length and degree of specificity.
6. In preparation of the 1978 reports, the Deputy Secretary asked
posts and regional bureaus to ensure that the reports were “objective,
specific and responsive to the headings in the format.” (see ref (B)). Re-
porting for the 1979 country reports should also display these qualities.
Reports must be objective and accurate, even where this may conflict
with host government sensitivities. Specificity calls for serious efforts
to provide specific factual information. The checklist below is designed
to assist drafters in assuring that reports are responsive to the format.
7. The remainder of this telegram is a checklist developed in con-
nection with last year’s reports, which is intended to serve as an aid for
the preparation of the 1979 reports. The questions in the checklist vary
in their degree of applicability and significance in different countries,
but our experience with previous annual reports indicates they are rele-
vant in most cases. In general, the complete report should be respon-
sive to the points in the checklist, either by generalizations or by spe-
cific information.

Begin text checklist:
Introduction:

Human Rights
—Should provide brief overview of the country’s human rights sit-
uation, as well as historical, legal, cultural, religious, political, and
other factors to establish adequate perspective. See 5.A above.
Section 1:
Respect for the integrity of the person, including freedom from:
A. Torture
Is torture prohibited by law, or custom?
—Does it occur? How frequently? What methods are used? Is tor-
ture used in interrogation? What are the sources of reports of torture?
Are they credible reports?
—If torture does occur, is it authorized by the government? If not
authorized, is it condoned? If it occurs without government sanction,
what is the government’s response? Is anyone disciplined?
B. Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
—If such treatment occurs, when does it occur? Immediately after
arrest? During interrogation? While awaiting trial? During detention
after conviction?
—What form does it take?
—Are there summary executions? If so, to what extent?
—Have there been reports of prison officials using such treatment?
Are they credible reports? Or police? Does government condone such
actions, or does it seek to prevent them.
—What are prison or detention conditions like? Do those held
have adequate health care? Is diet adequate? Are they allowed visits
from family members? Attorneys of their choice? Are classes of impris-
onment used, i.e., between political and ordinary prisoners?
—Does the International Committee of the Red Cross have access
to detainees?

C. Arbitrary arrest and imprisonment
—Are there political prisoners? (see para. 5.B. above.) How many?
If our estimate differs from that of human rights organizations, can we
explain this difference?
—Does the government acknowledge holding political prisoners?
If it does, how does it justify their detention or imprisonment?
—Does habeas corpus or its equivalent exist? Is it honored in
practice?
—Does the law permit “preventive detention?” Are there safe-
guards on preventive detention? Does it have a fixed term? Can it be
extended?
—Are persons arrested and held without charge? How long can
they be thus held?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Are persons held clandestinely?
—Do persons “disappear” for protracted periods?
D. Denial of fair public trial
—Recognizing that legal systems vary, is a right to fair public trial
provided for by law? By practice or custom? Is this right honored in
practice?
—Are defendants entitled to counsel? Does counsel have free
access to defendants? May consultations between defendants and
counsel be held in private? Are there incidents of harassment of de-
fense counsel by the government?
—Are defendants made fully aware of the charges brought against
them? May they and their lawyers inform themselves of the evidence
on which the charges are based?
—Are the courts independent of executive or military control?
—Are there special courts to deal with security or political of-
fenses? If so, do they adhere to the same standards as control the courts
considering ordinary offenses?
—Are civilians tried by military courts? If so, under what circum-
stances? What standards control military courts?
—Have there been summary executions? Who orders or controls
them?
—On what basis if any have such practices been justified?
E. Invasion of the home
—Is the sanctity of the home safeguarded by law and/or custom?
Is it respected in practice?
—Are judicial warrants required before entering a home? What
standards control the issuance of warrants?
—Are there allegations of illegal entry into homes? If so, how fre-
quent are such allegations made? Are responsible officials disciplined
for unauthorized entries or are such acts condoned?
Section 2:
Government policies relating to the fulfillment of such vital needs
as food, shelter, health care and education
—What is the character of the country’s economy? Rural or urban?
Capitalist, socialist, mixed or what? Does it confront special problems?
—What is the distribution of income? Of wealth? Of land? Are
there efforts to bring about increased opportunity and equity? Is the tax
system progressive or regressive?
—Is property privately owned, and is this right protected?
—Is adequate shelter a significant problem?
—Is health care available? How extensively?

Human Rights
—Is education free? Up to what level? Is it adequate in rural areas?
What is the level of literacy?
—Is fulfillment of vital human needs hindered by corruption? If
so, what is being done about it?

Section 3:
Respect for civil and political liberties, including:
A. Freedom of speech, press, religion, and assembly
—Are these freedoms guaranteed by law or custom and respected
in practice?
—Is there censorship? What are the subjects of censorship?
—Are the media—especially the press—subject to control? If the
media are government-owned or controlled, are opposition views
aired? Is criticism of the government by others permitted? Have jour-
nalists been intimidated or imprisoned? Newspapers closed?
—May religion be freely practiced? Are any sects or religions sup-
pressed while others are unimpeded? Is there persecution or harass-
ment of any religious groups? Are any religious groups discriminated
against?
—Are there any impediments to assembly? Are certain groups al-
lowed to hold public meetings and not others?
—Are there impediments to the freedom of association? Are par-
ticular groups or individuals denied the right to associate? Interest
groups, workers, politicians? Limitations on purposes of activities?
B. Freedom of movement within the country, foreign travel and
emigration
—Are these freedoms guaranteed by law or custom and respected
in practice?
—Is domestic travel circumscribed or controlled? What is the ra-
tionale for such control?
—Are limits placed on travel abroad? Or the right to return? What
are the reasons for limitations on travel abroad? Do excessive passport
fees limit the right to travel abroad? (See answers to State 161057.)
C. Freedom to participate in the political process
—What is the character of the political system? Authoritarian, dic-
tatorial, democratic? Multi-party, two-party, single-party? Are any
parties outlawed? Do opposition parties function freely? Have they
access to the media? Can they hold public meetings?
referred to a study that compared American passport fees to those charged by other na-
tions and requested that posts advise the Department concerning passport fees and expi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Is participation in the political system open to all citizens? If so,
are there any groups who are denied citizenship? If some groups of cit-
izens are denied the right to participate, what is the basis for this
denial?
—What is the status of women? Are they legally equal to men? In
practice, do women participate freely in social, economic and political
life? Is their participation growing, or do they tend to remain in “tradi-
tional” roles? Are there social, cultural or religious factors which inhibit
women from playing a larger role? Is there economic discrimination?
—Is there an active trade union movement? Is it granted by law the
right to organize, strike, bargain collectively and lobby?
Section 4:
Government attitude and record regarding international and
non-governmental investigation of alleged violations of human rights
—What is the government’s record and attitude regarding such
investigations?
—If there have been discussions or communications with interna-
tional or non-governmental human rights groups, what has been the
subject and what has been their tenor?
—Has the government permitted investigations by individuals or
teams sent from outside? Has it facilitated their work?
Vance

191.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance,

192.

Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, September 17, 1979
SUBJECT
The Soviet Union and Human Rights in Equatorial Guinea and Uganda
Your memorandum of August 21, 19792 asked us to review how
we might publicize Soviet, Cuban and East European support for the
former regimes in Equatorial Guinea and Uganda which violated
human rights so grossly. The Department has looked at the evidence
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and has concluded there is no basis for a US effort to pinpoint support
by these countries for the two African regimes.

While the Soviets provided Equatorial Guinea with military equip-
ment and training and the Cubans at one time had as many as 400 ad-
visors in the country (probably half of them military), the Chinese vir-
tually dominated the local market with their goods, built major
telecommunications projects and helped train Macias’ National Guard.
There is even an unconfirmed report that Chinese advisors helped pro-
tect Macias from rebel troops almost up to the very end. For this reason
we believe any specific criticism of the Soviet Union and Cuba for
helping Macias would also implicate the Chinese. A number of African
states, including Nigeria and Cameroon, also maintained friendly rela-
tions with Macias and may well be offended by a US campaign on So-
viet support for Equatorial Guinea.

Soviet support for Uganda is clearcut (although there was virtually
no Cuban involvement). At the same time, however, a large propor-
tion of Soviet military equipment provided to Uganda was transported
through Kenya or by airlift over the Sudan. Amin remains popular in
the southern Sudan, his tribal home, and according to a recent uncon-
firmed report, is in the southern Sudan at the present time. All
Uganda’s POL, on which Amin’s regime depended, came through
Kenya. The Kenyans maintained friendly relations with Amin almost
to the end of his rule and consistently refused to interdict supplies to
Uganda until the very end. Moreover, several US business concerns,
with US Government approval, were involved in providing equipment
and advice to Amin.

Both Kenya and the Sudan are, of course, among the African states
most critical of the Soviet Union and of Soviet policy. We believe it
would be embarrassing to both countries if their own relations with
Amin, broad tolerance of his regime and facilitation of Soviet military
supplies through or over their countries were subsequently to be
brought to the fore in some way as a result of US efforts to increase in-
ternational awareness of Soviet support for Amin.

Human Rights
The East Europeans do not appear to have played a pivotal role in
supporting either the Macias or the Amin regime (although the East
Germans may have provided some arms to Uganda).

Peter Tarnoff
the “circumstances” preventing governments from ratifying interna-
tional human rights treaties, in particular the Genocide Convention, the
International Covenants on Human Rights, the Racial Discrimination
Convention, and various agreements on slavery.

The Secretary-General will request UN member states, which have
not ratified these treaties, to inform the UN of the circumstances pre-
venting their ratification. A working group will then examine the re-
plies and consider ways of encouraging and assisting governments to
ratify these treaties, including inviting government representatives to
meetings with group members.

The resolution establishing the working group and the new pro-
cedure is attached. The working group will be composed of five
members of the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and Protection of Minorities, a sub-body of the Commission on Human
Rights. The group will meet annually, beginning next summer. The res-
olution was adopted by the Sub-Commission September 5 and spon-
sored by Sub-Commission experts from France, Egypt, and Peru (who
do not serve as government representatives).

To date, the United States has not ratified any of the treaties listed
except the slavery conventions. We therefore can expect to receive a
letter from the Secretary-General requesting an explanation, which the
working group will examine next summer. We also can expect interna-
tional and public spot-light on our non-ratification record in a forum
where we already have been subjected to considerable embarrassment
on this score. However, in the past, our record was predominantly cited
in speeches by communist countries and other states seeking to dis-
credit us. In the future, our non-ratification record will be the subject of
formal UN examination and by a wide spectrum of states.

In the absence of ratification, the new procedure will tend to make
it more difficult to obtain support for the human rights objectives we
pursue at the UN.
194.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to
Secretary of State Vance
Washington, October 22, 1979
Goals and Objectives for the Next Eighteen Months
Bureaucratic
—Full participation for HA in the Foreign Policy decision making
process. Despite the high priority the President has assigned to human
Human Rights
rights in U.S. foreign policy HA is still a very junior partner in the deci-
sion making process. We are often excluded entirely.

The rationale in some cases is that HA’s need to know disappears
in any crisis and that the issues are now “political”, not human rights.
We saw that in the Nicaragua special mission2 in its most discouraging
form. We were routinely cut off from cables, meetings, and discussions.
Frequently we are told that our views are “known” and taken into con-
sideration. However, we don’t get to make our case. This is bad for
policy. It is bad for our standing in the bureaucracy. It does not serve
the President to present him papers so sanitized that there are no real
choices in the human rights field. There have been some pluses for him
in human rights and some severe criticisms for failures on issues which
I believe he never had a chance to consider adequately. Our calling
things back or raising issues again after the decisions have been made is
handicapping and inefficient. We should participate in the SCC
meetings on certain countries; someone should be able to make the case
for human rights considerations. The result too often across the board
is: “The President has decided”, when we have no sense of the human
rights issue being raised and argued. Correcting this situation will re-
quire your and Mr. Christopher’s attention. It will also necessitate a
more active effort by HA to overcome still formidable bureaucratic re-
sistance to the policy within the Department and the Foreign Service.
—Adequate Staffing
From the outset HA has been hampered by too few slots and inad-
equate staffing. The Foreign Service personnel system has failed to pro-
duce the quality officers we require to staff our positions. Consequently
our officers have been enourmously overburdened. The system is ex-
ceptionally slow in replacing officers who have completed their tours
in HA. Our AF officer3 left in late June and we do not have a replace-
ment even now. Our Security Assistance/PM officer left in January and
was replaced six and a half months later. Our country reports officer
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
was on overcomplement and we didn’t get a slot for that job for many
months. We are still operating with an overcomplement officer for the
second country reports slot6 and it took several months for the system
to produce an officer. Our asylum officer7 is said to be the USG’s fore-
most authority on asylum, but his rank is not commensurate with his
duties or skills. He is unspeakably overworked and our only assistance
to him is an erratic overcomplement system. We have had to resort to
outside hires which have been a source of some criticism. Personnel
must be persuaded that HA deserves as much priority in receiving
qualified personnel as the geographic bureaus. Service in HA should be
recognized. A number of our officers and potential officers have told us
that their personnel counselors have advised them not to come to work
in HA. Our officers have received good onward assignments although I
was disappointed at the way HA fared in the recent promotion list.
—Improved Human Rights Training
This is necessary for Foreign Service officers and later for other
USG officers with foreign affairs responsibilities. There has been an un-
fortunate tendency for some officers to disparage the human rights
policy and occasionally HA in their official and unofficial contacts.
If we are taken seriously, have the quality personnel needed to
staff our positions and can attenuate bureaucratic resistance to the
policy, we can make more progress toward achieving our substantive
goals. These are:
—Human Rights Strategy Papers for Problem Countries. These
should be the product of HA and Regional Bureau collaboration.
—Senate Ratification of International Human Rights Treaties. HA,
H and Department principals should work to ensure their favorable
consideration. U.S. failure to ratify the Genocide Convention, Interna-
tional Covenants, Racial Discrimination Convention and American
Convention seriously impairs our credibility in the human rights areas.
—Development of a mechanism to permit effective response to
complaints about U.S. domestic human rights violations. This will re-
quire close coordination between HA, IO and the Department of Justice
and the Civil Rights Commission. We might consider the creation of an
interagency group along the lines of the Interagency Committee on
Human Rights and Foreign Assistance.
—Closer cooperation with the NSC to coordinate the activities of
and promote acceptance by domestic agencies of the human rights
policy.

Human Rights
—A more creative human rights approach at the United Nations
including a more forthcoming position on apartheid and racial discrim-
ination in Southern Africa. We need a major review of our human
rights policy towards South Africa in which HA, IO, AF, and S/P
would participate. We must avoid a repeat of the incomprehensible de-
cision to support seating Pol Pot’s representative.
—Fuller integration of human rights considerations in our eco-
nomic decision making (Ex-Im, CCC, etc.)
—A re-examination of our arms transfer policy with special atten-
tion to the human rights factor. Restructuring of the Arms Export Con-
trol Board (AECB) so that participants express their bureau or agency
views, make proposals, vote on them and provide a record of votes and
arguments to the decision makers. It is now a rubber stamp operation.
There is no logical forum for all policy points to be openly discussed
and considered.
—Closely related to the study of arms transfers is a special study of
how to promote human rights most effectively in violating countries
with which we have a security relationship (e.g., Korea, Philippines.
Our record here is poor). This could be independent of the country
strategy papers or incorporated in them.
—OAS. Full funding of the Inter-American Court.
—CSCE. Systematic preparation for the Madrid Review Confer-
ence requires the immediate appointment of a full-time Ambassador
and staff to coordinate the process. It also will require your and Mr.
Christopher’s attention to the problem of how we deal with the CSCE
Commission.
—Interagency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance.
Notification time between decisions and votes is variably inadequate,
not providing time for explaining our position, or garnering the sup-
port of like minded states. The inevitable conclusion is that we are not
serious about this human rights tool.

Overview
We have done more in human rights than any other administra-
tion and have some positive results to show for the policy. We have
done less than we could or should have. Our policy is erratic and con-
fusing. We send a mixed message; in the past we sent a consistent one,
(e.g., it’s business as usual), so a mixed message is an improvement. But
we should be striving for a consistent message. We could achieve that

195.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Kreisberg) to the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake)
Washington, October 23, 1979
SUBJECT
Christopher’s Priorities Meeting with Maynes
[Omitted here is a synopsis of Christopher’s meeting with
Maynes.]

SUBJECT
Christopher’s Priorities Lunch with Derian
I am sorry they didn’t have a doggie bag for the dessert, it was fat-
tening. Chris got started by asking the first question on our discussion
list on page 3 and never really got beyond that, although the essential
issues involved in the second paragraph of page 1 on our memo3 were
batted back and forth (with Patt doing most of the batting) for nearly
one hour and a half. Chris essentially listened to Patt’s complaints
Human Rights
about Vaky and Holbrooke (Moose is great, the problems in NEA are
understandable and Patt sympathized, EUR is unhelpful but not hos-
tile, Jules Katz is actively hostile but totally open in his hostility which
Patt finds refreshing). Christopher was quietly resistant to most of
Patt’s arguments (a good deal which was explicitly directed against
what she and Mike Schneider clearly feel was a reluctance on Chris’s
own part to defend HA by giving them access to information on ARA
issues). The lunch went on so long, largely I think, because Chris
wanted to let Patt get her frustrations off her chest. (At one point in de-
scribing her existential way of getting access to the Secretary, Patt
noted that she had had a “quickie” with the Secretary last week—a
metaphor I would not have urged her to repeat!) It is conceivable that
Chris may do something about Patt’s concerns that HA have more
access to NODIS and that its views be solicited more actively on policy
issues, but I doubt it. He is clearly sensitive to the confrontational and
ideological approach HA takes, and Patt’s comments at lunch under-
scored these, although she emphasized her own awareness of broad
strategic policy issues such as Korean security several times.
The only really concrete outcome of the lunch was the clearance of
the cable4 you brought in.

Paul Kreisberg
Attachment
Action Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Kreisberg) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)
Washington, October 23, 1979
Human Rights Goals and Objectives
Patt’s memo to you7 deals with three broad issues:
1. Her belief that human rights considerations (and HA as a bu-
reau) should carry greater weight in foreign policy decisions. She cites
the Nicaragua special mission; the decision to support seating Pol Pot’s
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
representative at the UN; and South Korean policy as examples of in-
stances when HA was cut out of the decision-making process.
We believe she is right that there is a widespread perception in the
Department that the emphasis given earlier to human rights has gradu-
ally taken a backseat in Administration concerns to security factors,
and therefore that neither human rights considerations nor HA need be
given as much attention as formerly. This has led a number of Bureaus
to downplay human rights issues and may have increased the sense of
an adversarial relationship between HA and the rest of the Department
on both sides of the issues. The key conceptual divergence from the bu-
reaus is at the end of Patt’s memo where she emphasizes the need for us
to convey a “consistent message” on human rights where the Bureaus
argue human rights is only one of our policy interests and we must also
convey other messages as well.

Patt makes three procedural suggestions for better routine integra-
tion of human rights concern in decision making, all of which are at
least as much complaints about what decisions are being made as how:
—Fuller integration of human rights considerations into economic
decisions such as Ex-Im and CCC programs. Our sense is that these are
being adequately considered in the Interagency Group.
—Restructuring the AECB. Patt’s right that there is now no sys-
tematic factoring of human rights concerns into specific decisions, as
there is with the Interagency Group for economic assistance. But S/P’s
attempt to assess the decision record on these issues (in February of
1979) led us to conclude that the policy is about right even if the proce-
dures are somewhat less neat than they might be?
—Earlier notification to other donor governments of MDB votes.
Patt is right that decisions a few days before major votes may reduce
the seriousness with which other governments take our “consulta-
tions”. Part of the problem is the inability of the US representatives on
the MDB to give us sufficient advance notice of pending loans.
2. Personnel issues, and especially better staffing of HA and
human rights training for other officers.
—Too few slots. Our impression is that HA does not now have a
numbers problem but that stronger management would help inside the
bureau.
—Personnel’s “failure” to fill slots—quickly—with quality people;
and
—Lack of interest in human rights training on the part of other
FSOs.

Human Rights
The last two issues are related. I’m not familiar with the details of
either problem but suspect both relate to HA’s adversarial relationship
with much of the building and the consequent reluctance of many to
become more directly involved with the human rights policy. We can’t
force human rights assignments, or training, on unwilling officers.
3. HA priorities.
—Strategy papers for problem countries (with particular emphasis
on how to promote human rights in violating countries with which we
have security relationships). The results were disappointing when we
and others tried a few examples earlier in the administration. The
strategy paper concept may be overly rigid.
—Senate Ratification of International Human Rights Treaties. We
agree this should remain an Administration priority and you will recall
it is also on Roberts Owen’s priority list for L.
—Better US human rights performance. We agree with Patt that a
mechanism to permit effective response to complaints about US do-
mestic performance would be useful, especially for the Madrid CSCE
review conference. You may want to ask whether there is any mecha-
nism for this at present. We’re less sure what she has in mind with the
recommendation for closer cooperation with the NSC to coordinate ac-
tivities of, and promote acceptance by, domestic agencies of the human
rights policy. You may want to explore this.
—A “more creative” human rights approach at the UN. We believe
HA already has an adequate voice in such decisions.
—Full funding of the Inter-American Court. We aren’t sure what’s
involved here, and HA’s memorandum arrived too late for us to try to
find out.
—CSCE. This will indeed be a major HA concern for the next year.
We agree on the need to appoint an Ambassador promptly as does
EUR and we assume Patt is aware of the state of play.
Questions for Discussion
You might want to explore the following questions with Patt and
her colleagues:10
—Does HA perceive that it has an adversarial relationship with the
rest of the building? If so, what might be done about it?
—Can specific examples be cited of what country strategy reports
might enable us to do better?
—What military assistance decisions does HA think would have
been different had the procedural changes they recommend in the

196.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
THE IMPACT ON U.S. FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNTRY REPORTS
as amended, direct the State Department to submit Reports on human
rights practices in countries receiving U.S. security or economic assist-
ance. An amendment adopted in 1979 expanded this directive to re-
quire Reports on all foreign countries that are members of the United
Nations, as well as on all countries receiving U.S. assistance. Reports
are also being written in 1979 on North Korea, Zimbabwe-Rhodesia,
Taiwan, and Namibia.

The State Department has sent to the Congress three sets of Re-
tion, will be delivered by January 31, 1980. The Reports are written by
the State Department on the basis of information from a wide range of
sources, including reports from our Embassies in the countries con-
cerned and reports from official international organizations and non-
governmental organizations.

In preparing the Reports, the State Department has tried to pro-
vide as complete and objective an assessment as possible of the human
rights situation in the countries covered. Reports have been as specific
and accurate as permitted by available information, even where this
has impinged on sensitivities of the governments or countries con-
Human Rights
cerned. The Reports have sought to describe the human rights situation
in the context of a country’s history, political conditions, education
levels, economic resources and development, judicial institutions, and
religious and cultural traditions. Efforts have been made to improve
the Reports each year, in terms of comprehensiveness, additional fac-
tual information, and coverage of aspects of human rights in which
Members and Committees of the Congress have taken special interest.
Each year when the Reports appear, our posts give copies to their
host governments, and many foreign embassies receive them in Wash-
ington. Frequently delivery of the Report leads to a discussion of the
U.S. human rights policy and enables U.S. officials to call attention to
the overall objectives and concerns of that policy, as spelled out by the
Congress and the Administration. In many cases this dialogue con-
tinues over time in relation to specific issues, for which the Human
Rights Reports provide general background. In some cases, described
below, foreign countries have objected strongly to certain portions of a
Report, particularly when it describes serious violations of human
rights. In a few other cases, governments have objected expressly to the
fact that Reports are prepared at all, regarding them as interference in
internal affairs. We explain that the Reports cover a wide range of
countries, that no country has been singled out for criticism, and that all
are described using a standard format.

There have been both benefits and costs associated with the annual
preparation and submission of these public Reports. The benefits are as
follows:
First, the Department’s view on current human rights practices of
foreign assistance recipients aids Congressional evaluation of budget
requests, and the Reports also furnish a useful reference in Executive
Branch decisions on foreign assistance.

Second, the preparation of the Reports stimulates within the De-
partment a disciplined and regular fact-finding and analysis process.
Third, the Reports enumerate human rights practices in consider-
able detail, communicating our concerns with a high degree of speci-
ficity to the governments involved. The Reports themselves often pro-
vide an impetus for bilateral discussions with host governments
concerning the specific abuses cited.

Fourth, the American public is better informed regarding these
conditions as a result of the publication of the Reports.
Finally, the Reports have come to symbolize the continuing impor-
tance of human rights concerns to our foreign policy decision-making.
We have also experienced the following costs:
First, when the statute required Reports only on countries re-
ceiving aid, many countries with poor human rights records, particu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
larly the eastern bloc governments, were not covered. This lack led to
criticism, and also deprived us of many of the benefits described above
with respect to those countries. The 1979 amendment has remedied the
situation.

Second, since we do not control the timing of the public release of
the Reports, publication can conflict either with the timing of other bi-
lateral pursuits or with the timing of the human rights strategy itself in
a particular country.

Finally, the public release of the Reports produces friction in bilat-
eral relations with some countries, and occasionally complicates
achievement of other U.S. objectives.

In most instances, however, the impact on our bilateral relations—
whether positive or negative—has been modest. A more detailed de-
scription of the impact of the reports on U.S. foreign relations is pro-
vided, region by region, in the sections that follow.

Europe and North America
Most European countries have had little or no official reaction to
the Reports, and the Reports had little impact on our bilateral relations
with those countries. The Federal Republic of Germany and Yugoslavia
registered minor objections to specific aspects of the 1978 Reports.
France objected officially to the fact that a Report was prepared on its
human rights practices. The Governments of Turkey, Greece, and
Cyprus each expressed displeasure with the Reports, focusing pri-
marily on the discussion of Cyprus in each of these Reports. Since Re-
ports on the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe will be prepared for the
first time in 1979, there has been no reaction thus far from these
countries.

Central and South America
Because U.S. policies on human rights issues are generally well-
known in Central and South America, the publication of the Reports
has had little impact on our relations with most nations in that region.
Most host governments review them with interest but generally offer
little or no official comment. In many cases, the Reports have served as
a useful resource for the discussion of specific human rights issues in
Latin American countries, and for internal human rights reviews re-
lated to aid decisions and U.S. votes in the international financial insti-
tutions. The Reports generally have had the positive effect of reaf-
firming to host governments our commitment to human rights, and of
reminding individual countries of specific issues which deserve special
attention.

While a few countries—for example, El Salvador, Jamaica, and
Uruguay—have criticized alleged inaccuracies in the Reports, the

Human Rights
strongest reactions have come from governments which object to the
very existence of the Reports as interference in their internal affairs.
Brazil, for example, removed itself from the reporting requirement in
previous years by rejecting U.S. assistance. (A Report on Brazil, as a
UN member state, will, however, be prepared in 1979.) Most negative
reactions to the Reports, however, reflect the continuing discomfort of
some Latin American governments with our general human rights
stance.

East Asia and Pacific
There has been little reaction to the Reports in East Asian and Pa-
cific countries, from either the governments or the public, and they
have had no significant impact on our bilateral relations. Some coun-
tries in this region have indicated to us indirectly that they regard the
very existence of the Reports as an intrusion into internal affairs. In
some cases where a Report was critical, supporters of the government
concerned have attacked its veracity, while critics of the government
have praised the Report or criticized it for not going far enough.
While the Philippines sent the State Department a thirteen-page
response from the Philippine Solicitor General attacking the Report as a
rehash of “half-truths,” our Embassy in the Philippines believes the Re-
port has been helpful to it in representations to the Government on
human rights issues. The Republic of Korea and Indonesia have not
reacted officially to the Reports.

Africa
Most African countries had little or no official comment on the Re-
ports. In some cases where a country’s record has been good, the Re-
port predictably had little impact. In others, where the government has
displayed little sensitivity to human rights issues, the government ap-
parently preferred not to engage us on this subject, and the local press
was not free to comment.

The Reports have, however, had a positive effect on our bilateral
relations with a number of countries in the region, where they have
provided a useful supplement to a continuing dialogue on human
rights. One African President told our Embassy that the U.S. human
rights policy was “useful” in “disturbing the conscience of government
leaders everywhere.” In another country, which has had a poor human
rights record, the Report contributed to an increased comprehension of
the role human rights play in United States Government decisions.
In a few countries in the region, the Reports have had a negative
impact on our bilateral relations. For example, one government

197.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
4020. Inform Consuls. Subject: Annual Human Rights Reports. Ref:
1. Entire text Limited Official Use.
2. The Department is in the process of completing the preparation
of the annual human rights reports. The contributions submitted by
posts abroad have been, as expected, of high quality and are appreci-
ated. They have helped the Department in developing accurate, bal-
Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by Kenneth Rogers; cleared by Tim Dunn (ARA/
PPC), Irons, Calvin Konner (S/S–O), Clapp, Rizik, Vogelgesang, Jennone Walker, Derian,
and Sieverts; approved by Christopher.

Human Rights
anced, meaningful and useful reports. The internal Department proce-
dures related to the publication have progressed well thus far.
3. It has come to my attention that there have been at least two
cases, and possibly others, of our personnel showing draft human
rights reports to, or discussing their contents with, representatives of
foreign Embassies in Washington or foreign officials abroad. I was con-
cerned to hear this, and hope that it has not happened widely.
4. Draft reports are not to be shown to, or discussed with foreign
governments or their representatives. This applies both to the report on
that country, and to reports on any other countries in which a gov-
ernment might be interested. This is absolutely essential to the integrity
of the reports. We do not, of course, “negotiate” the contents of the re-
ports with foreign governments, and we must avoid any activity that
could even suggest that we are doing so.
5. We will, as usual, inform Embassies of the reports’ publication
date3 and when posts may discuss the completed reports with host
governments.

Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

198.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to David
Martin of the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs
Washington, February 29, 1980

199.

Editorial Note
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance wrote out a formal letter of resigna-
tion on April 21, 1980, following President Jimmy Carter’s decision to
launch a rescue operation on April 24 in an attempt to free the Amer-
ican hostages in Iran. In his letter, Vance noted, “I know how deeply
you have pondered your decision on Iran. I wish I could support you in
it. But for the reasons we have discussed I cannot.” The complete text of
Vance’s resignation letter is printed in Department of State Bulletin,
June 1980, page 2. Vance delivered the letter to Carter the afternoon of
April 21. In his memoirs, Vance stated that he “wanted to make it clear
that I would resign whether or not the mission was sucessful.” (Vance,
Hard Choices, page 411) Vance recounted: “I agreed to his request not to
make my resignation public until after the rescue attempt, and to re-
main in my position until the mission was completed.” (Ibid.) For the
text of Carter’s April 25 address to the nation, wherein he indicated that
the rescue operation had been cancelled, see Public Papers: Carter,
with Carter at the White House; Carter gave Vance a letter accepting
Vance’s resignation. In his farewell remarks at the Department of State
on April 28, Vance indicated that he would “support fully” the Presi-
dent’s policies related to other foreign policy issues and demurred
from further discussion of the details informing his resignation. (De-
partment of State Bulletin, June 1980, page 2)
On April 29, the President announced from the Briefing Room at
the White House that he had designated Senator Edmund S. Muskie
(D–Maine) as his Secretary of State nominee, touting Muskie’s “exten-
sive knowledge of foreign affairs.” Following Carter’s announcement,
Muskie offered a brief statement, remarking: “The world is in turmoil.
The issues are complex. But I believe that in this instability the United
States must be perceived as stable and as a source of strength in the free
world. As Secretary of State, I will devote my full energies to achieve
these goals. I respond to this challenge with genuine hope. America re-
mains a land of great opportunity. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book
In a White House ceremony on May 8, Muskie was sworn in as Secre-
tary of State. For the President’s and Muskie’s remarks, see Public
A briefing paper prepared by the Bureau of Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs on May 9 for inclusion in Secretary Muskie’s
briefing book summarized the historical antecedents for the adminis-
tration’s human rights policy and called for a “reinfusion of high level
commitment and support to preserve and build upon the accomplish-
ments of the past 3½ years.” The paper outlined six major objectives:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“High Level Commitment and Support
“We need soon broad reaffirmation of the policy by the President
and the Secretary, along the lines of the President’s statement of De-
cember 6, 1978.

“Ratification of International Human Rights Treaties
“Five international human rights treaties are before the Senate: The
Genocide Convention, the International Covenant on Civil and Polit-
ical Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cul-
tural Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and the American Convention on Human Rights.
Adopted by the UN and Organization of American States, they have
been ratified by the vast majority of countries. U.S. failure to ratify the
treaties undercuts our efforts in the human rights area. A strong early
effort by the Secretary to persuade the Senate to act favorably would
signal his personal commitment to the human rights policy and would
reassure the human rights community that the policy will be pursued
vigorously.

“The Genocide Convention merits top priority. Adopted by the
UN in 1948, it has been ratified by more than 80 states and has deep
symbolic significance. The President has strongly urged ratification,
and the Administration should make strenuous active efforts to
achieve this, preferably before the Madrid CSCE Review meeting in
November.

“CSCE Review Conference
“The human rights community would welcome strong affirmation
of our commitment to solid[ify] human rights gains at the Madrid Re-
view Conference, maintaining balance in CSCE with military security
issues. The community and the various ethnic organizations which
follow CSCE are aware that efforts to develop an allied position on mil-
itary security issues have not been matched by progress in the human
rights area. We must strive to eliminate the imbalance.

“U.S. Leadership Role in UN Human Rights Bodies
“Our leadership can be enhanced by adopting positions more re-
sponsive to the human rights concerns of non-aligned countries. The
recent session of the UN Human Rights Commission, one of the most
successful, was marked by our close cooperation with non-aligned
countries. HA feels strongly that we should further strengthen this alli-
ance by: stronger support for UN actions against apartheid in South Af-
rica, an evenhanded position on the human rights conditions of Arabs
in the Israel-occupied territories; effective efforts to respond to com-
plaints lodged against the U.S. by Native Americans and other of our
minority groups; responsive positions on economic and social rights, in
particular the right to development. A strengthened alliance would

Human Rights
serve to isolate communist and radical (left and right) countries which
seek to undermine UN human rights efforts.

“Human Rights and the IFIs
“Under the International Financial Institutions Act of 1977, the
U.S. Executive Directors to the Multilateral Development Banks are re-
quired to oppose any loan to any country whose government engages
in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights. Thus, all
MDB loans to all countries are screened by the Working Group of the
Inter-Agency (Christopher) Committee on Human Rights and Foreign
Assistance (IAGHR). To date the U.S. has opposed 87 loans to 16 coun-
tries. Concern of human rights advocates in the Congress that the re-
view process be institutionalized has led to proposals to legislate the
continued functioning of the IAGHR. HA favors the proposals. Human
rights groups are watching to see if an assiduous human rights review
of MDB loans continues to produce a vigorous policy and a firm U.S.
stand in the banks.

“Human Rights and Security Assistance
“We need to ensure that human rights concerns are more system-
atically factored into our decision-making on security assistance. HA
believes military aid and sales should be screened for human rights by
an interagency working group, perhaps reporting to the Inter-Agency
Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance.”
The remainder of the briefing paper detailed a variety of country-
specific issues. (Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Hu-
SHUM Policies 1980)
According to a May 21 memorandum from the Executive Secre-
tariat to all Bureau principals, at Muskie’s May 21 morning staff
meeting, the Secretary had requested that each Bureau prepare a list
and description of high priority items. (Ibid.) Responding to this re-
quest, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs Patricia Derian sent forward a 1-page briefing memorandum
later
that
day.

Derian’s
lead
item
focused
on
overall
policy
implementation:
“Institutionalization of the human rights policy—Despite extensive
legislation and the President’s commitment, human rights issues are
not yet adequately incorporated into decision-making. We need more
systematically to apply human rights criteria to security assistance
issues. HA has not been included at relevant PRCs when issues signifi-
cant to human rights are raised, e.g., last week’s PRC on Argentina. The
regional bureaus continue to evince excessive ‘clientitis.’ Many posts
overseas fail to do their part in implementing the policy.”
The remainder of Derian’s briefing memorandum discussed
human rights situations in Argentina, Israel, Korea, and Liberia. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
200.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to
Acting Secretary of State Christopher
Washington, April 30, 1980
Problems Over the Next Several Weeks and Months
REF: S/S Memorandum of April 292
1. Credibility of Policy. The human rights community and the public
increasingly think the policy has been downgraded if not discarded.
We need soon a strong Presidential statement similar to that of De-
cember 6, 19783 and an early address on the policy by the Secretary
designate.
2. Over Identification with Repressive Governments. There is a grow-
ing tendency to permit other policy concerns to dilute our human
rights principles and policy. I am apprehensive about the evolution of
our relationships with Argentina, Zaire, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Philip-
pines, Guatemala and Pakistan. We need to examine them carefully, in
terms of our human rights policy and our long term interests. We are
too “close” to these repressive and unstable governments.
3. Asylum. The massive influx of Cubans and Haitians into Florida
is placing tremendous stress on HA’s ability to review asylum requests.
We have over 10,000 from Haitians that will have to be re-evaluated
once litigation in southern Florida is resolved. All Cuban cases require
case-by-case asylum review. We will be swamped. Over 175 other
asylum cases (mostly Iranian) are received each week, further straining
our understaffed capacity.
4. Human Rights Conventions. Passage is urgent to attenuate the
criticism we will receive in Madrid for our failure to ratify.
5. CSCE. In view of the recent arrival of key players in the Madrid
exercise, you personally should provide broad policy guidance for our
delegation head.

Human Rights
6. Central America. The interagency working group on El Salvador
was expanded into a Central America working group because of polit-
ical developments in Nicaragua and the need to devise a strategy to
deal with growing violence in Guatemala. Nongovernmental organiza-
tions strenuously opposed and are not reconciled to our decision to
provide security assistance to El Salvador. We justify our assistance as
intended to advance human rights. In view of this public commitment,
and the difficult decisions to be taken HA should participate in the pro-
posed PRC on Central America.
7. Security Assistance. We need a better mechanism to ensure that
human rights concerns are factored into the allocation of security assist-
ance and that security assistance is coordinated with economic assist-
ance. Our first preference is for the Christopher Committee to assume
this responsibility. Alternatives are the creation of a new committee
analogous to the Interagency Committee or an AECB with a broadened
mandate.
8. Korea. General Chun Doo Hwan’s recent press conference, and
his assumption of the KCIA directorship, make me profoundly un-
easy. We must continue to press the ROK to lift martial law and con-
tinue political liberalization. We must disabuse General Chun of incip-
ient notions he may harbor of perpetuating the Yushin system or
becoming a new Park.
9. Taiwan. We anticipate heightened interest and concern from
Congress and other groups about the Taiwan authorities’ handling of
the Kaohsiung incident last December. Eight participants received
sentences from 12 years to life imprisonment. Thirty-three others are
currently on trial facing lesser charges. Ten more (including the leader
of the United Presbyterian Church in Taiwan) were indicted on April
29 and will be tried in a military court. The trials, while open, were a
sham. Signed confessions were extracted through intimidation and tor-
ture. These trials have serious implications for Taiwan’s internal sta-
bility. The authorities have effectively removed the most potent oppo-
sitionists from the political scene and delayed progress toward the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
process of political liberalization on the island. We must consider how
we can reverse this disturbing trend. One possibility is review of as-
pects of our military sales relationship.
10. OPIC. The Department is accused of laxity in enforcing Section
239 of the Foreign Assistance Act. Only two applications for OPIC
insurance have been denied on human rights grounds. While critics
grudgingly accept the interpretation that OPIC will be denied only
when it involves direct assistance to a violator government, we must
not make any move which could weaken this interpretation. We need a
better review of OPIC activities in the interagency committee.
11. DOD Activity in Human Rights Problem Countries. We need to
get a handle on the myriad of DOD activities (ship visits, visits of high
ranking U.S. military) in countries with human rights problems. Some
bureaus approach the problem systematically. Others handle it on an
ad hoc basis if at all. We need a Department-wide policy and coordina-
tion mechanism.

Overseas Private Investment Corporation Amendments Act of 1978, which the President

201.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
Posts
127374. For Ambassador from the Acting Secretary. Subject: Dis-
semination of Country Reports on Human Rights Practices.
1. At a recent conference at the Department, several reps of non-
governmental organizations reported that officers in some of our mis-
Human Rights
sions were unfamiliar with contents of our 1979 human rights reports
on their countries of assignment.
2. If you have not already done so, please ensure that mission per-
sonnel who have appreciable contact with host government civilian of-
ficials and military officers are knowledgeable about the contents of the
country report. The regional bureaus will be glad to pouch additional
copies if requested. Copies might be placed in the post library and be
included in the orientation materials for newly arrived officers.
3. In at least one capital, host government officials and others re-
portedly continue to criticize the country report on the basis of dis-
torted press or other accounts. If this is relevant to your situation, you
may wish to consider making copies of your country report (a public
document) more widely available.

Christopher
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject

202.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Miller
Washington, June 25, 1980
SUBJECT
U.S. Human Rights Policy and the Multilateral Development Banks
During your conversation with Congressman Wilson last week,
the issue of U.S. human rights policy in the MDBs came up. The fol-
lowing provides background information on the key practices and
issues related to that subject.

Legislative Requirement
Authorizing legislation passed in 1977 requires U.S. Executive Di-
rectors in the MDBs to oppose loans to countries whose governments
engage in “a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
recognized human rights” unless the assistance is directed specifically
to programs which serve basic human needs.

The Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance
To provide a thorough high level assessment of possible human
rights policy actions, the Administration established in 1977 the Inter-
agency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. This group,
frequently termed the “Christopher Group” since it is chaired by the
Deputy Secretary of State, includes representatives of the Departments
of State, Treasury, Defense, and Agriculture, the National Security
Council, the Agency for International Development, the Export-Import
Bank, and other agencies when appropriate.

The Interagency Group reviews all proposed MDB, AID, OPIC,
Exim, etc., projects and programs. It examines the human rights situa-
tion and trends in a recipient country, previous U.S. efforts to improve
the situation (including actions in the bilateral assistance relationship if
one exists), the likely effectiveness of various possible actions in im-
proving human rights situation and the nature of the assistance under
review (e.g., to what extent it meets basic human needs). The Group
then recommends a U.S. voting position to Treasury given our respon-
sibility for instructing the U.S. Executive Directors to the MDBs.
Treasury’s Role in the Interagency Group
The Interagency Group relies primarily on the State Department’s
judgment as to whether or not the government of an MDB recipient is
engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violation of human rights.
The Treasury Department has three major goals in the subsequent
Interagency deliberations:
—to insure that the MDB vote is not used as an “easy option” and
in isolation of a broader USG approach to a given human rights situa-
tion. (Treasury would, for example, resist using the MDB vote if com-
parable actions were not being taken in our bilateral relationship with
the affected country.)
—to insure that the criteria and considerations used for deter-
mining whether or not a project meets “basic human needs” (BHN) are
economically sound. (In general USAID and the Human Rights Bureau
at State advocate a rather narrow BHN definition, while Treasury and
the Economic Bureau at State advocate a more flexible approach which
takes into account each country’s unique economic, cultural and social
circumstances. At the present time, the Interagency Group is operating
on unofficial BHN criteria which are very close to the Treasury
approach.)
—to maintain to the maximum extent possible the integrity of the
MDBs as effective social and economic development institutions, and

Human Rights
insure that there is a basic consistency in the application of our human
rights policies to bank operations.

Differences between the Departments of State and Treasury on an
individual MDB loan are usually resolved prior to Deputy Secretary
Christopher’s formal recommendation to Treasury. There have, how-
ever, been a few instances where we have disagreed on the Deputy Sec-
retary’s position on whether or not a specific project met basic human
needs—and, in such cases, we have always prevailed. There have been
no such cases for a long time, however; none since you came to
Treasury, in fact. (I came close to bringing to you the Chile loan raised
by Congressman Wilson, but did not because of the egregiousness of
their behavior in the Letelier case.)

U.S. Voting
In the period since January 1, 1977, the United States has op-
posed—through “no” votes or abstentions—more than 90 MDB loans
to 16 countries3 where we considered the human rights situation se-
vere. Our general policy has been to support MDB projects for coun-
tries with human rights problems if the project serves the basic human
needs of the people in the recipient country. This avoids penalizing the
poor people of countries whose governments follow repressive prac-
tices, and reflects the fact that we consider human rights to include
basic social and economic rights such as adequate food, housing,
clothing, education and health care.

U.S. decisions to oppose MDB loans on the basis of human rights
considerations are taken only after a thorough examination of the cur-
rent human rights situation and trends in a recipient country. In the
past six months, we have opposed loans for Argentina, Chile, Laos, the
Philippines, Uruguay, and Yemen (PDR). U.S. opposition to upcoming
MDB loans to Korea is also likely given the deteriorating human rights
situation in that country.

The U.S. has veto power over projects only in the FSO (IDB). In
other MDBs, our opposition to specific project proposals would have to
be accompanied by that of several other members before a proposal
would be formally denied. Some other countries have also had human
rights concerns and joined us in opposing specific MDB projects. We
have not formally “voted down” a loan on human rights grounds. On
several occasions, however, we have influenced the MDBs and the re-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
cipient country to restructure a project so that it meets BHN. The fact
that the U.S. intended to oppose a loan project has also been respon-
sible for loans being delayed or indefinitely deferred.
In situations where the U.S. has opposed MDB loans on the basis of
human rights considerations, we have been joined by one or more
donors in 10 IDB votes involving four countries (Argentina, Chile, Par-
aguay, and Uruguay), and in 2 IBRD votes involving Chile.
Note: The United States continues to consult widely with other
governments to explain in detail our views on human rights and basic
human needs and our position that the MDBs are appropriate and ef-
fective instruments for furthering these objectives. Achieving an inter-
national consensus on human rights will, however, be a long and diffi-
cult process.

The Issue of an MDB Charter Amendment in Human Rights
In 1978, Congressman C.W. Bill Young (Fla.) proposed an amend-
ment to the FY 1979 Foreign Assistance Appropriations (Sec. 611 of
Public Law 95–481) instructing the U.S. Governor to propose and seek
adoption of an amendment to the charters of the multilateral develop-
ment banks, which would specifically provide that human rights
should be taken into account in loan decisions. In informal discussions
with other members we have sought support for the adoption of such
an amendment. The reactions of other countries to our initiative were
negative. Adoption of amendments to the charters of the MDB’s re-
quires from 75–85% of the votes. Because of the high percentage of af-
firmative votes required, we believe that it unlikely such an amend-
ment would attract sufficient support for passage. Moreover, other
countries pointed out that if such an amendment were defeated, it
would undermine our argument that the MDB charters already allow
consideration of human rights performance in bank discussions.
The recently passed Authorization Bill for the regional banks4 also
directs the U.S. Governor of the banks to consult with the other gov-
ernors concerning the adoption of an amendment to the articles of
agreement to establish human rights standards for assistance.

203.

Memorandum From Lincoln Bloomfield of the National
Security Council Staff to Roger Molander of the National
Security Council Staff
Washington, July 3, 1980
SUBJECT
Briefing Paper on Human Rights and the NSC
Attached hereto is the first of several briefing memos which I am
preparing for you or Jerry, as part of my orderly departure program
which, albeit a failure in Vietnam and Cuba, ought nevertheless to be a
success in the NSC staff.

As you know, Mary is arranging a series of luncheons in the White
House Mess this month where I would like to have you (Jerry in his
areas of future concern) to have a chance to meet informally with key
figures with whom I have been dealing in the bureaucracy.
(Attached hereto also is a cartoon about the Carter human rights
policy which delicacy forbids me from attaching to other copies of this
memorandum.)

Attachment
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, undated
THE NSC AND HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY
You will also want to read a very thoughtful and provocative
memo which Tom Thornton left for me a year ago on this subject.
Philosophically it stands up well. Some of the specific policy issues,
with their typically long halflife, linger instead of speedily decaying.
(Perhaps the people do the decaying, while the problems remain?)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Two facts dominate this policy scene:
1. Human rights policy has clearly represented one of the principal
personal policy commitments of President Carter. Therefore it has been
operationalized virtually across the board. As an outsider, I observed
an explosive but somewhat unguided takeoff in early 1977. Cy Vance’s
Athens, Georgia speech of July 1977 provided the needful midcourse
correction, explaining that of course the policy could not be applied
without modulation everywhere, at all times, friend and foe alike.
When security requirements crowd in, human rights take second place,
being invoked pietistically rather than operationally.
2. The other central fact is that bureaucratically, the human rights
policy is somewhat of an orphan child, or maverick, perhaps because
by contrast with the HAK approach it was new, and controversial. Ap-
plying the “human rights criterion” still tends to line up the bureau-
cracy on predictable sides. Its central agency—HA in State—is clearly
not staffed by the most promising FSOs. On the contrary, under Patt
Derian—an activist if there ever was one—the whole HA team soon ac-
quired the opprobrium throughout the buttoned-down elements of the
bureaucracy as “the Human Rights Mafia.”
Operationalizing and institutionalizing this new (restored?) com-
ponent of policy includes codification into a variety of laws by the
Congress (you will find all the legislative references on my shelves).
The Congress in a sense outdid the President by writing into law
the requirement that foreign economic assistance and, to a more limited
degree, foreign military assistance, could not be given to countries
whose governments were guilty of a gross and consistent pattern of
human rights violations. The effect is that far from consisting of op-
tional rhetoric, each specific aid decision has to be filtered through a
human rights test, with the burden legally placed on those who would
award grants, loans, aid, etc. to gross and consistent violators. The ex-
ceptions in the economic case are projects that would clearly benefit
basic human needs in a given country, and in some other cases (e.g.
OPIC investment insurance, FMS, etc.) a certification that national se-
curity considerations override. Needless to say, recent deterioration of
the security situation has made the human rights criterion secondary in
several recent FMS decisions.

The instrumentality for dealing with economic assistance choices
is the interagency committee on human rights chaired by Warren
Christopher, involving wide representation of the bureaucracy (in-
cluding myself). I have usually circularized my regional NSC col-
leagues to get their views on controversial cases prior to going to a
meeting, and they have sometimes accompanied me. (On the military
side, I have not been involved. Perhaps for that reason the system tends
to operate by raison d’e´tat and force majeure, rather than droit de l’homme!)

Human Rights
If Patt Derian leaves (Hodding already has), much will depend on
her replacement. Her number one Deputy Mark Schneider was a very
bright activist. After he went over the side he was replaced by Steve
Palmer, who is much calmer and introduces a more conservative note
stylistically, although he is quite committed to the cause. Chris himself
is also a strong advocate of the President’s human rights policy, but so
judicious in temperament that he creates the illusion that a fairly jumpy
policy is in fact purring along like a well-tuned Mercedes.
Clearly the policy is not agony-free. The case of Argentina is a
prime example of pulling and hauling between those pressing for let-
ting up on the pressures on policy grounds of wheat sales, fencing off
from the Soviets, hemispheric defense, et al, versus those who feel that
Argentina is still an egregious human rights violator. The NGO com-
munity is much exercised about this, as is US Representative to the
Human Rights Commission Jerome Shestack. (Tom Thornton and I re-
cently recommended that State prepare a public clarification prior to
Bill Bowdler’s late July visit to Buenos Aires, in order to correct dis-
torted news stories based on leak and rumor, and also to stiffen ev-
eryone’s spine when Bill goes to Argentina so the human rights compo-
nent of our policy doesn’t get lost in the shuffle. ZB and DA vetoed the
idea, and doubtless Bill will make it all plain to the Argentines when he
visits.)

The UN Human Rights Commission is backstopped by IO and HA
in State, but Jerry Shestak has made a practice of staying in touch with
me. He has a big ego, and also a long track record as an outside human
rights activist. This makes his role slightly ambiguous, particularly
since it has never been clear that the US Rep to the UN Human Rights
Commission is an instructed representative.

As for the NGO’s, they can be an important source of support for
the administration. I was astonished at their pleasure when I went over
to State this spring to participate, albeit briefly, in a daylong conference
of NGO leaders arranged by Patt and her staff. Any display of White
House interest, however symbolic, is of value.

When we still had some leverage with Moscow, there was a fairly
steady flow of Soviet dissident or refusenik cases of special concern to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the White House for which I would receive the visitors on behalf of the
White House (sometimes with Brement present). They were often
sponsored by the Council on Soviet Jewry, although other organiza-
tions have asked to visit on behalf of notable Soviet dissidents, ranging
from Lev Mendlevitz, who remains in prison, along with one Christian,
for insisting on practicing their religion, after the other “Leningrad hi-
jackers” have been let out; to the daughter of Sakharov (for whom we
were able to do very little). In one case (Ida Nudel) a personal letter
from Mrs. Begin to Mrs. Carter led to my taking Mrs. Nudel’s sister to
meet the First Lady. Unfortunately, we have been able to do less and
less to influence or pressure Moscow with respect to tough cases. Nev-
ertheless, I have been in occasional contact with Marina Neumeyer-
Wallach, who represents the Council on Soviet Jewry, and numbers of
Ukrainian, Evangelical and other national and church groupings which
take an interest in those cases.

One operational demand in which we are importantly involved
concerns the annual country human rights reports mandated of the
Secretary of State by the Congress. This last year, instead of just re-
porting on conditions in countries to which the United States furnishes
aid, the Congress changed the requirement to reports on all countries—
154 in all. The deadline for submission to the Hill was January 31st, and
I worked out with Patt Derian a procedure (which we did not formally
entitle clearance) in which every report was carried to my office as soon
as it had been cleared in the Department and before being put into final
form. I reviewed many of them myself, particularly the sensitive ones,
and in every case circulated them with a form covering note to appro-
priate NSC colleagues for review and comment. My arrangement
with Patt was that I would call her directly if we had any real agony.
There were a number of points that we felt ought to be taken up, and I
would say we batted about .500, all in all. However, the really hot ones
this year (Pakistan, Afghanistan, China, Argentina, you can imagine
the rest) I and relevant colleagues really labored over. In the case of the
Argentine report, with Tom Thornton’s help we put in a fair amount of
effort to ensure that it retained its integrity, on the ground that 153
other reports could be undermined if one were to be too badly fudged. I
Human Rights
think we came out alright, and I recommend that the same kind of
“nonclearance” system be arranged by December of 1980 for a fairly in-
tensive exercise during the first half of January.

The Madrid meeting of the post-Helsinki CSCE due to take place
in September11 was for a while a subject of considerable activity, in col-
laboration with Marshall Brement. The chief reason for wanting to go
ahead with the meeting following the precipitate deterioration of rela-
tions after Afghanistan12 was, in my view and that of others, the oppor-
tunity to reaffirm our strong commitment to the human rights ele-
ments of Basket I and Basket III of the Helsinki Final Agreement. The
chairman of the U.S. delegation will be former Attorney General Griffin
Bell, with Washington Attorney Max Kampelman as his deputy. State
has set up its operational preparations, and you will want to get in-
volved in collaboration with Brement and Blackwill in helping to mon-
itor the human rights elements of U.S. policy as it develops over the
next few months.

One issue I would simply pass along is what strikes me as an im-
balance in our tools for implementing the President’s human rights
policy. The fact is that we have, both in practice and in law, a number of
sticks to wield against countries which do not live up to the standards
that are embodied in the international declarations and covenants on
human rights, as well as our own policies. But there is a singular dearth
of carrots. In this connection, I would like to see a more active policy of
calibrated rewards to the list of countries we frequently boast of as
having moved away from despicable practices of torture, political pris-
oners of conscience, an unfree press, military rule, etc. These might
have the form of a special visitation (in my opinion the visit of Navy
Secretary Hidalgo to Argentina in early July, apart from its potential for
sabotaging a carefully crafted revised U.S. policy toward that country,
was the kind of demonstration that ought to be cranked up more often
for countries that have really gone the distance to stop leaning on their
own people). In this connection, I am concerned with the trend that I
understand Tom Ehrlich, the Director of IDCA, is pressing for a small
number of a relatively large aid projects rather than a scatteration. I can
appreciate his logic, but this already almost forced us to deny a tiny bit
of symbolic but needful economic assistance to Equatorial Guinea,
which has gotten rid of one of the bloodiest and most repressive dicta-
torships in modern history. I personally think that kind of flexibility
belongs in the aid program.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
In summing up the NSC role in this area, it is important to stress
the difficult but necessary line that I think has to be walked between a
kind of aseptic indifference to the way the human rights policy falls so
long as the paper work is in order, as against an all out advocacy of the
human rights criterion in all complex policy decisions, which I think
would be unbalanced and unseemly in the role a Presidential policy
coordinating staff should play. The NSC role is essentially a monitoring
one. However, I have often been asked by HA to intervene where the
system seems disposed to downgrade human rights concerns; in con-
sultation with my colleagues, I have done so where the arguments were
legitimate. Reciprocally, I have sometimes flagged human rights as-
pects of issues we are dealing with at the White House level—even in
the State Department—where it is not apparent that HA and its legal
and policy mandates are being given sufficient attention. Frankly, it
would be disingenuous not to notice that there are forces in the United
States government which would be glad for an excuse to dump the
whole human rights policy and get back to what they conceive to be a
“realistic, national interest based” approach. I guess I would have to
say that their approach seems to me, both in prospect and in retrospect,
to deprive us of one of the central distinctions between the democratic
system and the totalitarian system which is the foundation on which
those critics think they argue. Conversely, I feel that the NGO commu-
nity worries excessively that we really don’t give a damn and our
policy is thus a sham. They confuse the limits of policy based on the
possible with bad faith regarding the desirable. I feel the greatest serv-
ice one can do at this level is to keep in a balanced overall focus the pos-
itive commitment to the advancement of human rights and political de-
mocracy to which President Carter is committed, and from which the
United States has already considerably benefited in Africa and in some
other formerly hostile regions.

Human Rights

204.

Memorandum From Lincoln Bloomfield of the National
Security Council Staff to Roger Molander of the National
Security Council Staff
Washington, July 31, 1980
SUBJECT
Genocide Convention
The President’s firm determination that the Senate ratify the 35
year old Genocide Convention has not yet been translated into action.
For various reasons it was not possible to get a renewed push by the

205.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
PLANNING PAPER
Human Rights: 1981–85
I. Background
The international climate is going to worsen for human rights.
Third World governments will feel increasingly threatened by a combi-
nation of hard times economically, internal pressures for change, and
in some cases actual or feared Soviet or Soviet/Cuban efforts to exploit
internal problems.

The US public is also becoming more alarmed both about security
threats and about economic problems and therefore exports. This could
make it harder to keep American public and Congressional support for
active human rights policies.

The assumption that human rights and security interests were con-
flicting goals which had to be balanced against each other has always
been analytically wrong. Respect for human rights is necessary to
long-term stability, and therefore to US security interests. As President
Carter said in his State of the Union message, “In repressive regimes,
popular frustrations often have no outlet except violence.” Moreover,
it is a concern for human rights that ties together the varied policies of
this Administration: the human rights policy as such; our support for
peaceful resolution of grievances in southern Africa, the Middle East,
and Central America; our approach to North-South economic issues;
and our strong resistance to Soviet violation of Afghan human rights.
Human Rights
Failure to make clear this vital link between human rights and US
security interests could gravely undermine our whole human rights
approach.

II. Policy Issues and Priorities
The priority goal of US human rights policies over the next five
years should be to convince foreign governments, and US public and
Congressional opinion, that respect for human rights is a requirement
of long-term stability and therefore serves US security interests.
Three areas of endeavor will be central to this effort: development
of strategies for key individual countries; strengthening regional orga-
nizations in their understanding of, and responsibility for, related re-
gional stability/human rights problems; and demonstrating to nervous
governments that the aim of our human rights policies is not their
“destabilization.”
We also should use the next five years to ensure the domestic foun-
dations of our human rights policy. Priority attention should be given
to an aggressive and sustained effort to explain the connection between
human rights and security interests. We also should ratify UN and OAS
Charters and Covenants, and complete a body of legislation that will
help ensure attention to human rights concerns by future American
Administrations while allowing enough flexibility for pragmatic im-
plementation of a policy that can maintain domestic support.
A. Country Strategies
Five-Year Goal: Especially for human rights problem countries
where there are important US security interests, we need country strat-
egies that focus not on human rights as such, or on immediate security
needs, but rather on the longer-run requirements of stability and the
prospects, and limits, for American influence in that particular
situation.

There is no abstract formula—or choice among strategies—for con-
vincing governments which feel threatened by pressures for change to
share our view of the requirements of stability. Strategies will have to
be shaped with regard to individual countries, bearing in mind the
sources of internal instability, the state of its political development, and
the nature (if any) of genuine external security threat, as well as the par-
ticular human rights problem.

These strategies should include not only questions of USG pres-
sures and/or assistance, but also of opportunities to work with (or
complementary to) other democracies or democratic forces. Southern
European Socialists, for instance, are eager to establish links with the
non-Communist left in Latin America (especially in the troubled Cen-
tral America and Caribbean region). And even some European gov-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ernment leaders who are relatively unmoved by claims of human
rights as such are increasingly sensitive to the dangers to stability—and
so to Western economic and security interests—posed by repressive
regimes.

Country strategies should also focus on how we can encourage
private American groups to develop ties with foreign counterparts
(press, lawyers, teachers, business) which might be forces for pluralism
and peaceful political progress. Good examples include recent State
Department facilitation of contacts between groups of African lawyers
and American bar groups, and an AID grant to the President of the In-
stitute for Law and Social Policy (a former US Ambassador) for ex-
changes with African legal groups.

Such strategies obviously would be most useful before a country
reaches the explosive stage.

B. Strengthening Regional Organizations
Five-Year Goal: Regional organizations which understand the link
between human rights and stability, and are willing and able to take
primary responsibility for their areas.

The Andean Pact states and OAS got involved in Nicaragua, and
ASEAN started cooperating on refugee problems, at least as much from
a concern about regional stability as about human rights as such. Af-
rican awareness of the potential danger posed to regional stability by
that continent’s Emperor Bokassas or Sargent Does is one reason for
tentative gropings by the OAU for a human rights policy.
We should try to build on this appreciation of the link between
human rights and stability, and look for ways to strengthen efforts by
all regional bodies. This would have the added benefit of further multi-
lateralizing human rights efforts, and creating a greater sense of re-
sponsibility for them on the part of Third World nations and
organizations.

Efforts on our part will need to be skillful, and carefully calculated
to specific cases, to avoid smothering regional efforts with a Big Brother
embrace. The OAS, for example, already has an active human rights
policy. While continuing to make clear we support it, we should in-
creasingly let Latin American states take the lead. In regional coopera-
tion among ASEAN members there is little resonance for “human
rights” under that label. What they most need from us, and other in-
dustrialized democracies, is money to help with crushing refugee
burdens. The cause of human rights is likely to fare better in the OAU if
we continue to let UN officials and African moderates take the lead. We
can best help by facilitating the kind of contacts in individual African
states sketched above, and by economic assistance to get at one of the
prime causes of instability and repression.

Human Rights
C. Reassuring Nervous Governments
Five-Year Goal: To demonstrate—with deeds, not just words—to all
governments that our aim is not their “destabilization.”
Our constant message must be that the only way to avoid further
Nicaraguas or Irans is by beginning the process of liberalization when
reform and compromise are still a viable alternative to revolution and
radicalization . . . that the only thing more dangerous than change is re-
fusal to change.

This argument will need to be reinforced by demonstrated sensi-
tivity to differing situations and political perceptions.
Exchanges with Third World leaders on different forms of political
expression can help convey the message that we are not trying to im-
pose our form of government on others. ICJ-sponsored work with Af-
rican officials on the nature of political competition in one-party states
was useful in this regard. Direct USG exchanges would be better still in
demonstrating our interest in understanding their perspectives.
We also need to re-examine the question of which USG “sanc-
tions”—opposition to MDB loans; curtailment of bilateral aid; denial of
military sales or assistance—to continue when violations of the person
have virtually ended but a regime remains fundamentally repressive.
Easing sanctions just because a government is not at the moment ar-
resting, torturing, or killing its opposition could undermine our efforts
for those institutional changes which are the best longer-range guar-
antee of continued respect for rights of the person, as well as for polit-
ical liberalization. But refusal to respond concretely to non-institutional
improvements could reinforce suspicions—in the country concerned
and among its neighbors—that we will be satisfied with nothing less
than the downfall of individuals or regimes. That could lessen chances
both for immediate human rights improvements, and for persuading
governments of the sincerity—much less the wisdom—of our claim
that internal stability and human rights improvements are inextricably
linked. We favor the second course.

D. Ensuring the Domestic Foundations of Our Human Rights Policy
Five-Year Goal: Solid public and Congressional support for the
human rights policy, and sophisticated understanding of its relation-
ship to US security interests.

Growing security and economic worries in this country could put
the human rights policy in at least as much trouble at home as abroad.
Two areas of endeavor can help with this problem.

(1) Making our Case
The litany of accomplishments—tens of thousands of political pris-
oners released in over a dozen countries; fewer “disappearances” and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
reports of torture; movement from military to civilian rule in many
countries; and the awareness of those tempted to overturn election re-
sults that it would cost them in their relations with us and in their
broader international standing—are familiar to us but will need fre-
quent stress to an increasingly skeptical public.

We should always, however, couple recitals of what we are doing
for others with its relevance to concrete US interests:
—Support for peaceful change is support for stability.
—And it puts us in better position to work with change when it
does happen. Even in countries where our human rights advocacy has
strained relations with repressive governments, civilian professional
and business classes—and in some cases younger military—who
should always have looked to the US as a model and source of hope no
longer see a disconnect between the freedoms we insist on for our-
selves, and our support of dictatorships over them.

(2) The Legal Basis of US Human Rights Policy
We should soon end the anomaly of the US proclaiming itself as a
leader of international human rights efforts, but not yet having ratified
the basic human rights Covenants and Conventions of the United Na-
tions and Organization of American States.

Five are before the Senate: The Genocide Convention, the Interna-
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Cov-
enant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination and the American
Convention on Human Rights. The Genocide Convention merits top
priority. Adopted by the UN in 1948, it has been ratified by more than
80 states and has deep symbolic significance.

The next term should also leave a legacy of a consistent body of do-
mestic legislation that will help ensure continued attention to human
rights by future Administrations, while giving them (and ourselves)
the flexibility necessary for pragmatic implementation of a policy that
can maintain domestic support.
—All programs designed primarily to promote US exports should
have the same human rights criteria (OPIC is now more restrained than
ExIm or CCC). US policy options are to treat these as we do other forms
of USG assistance, or to interfere with them only when there is a strong
chance that doing so would actually lead to human rights improve-
ments (not just for “distancing”). Given what injecting human rights
into these programs already has done to arouse opposition to the policy
by US business interests—and the marginal incremental effect on most
human rights problems of adding use of these programs to our other
pressures—we favor the latter.

Human Rights
—Country Specific Legislation. This often has more to do with the
ideological bent of certain legislators than with concern for world-wide
human rights. And it can limit our flexibility to offer gradual induce-
ment to governments which are prepared to undertake gradual re-
forms. But Administration initiatives to remove the country specific
legislation which now exists would be seen as a weakening of our
human rights commitment. Our alternatives are to make a push early
in the new Administration to remove all country specific legislation, or
to leave present legislation in place (absent substantial human rights
improvements in the specific countries) but resist new legislation of
this type. The latter probably is more feasible on the Hill.
—Legal mandate for the Interagency Group on Human Rights and
Foreign Assistance. A bill to this effect may well be introduced in the
next Congress, and might require that security assistance also be con-
sidered by the Group. Our options would be to oppose such legislation,
on the ground that the Executive Branch should be able to establish—
and change—its internal, decision-making procedures; or support it be-
cause it is effective and because anything else might signal a weakening
of our human rights commitment. This is not an important substantive
issue; future Administrations could keep the same machinery but make
very different human rights decisions. We should stay neutral.
—Present legislation governing bilateral and multilateral aid and
security assistance. This has been useful in reinforcing policies this Ad-
ministration wanted to pursue. It has given us enough flexibility to
tailor human rights efforts to be effective in differing situations, and to
protect US security and economic interests. It could be even more im-
portant in forcing future Administrations at least to consider human
rights factors in assistance decisions and to justify their decisions to in-
terested parties on the Hill. We should resist any efforts either to
weaken it or to make it more stringent.

206.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the
Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Tarnoff)
Washington, November 10, 1980
SUBJECT
List of Issues for Transition Briefing Papers
The perception exists that the Reagan Administration plans to re-
verse policies to promote respect for internationally recognized human
rights. The human rights policy is based on domestic and international
law and occupies a central place in U.S. foreign policy. The following
list of issues will therefore require decisions during the 90-day period
following January 20, 1981.
1. Bilateral Initiatives on Behalf of Human Rights
—Continue prompt and vigorous diplomatic initiatives with re-
gard to major human rights problems in communist countries. Coun-
tries requiring such action are: the USSR, Czechoslovakia, the German
Democratic Republic, Poland, Romania, the People’s Republic of
China, Cuba, Vietnam, Kampuchea, Ethiopia, Mozambique and others.
—Continue prompt and vigorous diplomatic initiatives with re-
gard to major human rights problems in non-communist countries.
Countries requiring such action are: South Africa, Liberia, South Korea
(particularly to save the life and obtain the freedom of Kim Dae Jung),3
the Philippines, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Guatemala, El Salvador, Ni-
caragua, Iraq, Syria, the Israel-occupied territories and others.
Failure to take action with regard to these countries will under-
mine the leadership role of the United States in the human rights area,
and in many cases impact adversely on our national interest and secu-
rity objectives.

Human Rights
2. Economic Assistance and Human Rights
—Continue the systematic review of economic assistance and
human rights by the Inter-Agency Committee on Human Rights and
Foreign Assistance, chaired by the Deputy Secretary. This Committee
and its Working Group regularly review bilateral economic assistance,
IFI loans, Ex-Im and OPIC transactions with a view to ensuring that
human rights concerns are fully taken into account in decisions made,
as required by U.S. law and policy.
3. Arms Transfers and Human Rights
—Improve the mechanism in the Department of State for reaching
decisions on6 arms transfers and human rights7 through the creation of
a special body to systematically review such decisions, including the
sale of police equipment, and ensure that human rights criteria are fully
taken into account, as required by our law and policy.
4. Pending Decisions on Sales of Police Equipment and Lethal Mili-
tary Equipment
—Decide on pending sales of police equipment to the following
countries with serious human rights problems: the People’s Republic of
China, Taiwan, Ethiopia, the Philippines, Yugoslavia, Israel (West
Bank).
—Decide on pending sales of lethal military equipment and ex-
panded military sales to the following countries with serious human
rights problems: Haiti, El Salvador, Paraguay.
5. Multilateral Initiatives
—Insist on full review of implementation of Basket III (human
rights and humanitarian) issues at the Madrid CSCE Conference and
promote the establishment of more effective machinery to implement
the Helsinki Final Act.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Continue to strengthen international machinery for dealing with
human rights issues (United Nations, Organization of American States,
International Labor Organization, UNESCO) and promote the creation
of regional human rights bodies.
6. Ratification of International Human Rights Treaties
—Complete U.S. adherence to six major international human
rights treaties through ratification. The six treaties currently before the
Senate are: the Genocide Convention, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, So-
cial and Cultural Rights, the International Convention on the Elimina-
tion of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the American Convention
on Human Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.
7. Non-Governmental Organizations
—Continue to cooperate with private non-governmental organiza-
tions engaged in programs and activities to strengthen the protection of
human rights internationally.
8. Asylum Policy
—Strengthen the asylum unit to enable it to deal with a rapidly in-
creasing number of cases, for example Iranian, Nicaraguan and Cuban
cases, among others.

207.

Memorandum Prepared by Cyrus Vance
New York, October 24, 1976
[Omitted here is information unrelated to food policy.]

L. Economic Assistance.

Here again, the new Administration will be faced with immediate
and difficult budgetary and political questions. As you know, eco-
nomic or so-called development assistance falls into three categories:
US bilateral economic development programs administered by AID
and the Peace Corps, and multilateral development programs, which
receive US funding through the World Bank, regional banks and
various United Nations agencies. A second category is political eco-
nomic assistance. A third category is straight humanitarian or relief
assistance. There is also military assistance, which has often been
bracketed with, but in fact is not, development assistance.
The first question is who should receive economic assistance.
Here, I believe that we should continue to make economic assistance
available to both the least-developed and the middle-level countries, as
it is at present. I believe it would be unwise to adopt a rule that only
very poor countries will receive US bilateral economic assistance. Not
the least important of the several advantages favoring this suggestion is
the fact that the other course of action would make most Latin Amer-
ican countries ineligible for development aid.

A second issue is whether economic assistance should be denied to
countries that flagrantly violate human rights. Current aid legislation
prohibits economic assistance to those who violate human rights,
unless the President can demonstrate that such aid gets to the poorest
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
people. The issue is whether this escape clause should be tightened. It
would be a mistake, in my judgment, to do so. Conditioning economic
assistance on such a policy would appear to be an intrusion into the in-
ternal affairs of the recipient countries. In addition, it would appear to
be saying that in order to show our sympathy for the poor, we are with-
drawing the aid designed to improve their wellbeing.

Another key question is whether economic assistance should be
multilateral or bilateral, or both. I believe it should be both. We should
provide capital aid increasingly through the regional development
banks, while continuing to rely on bilateral channels for more technical
assistance. The regional development banks are generally considered
to be efficient in handling multilateral aid. However, assistance can be
provided more efficiently on a bilateral basis.

Finally, I believe that economic assistance should be increased.
There is an international target of .7% of GNP. Other countries are
taking the target seriously and some have reached it. I am not sug-
gesting we should attempt to go to .7%. We are currently at about .25%
and should do more. Moreover, the capability of aid-delivering
agencies to help host countries develop useful projects has improved
over the years, while the amount of human deprivation has continued
to increase.

Budgetary decisions will have to be made with respect to Fiscal 78
Budget on the funding of economic assistance programs for the next
two years. The amounts involved are very large. I would recommend
the so-called lower option (2-a) contained in the Development As-
sistance issues paper, which would provide for authorization of $3.
possible to get anything higher through the Congress, and even this op-
tion will be difficult to achieve. However, we must meet our obliga-
tions. Failure to do so in a responsible manner could shake the
international institutions, resulting in setbacks to their current lending
programs and projects. The critical item with the Congress will be the
amount of the appropriation, rather than the authorization.
M. Relations with Developing Nations.

Whether we like it or not, one of the most important and difficult
issues which will face the new Administration is the question of our re-
lations with the developing nations. The developing nations have
found that they can achieve political leverage by operating in concert
and have made it a central focus of their foreign policies under the ru-

World Hunger and Food Policy
bric of a demand for “new international economic order.” The devel-
oping countries’ goals in this area affect trade, commodities, invest-
ment and technological transfer, monetary reform, and aid.
Our relations with the developing countries are important because
without their participation and cooperation, we, as well as they, may
find it most difficult to grow and prosper. They now constitute a ma-
jority in most international bodies in which global problems are dealt
with. While the developing nations may not be able to force action, they
can block it.

As you know, the current Administration had opposed requests
from the developing countries for change in international economic
systems for a number of years. This policy was changed in the speech of
the Secretary of State at the 7th Special Session of the United Nations
General Assembly in September 1974. Since then, however, little of
significance has been accomplished, and we face the danger of in-
creased tensions if the ongoing discussions and negotiations come to
naught.

The current outlook is gloomy. The dialogue at CIEC appears to
be going nowhere. The UNCTAD meeting last spring ended without
Document 32.
focused upon development and international economic cooperation, including food
speech, entitled “Global Consensus and Economic Development,” was delivered by U.S.
Ambassador to the United Nations Daniel Patrick Moynihan; Kissinger was in Israel wit-
nessing the signing of the second Israeli-Egyptian disengagement agreement. For the text

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
important accomplishment6 and little progress is being made in
other areas such as Law of the Sea, food, commodities, and debt
rescheduling.

Insofar as the US public is concerned, surveys would indicate that
the country is ambivalent. People feel that we should help the less for-
tunate, but they feel, at the same time, that our aid is not getting to the
poor people who really need it, and that we are taxing the American
people, including the poor, to assist the well-to-do and rich in other
countries. I believe, however, that our people will support a policy
which they feel is practical and is properly directed toward alleviating
suffering and deprivation in the developing world. More public educa-
tion is needed, and it will have to come in large measure through Presi-
dential leadership.

Among the available options concerning our overall approach to
the problem, selective functional cooperation with the developing na-
tions makes the most sense. If we chose this course of action, the US
would agree to discuss in good faith all the issues being raised, looking
where possible to strike bargains where gains for both sides can be as-
sured, but refusing to agree to proposals which we believe are econom-
ically unsound or politically unacceptable. This would serve to diffuse
the danger of growing confrontation between the North and the South.
It would also put the US in a position of leadership it has not had since
the early 1960’s.

Turning briefly to specific issues, the first key issue is trade. What
the next President does about the Tokyo Round7 is extremely impor-
tant: If you follow the course of action suggested earlier in this paper, I
believe you will be on solid ground. The problem of commodities is in-
credibly complex. The preferred solutions will vary among different
commodities and positions will vary among the developing countries.
The use of buffer stocks should be approached with caution. Perhaps
more can be done quickly by increasing US strategic stockpiles in the
metals area, than can be done by the use of buffer stocks. Attempts to
hold prices on raw materials at artificially high levels do not make
sense. But it is true that volatility of commodity prices is to many coun-
tries an obstacle to economic development.

I have already commented on the question of development assist-
ance and it need only be noted further that after trade, concessional aid

World Hunger and Food Policy
is the single most important issue you will have to address from an eco-
nomic standpoint in the North-South relations.

Space does not permit adequate discussion of international debt
service by developing countries. Suffice it to say that the better-off de-
veloped countries do not need it and fear that it would jeopardize their
credit standing. The debt issue, thus, comes down to the poor coun-
tries. Of the total amount owed, two-thirds is owed by India, Pakistan
and Egypt.

With respect to monetary reform, the issue concerns the devel-
oping nation claim that they do not receive a fair deal from the IMF be-
cause of their lack of voting weight. This in turn relates to the question
of special drawing rights, which are allocated on the basis of IMF
quotas, which are in turn a rough indicator of the financial importance
of the member country in the world economy, and thus of each member
country’s need for international reserves. In this connection, consider-
ation should be given to the possibility of permitting raw materials
such as copper, tin, etc., to be used as reserve currencies.
Further with respect to the question of the oceans, we have the
problem of the stalled Law of the Sea Conference. It is currently stale-
mated primarily on the issue of deep sea mining. Here I believe that we
must take a new initiative if we want to restore vitality to the negotia-
tions. A possibility worth pursuing is a fleshed-out version of Secretary
Kissinger’s most recent suggestion, i.e., a two-track approach involving
mining by both private interests and the public “Enterprise.” Under
this approach, the US and other individual countries would provide
the necessary technology and know-how to the Enterprise.

With respect to food, the basic answer is increased food produc-
tion in the developing countries themselves. Accordingly, there should
be increased emphasis in both bilateral and multilateral efforts on in-
creasing the developing countries’ production of food. It will, however,
take many years to increase food production in the poor countries.
Therefore, in the meantime, it will be important to establish and main-
tain sufficient grain reserves in the developed countries to meet recur-
ring needs in the developing countries.

Finally, we must continue to work on the population problem,
which is inextricably linked with the problem of food and social and
economic progress.

In light of the foregoing, the first and most critical task is to de-
velop a coordinated strategy for dealing with the various issues pre-
sented. They cannot be dealt with on a piecemeal basis. Therefore, as

208.

Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter intended to pursue both bilateral and mul-
tilateral approaches to solving the problem of world hunger, as he out-
lined in a January 20, 1977, videotaped address to the world commu-
nity. Broadcast to 26 nations by the United States Information Agency
on Inauguration Day, the message stressed Carter’s “desire to shape a
world order that is more responsive to human aspirations.” “The
United States alone,” he asserted, “cannot guarantee the basic right of
every human being to be free of poverty and hunger and disease and
political repression. We can and will cooperate with others in combat-
ing these enemies of mankind.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Docu-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance outlined the Carter administra-
tion’s foreign assistance program, including the use of food aid, in testi-
mony to the Subcommittee on Foreign Operations of the Senate Com-
mittee on Appropriations on February 24, 1977. Vance explained that
the administration’s foreign assistance programs “are diverse in sub-
stance, serve a variety of objectives, and are aimed at a wide range of
targets.” Underscoring the interdependent world of the late 1970s and
its burgeoning global concerns, Vance then commented: “We cannot ef-
fectively promote multilateral diplomacy, control the proliferation of
nuclear arms, defuse international terrorism, reduce the buildup of
conventional weapons, or protect our security interests in the oceans or
space in a hungry, angry, and bitter world. We can achieve cooperation
on these security issues only if we are doing our fair and reasonable
share in the process of international development cooperation—only if
we are seen as encouraging, not frustrating, the development aspira-
tions of others.” The Secretary subsequently indicated that the adminis-
volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.

209.

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, March 1977
[Omitted here is the table of contents.]

POLITICAL PERSPECTIVES ON KEY GLOBAL ISSUES
I. Introduction and Overview
This report assesses the significance for the US of selected global
issues. It is most immediately concerned with the international political
implications of recent and prospective developments in the areas of
(1) energy dependence, (2) LDC demands for a “New International
clear proliferation. The report is designed to assess the impact of these
global issues, both individually and collectively, on general trends in
international relations as well as on specific US interests. What chal-
lenges do the issues pose for the US in terms of threats and opportu-
nities, policy constraints and choices?2
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Although the issues chosen for study are each distinctive in impor-
tant ways, they do have some notable common characteristics:
—While none is a new concern in the strictest sense, all have taken
on increased prominence for the US over the past decade—some dra-
matically so, as in the case of dependence on imported oil.
—While each is global in that it affects US relations with nearly all
countries, the most immediate policy focus as a rule is US relations
with nonindustrial countries (the LDCs).
—The issues all have vital economic or technological aspects.
—They represent direct or indirect challenges to the influence and
freedom of action and potentially to the wealth and power of the indus-
trial democracies and at times of the Communist powers as well.
—Since the manner in which the major countries manage these
issues will affect global and regional power relationships, they also rep-
resent opportunities to optimize relative influence and freedom of ac-
tion—not least for the US vis-a`-vis traditional adversaries and allies.
A systematic explanation of whether and how these key global
issues are either causes or symptoms of a “new era” in international re-
lations would be well beyond the scope of this brief introduction. The
common characteristics listed above, however, underscore the impor-
tance of several relatively recent and closely related developments af-
fecting world politics, which, in turn, help to explain the prominence of
the issues selected for study.

First, the industrial democracies face increased domestic obstacles to
controlling developments much beyond their peripheries, especially
where the use of military power overseas or large amounts of economic
assistance would be required. This abatement of domestic support for
an assertive foreign policy reflects (1) a decline in the perception of im-
mediate security threats associated with the height of the Cold War,
(2) disenchantment with the costs and risks of extensive overseas in-
volvement, and (3) constraints caused by slower rates of domestic eco-
nomic growth amidst intensifying demands for social and economic
benefits.

Second, these domestic inhibitions on assertive foreign policies, to-
gether with the growing wealth and regional influence of certain LDCs
(e.g., Iran, Saudi Arabia, Brazil, Venezuela) and the rise in assertiveness
concerning their “rights” on the part of LDCs generally, have contrib-
uted to a diffusion of power in international relations. Even as the wealth
and military power of the industrial nations increase on an absolute
scale, their ability either to control or to ignore global problems is con-
strained. This is manifested most clearly in the increased frequency and
effectiveness with which the nonindustrial countries, individually and
collectively, challenge the general authority and specific policies of the

World Hunger and Food Policy
industrial powers. The ability of certain transnational or nonstate
actors (e.g., the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC), terrorists, multinational corporations) to influence events aug-
ments the tendency toward power diffusion.

Domestic and external constraints to some extent affect the efficacy
of an assertive foreign policy on the part of the USSR and China as well
as the industrial democracies. While the Communist powers may at
times attempt to take advantage of opportunities for foreign adventure
(as in Angola), their cost-benefit calculations are also conditioned by
domestic problems and by the diffusion of power, especially in regard
to the growth of nationalism among LDCs and even within the Com-
munist parties of many countries.

Third, the heightened sensitivity of the industrial democracies to
their dependence on imported oil and other raw materials, the periodic
reliance of the Communist powers on imported technology and food,
and the persistent economic strains in nearly all LDCs have helped to
politicize a wide range of international economic issues. The growing
sensitivity to economic pressures of nearly all countries is reflected in in-
tensive high-level “bargaining” on economic issues not only between
industrial and nonindustrial nations, but also among the industrial de-
mocracies and between them and the Communist powers.

Finally, the three broad trends summarized above have produced
increased complexity and uncertainty in international relations. In part, the
complexity reflects the growing interconnections among global issues
(for example, among energy dependence, LDC demands, and nuclear
proliferation). It also reflects the strains global problems place on har-
monious alliance relationships, because of the varying degrees of sensi-
tivity and vulnerability to these issues among the industrial democ-
racies, and on the management of crises in the Middle East and
elsewhere. As a result, the difficulties of dealing with any of the global
issues singly are, as a rule, magnified by the reverberations among re-
lated issues. The difficulties of attempting “national solutions” to one
or all of the issues are similarly increased.

As previously mentioned, the causal relationships among global
issues and international trends are difficult to align with confidence.
What does seem clear, however, is that the need to manage these global
issues effectively—whether to reduce risks or optimize opportunities—
will remain a central challenge to US foreign policy at least for the re-
mainder of the 1970s and the early 1980s. Such issues will represent an
important part of the international agenda in their own right. In addi-
tion, as the following chapters will demonstrate, they will have an im-
portant and at times major role in shaping the character of our relations
not only with LDCs but also with traditional allies and adversaries. On
each of these issues, the individual industrial democracies and Com-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
munist nations have their own calculations of risk and opportunity
which can serve not only to frustrate immediate US objectives but also
to complicate East-West and alliance relationships generally.
Despite these explicit and implied limitations to freedom of action,
the US (especially in the context of basically harmonious relations with
the other industrial democracies) remains the single most powerful and
influential country in the international arena. Most LDCs remain poor,
weak, and problem stricken and thus potentially susceptible to US in-
fluence and power when the latter are clearly delineated and forcefully
projected. Countries with some of the attributes of wealth and power
remain highly dependent in key areas (e.g., the oil-rich countries for
technological development and military security). And while the So-
viet Union is a superpower in strategic military terms, it generally
cannot match potential US influence and freedom of action vis-a`-vis
global issues when it comes to economic wealth and power, techno-
logical prowess, and alliance and other diplomatic networks. There-
fore, although the US can now rarely expect to control the outcome of
complex international events to the extent it did from the late forties to
the early sixties, its ability to affect how global issues will be addressed
and what kinds of bargains may be struck is still impressive.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to food and population
policy.]

World Food and Population Trends
Individually and in combination, food and population trends are
likely to complicate the definition and pursuit of US foreign policy in-
terests. Production increases in the last couple of years have eased the
pressure on global food supplies as compared with the early 1970s. But
the world is likely to remain in a period of food uncertainty—where
many countries cannot be confident of consistently adequate sup-
plies—for at least the next decade. And the US may have to decide how
to distribute its agricultural bounty as against competing political, eco-
nomic, and humanitarian concerns.

The discretionary allocation of food exports would probably in-
volve opportunities to exercise international political leverage. At
times, US positions on global problems might be enhanced. The utility
of such leverage would depend on the interaction of a number of com-
plex considerations, however. And during a period of food uncertainty,
only rarely would it be capable of effecting fundamental changes in the
basic domestic or foreign policies of other nations.

There is a small chance that several decades hence the world could
move into a period of chronic food scarcity (e.g., because of climate
change). The potency of US food leverage would increase dramatically
if stockpiles were exhausted and food production was insufficient for a

World Hunger and Food Policy
prolonged period. But, in this unlikely event, threats to US interests
posed by the impact of food-related issues on international politics
would become more intense and dangerous. Strident LDC demands for
their “fair share” of a scarce resource—even the employment of ter-
rorism and “nuclear diplomacy” to affect US decisions—might result,
for example.

In addition to its impact on the precarious balance between food
supply and demand, world population growth is likely to contribute,
directly or indirectly, to domestic upheavals and international conflicts
that could adversely affect US interests. Population growth will also re-
inforce the politicization of international economic relations and inten-
sify the drive of LDCs for a redistribution of wealth and of authority in
international affairs. Over the long term, the ecological and environ-
mental consequences of population growth might physically threaten
US interests. Implementation of long-term goals for slowing world
population growth will at times necessarily come into conflict with
such immediate requirements as maintaining stability in and effective
ties with certain poor countries.

[Omitted here are two short segments on terrorism and nuclear
proliferation, Chapter II: Energy Dependence, and Chapter III: LDC
Demands for a “New International Economic Order” (NIEO).]
IV. World Food and Population Trends
A. The Setting
In the early 1970s, unfavorable weather, crop failures, massive So-
viet grain imports, the depletion of grain reserves, declining fish
catches, and skyrocketing food prices caused an unprecedented fo-
cusing of international attention on the precarious balance between
food supply and demand, and politicized the issues of population
growth and food distribution. As the world’s pre-eminent food ex-
porter, the US is uniquely situated to realize significant gains—and im-
posing problems—from increasing international reliance on its agricul-
tural production. This dependence could help the US manage some of
the global issues discussed in this report and increase US influence over
international affairs generally, but world food and population trends
portend threats as well as opportunities. Interconnections between
population and food-related developments and other global issues,
moreover, complicate the challenges that the US will face in foreign
policy generally.

B. Food: The Dynamics of Demand and Supply
Worldwide demand for food is rising primarily because the earth’s
population increases by some 65–75 million each year. This increase
stems in large part from the failure of birth rates in the populous LDCs

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
to decline as rapidly as have death rates. The tremendous reservoir of
young people in these countries constitutes a momentum that will keep
their populations expanding for decades even if they suddenly
achieved a preponderance of two-child families, i.e., “replacement
level” fertility.

Estimates of the earth’s population (now some four billion) in the
year 2000 range from about six to over seven billion. Population projec-
tions vary according to different assumptions about whether, when
and under what conditions fertility in the developing countries will
drop to complete the so-called “demographic transition,” the move-
ment from high to low birth and death rates. Experts disagree over the
extent to which the demographic transition experienced in the past by
the industrialized nations will be indicative of trends elsewhere. Popu-
lation projections also are undependable because they implicitly ex-
clude unpredictable events like massively destructive war, widespread
famine, pandemic disease, and natural disaster.

Demand for food depends not only on population growth but also
on individual affluence, wants, and tastes. As personal incomes rise,
people tend to seek variety in their diets and to increase protein content
through, for example, greater consumption of meat. The availability
and price of the food items people want regulate their ability to indulge
these desires. The ability of suppliers to respond to an increase in de-
mand induced by affluence is limited by patterns of trade, economic

World Hunger and Food Policy
conditions generally, and by food-related decisions by national
leaders—especially by those in charge of centrally planned economies.
Demand for food clearly is on the rise, but precisely how far and
how fast it will go is problematical. Uncertainty over demand naturally
complicates forecasts about the ability of food supply to keep pace.
In physical terms, there is great potential for dramatic food pro-
duction increases in the LDCs. The wide gap in per acre yields between
farms in the developed and developing countries can be narrowed by
increased incentives to producers, expanded investment in technology
and fertilizers, and more intensive cultivation.

But there also are considerable political, economic, and cultural
impediments to increased production. These include the high cost of
energy and fertilizer, inefficient land tenure patterns, disincentives to
farm production caused by national policies aimed at keeping food
prices down in urban areas, and reluctance by national leaders (who
tend to equate development with industrialization) to expend limited
resources on agriculture. In some instances, (e.g., Indonesia) poor agri-
cultural practices such as deforestation and overgrazing are resulting
in immediate production increases, but they are threatening the basic
ecosystems upon which food production depends and are likely to
have severely counterproductive consequences in the long run.
Technology and climate figure heavily in the outlook for supply,
especially over the long term. New food production techniques, such as
those using hydroponics and single-cell proteins, eventually could be
of great importance if proven technically, economically, and estheti-
cally feasible. A change in world climate that impacted negatively on
traditional food sources, however, might more than offset any techno-
logical gains. Climatologists hold widely varying opinions on the direc-
tion, pace, and permanence of climate change, and there is no con-
sensus about the interaction of natural and man-made causes. Most
knowledgeable observers agree, though, that it would be unwise to
count on an indefinite continuation of the climate of the last half cen-
tury or so, which has been unusually stable and favorable for
agriculture.

Food supply in any given year will also depend on the size of
carry-over stocks. Generally strong world agricultural performance
over the past couple of years has made some stockpiling possible, but it
has also helped dissipate an international sense of urgency about the
future. With immediate sufficiency in production breeding compla-
cency about long-term trends, prospects for the establishment soon of
an international grain reserve (or even an international system of na-
tionally held reserves) are not particularly promising. Stockpiles, there-
fore, probably will continue to be held mainly on an ad hoc and transi-
tory basis.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
C. Food Supply—Uncertainty and Scarcity
The unpredictability inherent in each component of the balance of
world food supply and demand is compounded when one attempts to
project how the components will interact in the future. It is the assump-
tion of this study, however, that the world already has entered a period
of food uncertainty in which it is likely to remain for at least the next
decade. The world has, to be sure, always lived with some uncertainty
over food supplies. Because of its interconnection with other global
issues, however, the scope and international political impact of the cur-
rent situation are much greater.

A significant number of nations, to varying degrees, cannot now
take for granted their ability to produce or procure enough food to
meet—in the case of poorer countries—basic subsistence requirements,
or—in the case of more affluent food importers—desired nutritional
standards. There will of course be year-to-year variations in world food
supply during the period of food uncertainty. A coincidence of good
harvests will at times mean relative abundance and some stockpiling,
but there may also be crop failures and famines. The extent of malnutri-
tion and localized starvation will also fluctuate, but both are likely to be
ever present.

The period of food uncertainty could continue indefinitely, or it
could end in dramatically different fashions. Increased production and
advances in technology might combine with a slowing of world popu-
lation growth to usher in an era of assured sufficiency of supply.
Should population growth and other demand factors outstrip food pro-
duction and exhaust stockpiles, however, the world might move from
food uncertainty to a period of chronic and widespread food scarcity
that could have severe human consequences.

Foreign dependence on US agricultural production is increasing.
As long as the period of food uncertainty persists, demand for US food
exports will probably fluctuate within relatively high parameters. In-
come from foreign food sales will contribute to US economic strength
and to foreign perception of its overall strength as a world power.
The possession of plenty amidst uncertainty will also give the US
an opportunity to derive political influence from the discretionary allo-
cation of its agricultural exports, i.e., the ability to decide to whom to
sell or give food. Assuming US willingness and ability to use food as an
instrument in international politics (discussed below), its effectiveness
as leverage will hinge on the interplay of a number of complex
considerations.

World Hunger and Food Policy
Foreign countries’ preoccupation with food supply and the extent
of dependence on US production will vary from time to time and place
to place. Food leverage stands to be more effective when applied to
countries that are vulnerable, rather than merely sensitive, to an inter-
ruption in imports from the US. The distinction will be conditioned by
such factors as the use to which the imports are put (e.g., the propor-
tions used for human consumption and livestock feed), the importing
country’s capacity to produce more, its wherewithal to purchase sub-
stitutes (provided they are available), and its ability to simply do
without. Attitudes of national leaders toward high prices, shortages,
hunger, and popular discontent could determine their judgment of
how essential imports from the US are to them, and hence their
country’s potential susceptibility to food leverage. In some areas in Af-
rica and South Asia, for instance, malnutrition, starvation, and even
famine might be viewed as neither unusual nor particularly disruptive
politically.

The effectiveness of US food leverage during a period of food un-
certainty would also depend on the attitudes or actions it sought to in-
duce, i.e., on the degree of conflict between the outcome sought by the
US and the preferences of those upon whom the leverage is brought to
bear. The factors the US might want most to affect, such as political
ideologies and alignments, development strategies, and population
policies, might be those least amenable to outside pressure. Except
perhaps for the poorest and most populous countries, needs for US
food in the period of uncertainty are unlikely to be so critical that they
will affect long-term nonreversible changes in basic national domestic
or foreign policies. Attitudes or behavior on less fundamental issues—
transitory political stands or specific tactical disputes, for example—
would be more amenable to the influence of food leverage. Even in
these cases, however, the US would have to take into account the cost in
resentment among those on whom the leverage was applied.

[Omitted here is a chart entitled “Net Grain Trade for Regions of
the World, Selected Periods.]

The utility of food leverage would also be affected by the ability of
other nations to bring countervailing leverage to bear on the US. Coun-
tervailing leverage could arise from exploitation of US dependence on
such imports as petroleum, for example, or from a nation’s strategic lo-
cation, political alignment, membership in the nuclear club, or status as
a super or regional power.

Movement from a period of food uncertainty to one of chronic
scarcity would enhance the political leverage obtainable from discre-
tionary allocations of food. For an increasing number of countries, need
for imports from the US would tend to be permanent and essential.
With heightened competition for available supplies and the exhaustion

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of alternative suppliers, food leverage could affect the basic national
policies of a widening circle of nations.

D. International Tensions
There is, however, another side to the coin. Food and population
trends portend threats as well as opportunities for the US. These trends
seem likely to make the world a more turbulent setting for the conduct
of foreign policy—a setting in which the definition and pursuit of US
interests will be more complicated. One aspect of this complexity al-
ready is manifest in the politicization of international economic rela-
tionships and their polarization along North-South lines.
Agitation by the LDCs for more advantageous terms of trade, aid,
and investment between themselves and the industrialized nations,
and for a redistribution of power and authority in international affairs
(as exemplified by demands for a “New International Economic
Order”) is attributable partly to food uncertainty and the pressures of
population growth.

The poorer food-deficient countries view the world food problem
as one of inequitable distribution and consumption as well as shortage.
They claim that affluent nations’ absorption of a disproportionate share
of world food resources is contributing to the problem, and their solu-
tions are articulated in terms of “distributive justice” as well as in-
creased production.

These countries direct most of their criticism against the industrial
democracies. Colonial legacies of commercial crops, encouragement of
modernization through pursuit of comparative advantage and partici-
pation in the world market economy, and the regular availability—
until quite recently—of surplus US grain on concessionary terms are
some of the factors they cite in support of the contention that the devel-
oping countries were misled into believing there was no need to be con-
cerned about balancing food supply and demand within their borders.
Considerations related to food and population trends thus are
spurring efforts by developing countries to improve their terms of
trade and eliminate alleged inequities from international economic re-
lationships through price preferences or structural arrangements to
compensate for their disadvantageous position. US interests could be
adversely affected even if the developing countries remain incapable of
imposing most of their demands. Political and economic relations be-
tween the US and its industrial allies could also be seriously strained if
differing degrees of dependence on the material resources of devel-
World Hunger and Food Policy
oping countries cause sharp disagreements over how their demands
should be dealt with.

Should a period of chronic food scarcity ultimately occur, it would
bring considerably more formidable and dangerous threats. Antipathy
between rich and poor nations would intensify and the international
economic order would be subjected to tremendous stress as food-
deficient countries of varying economic power struggled to increase
their export earnings in order to pay for agricultural imports. If spi-
raling prices were to force more and more nations out of the bidding for
available supplies, there would be mounting pressure for the replace-
ment of market distribution by some sort of internationally run “equi-
table” system of allocation.

Should anxiety over feeding expanding populations give way to
desperation, the world might have to contend with international dis-
ruption caused by attempts at climate control, intensified conflict
among nations, foraging populations, and perhaps even with nuclear
or terrorist blackmail. The US—and perhaps other major food pro-
ducers—might be the focus of an intense international struggle over
food, in which it would stand to attract the enmity of others no matter
how its agricultural resources were allocated.

E. Population-Related Disruption and Conflict
Food uncertainty is only one of a number of US interests that will
be affected by population growth. As population pressures increase,
there inevitably will be strains on existing political, economic, and so-
cial structures at the local, national, and international levels, and thus
some impact upon politics within and among nations. But racial, reli-
gious, and cultural animosities, regional differences, irredentism, eco-
nomic disparities, and a host of other sources of conflict between
peoples and nations are almost always intertwined with demographic
factors. Population growth will thus be part of a complex dynamic
in
which
causative
and
contributory
factors
are
likely
to
be
indistinguishable.

In any case, whether population problems help precipitate socio-
political upheaval will depend only partly on the intensity of the pres-
sures population growth generates. Ability to deal with these pressures
will be crucial, and this will hinge on the availability of resources and
on the political will and managerial skill in particular countries.
Over the mid-to-long term, apathy and despair probably will pre-
vail in some nations where resources and administrative talent are
woefully inadequate to cope with population growth. But educated
young city dwellers whose expectations will tend to exceed available
opportunities are likely to be key destabilizing forces in many coun-
tries. Intense political turmoil and social disintegration could occur in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
some cases, leading ultimately to chronic instability. Then too, popula-
tion pressures probably will propel some governments to strive for
greater administrative efficiency, more emphasis on food production
and population control, and labor intensive economic development.
Such movement probably will often be accompanied by more repres-
sive styles of rule on the part of governments already in power and by
the rise of additional authoritarian regimes.

The significance for the US of the destabilizing consequences of
population growth will vary according to how the US defines its for-
eign policy priorities and other national objectives. Instances in which
population pressures directly and immediately involve the US (for ex-
ample, problems related to Mexican immigration) are likely to be few
and far between in the near-to-medium term. In other cases, whether
US interests are affected will depend on how they relate to the partic-
ular actors and circumstances involved, e.g., how concerned the US is
with maintaining political stability and fostering economic well-being
among the LDCs.

Over the very long term, moreover, the impact of population
growth and the need to feed expanding populations could range be-
yond traditional politically defined national security considerations.
F. Ecological and Environmental Factors
The US has a fundamental interest in the health and welfare of its
people and the preservation of their way of life on a planet that might
eventually be physically threatened by the consequences of world pop-
ulation growth.

No one can say for sure how many people the earth can support.
Technological innovation and man’s managerial skills will help deter-
mine the upper limit. It does seem clear, though, that population
growth tends to increase the risk of ecological and environmental
damage in a variety of ways. The long-run impact of the greatly in-
creased use of fertilizer and insecticides on the environment, for ex-
ample, is likely to prove highly detrimental.

The extent to which the US will be able to insulate itself from the
adverse environmental and ecological consequences of population
growth will of course depend on how pervasive and intense the
damage becomes. This will not necessarily correlate precisely with in-
cremental population increases, but the cumulative impact of close to
15 billion people on earth would almost certainly be considerably
greater and potentially more dangerous than that of 8 or 10 billion.
Population growth is likely to impede international cooperation on
matters such as resource conservation and pollution abatement. Na-
tions with pressing needs to provide food and jobs for their people will
tend to be less concerned about the long-run consequences of their agri-

World Hunger and Food Policy
cultural, fishing, or industrial activity. Food-deficient countries might
attempt to link their cooperation to assurances of adequate food sup-
plies. Developing countries, moreover, will maintain (with some justifi-
cation) that the earth is threatened less by the impact of their popula-
tion
growth
and
modernization
than
by
the
consequences
of
overconsumption and pollution in the highly industrialized countries.
G. Policy Constraints and Alternatives
The ability of the US to use food as an instrument of its foreign
policy depends in part on the degree to which it controls the disposi-
tion of its agricultural production. Power to apportion this production
for domestic consumption, sale abroad, and foreign aid is currently
shared by the government, private institutions, and market forces. The
same is true for allocation among various paying customers. Moral in-
clinations, economic considerations, and international political chal-
lenges posed by food and population trends, however, may lead to ex-
panded and regularized government involvement.

The prominence of food as a domestic and international issue in-
creasingly calls into question complete reliance on the international
marketplace as a mechanism to allocate food among nations; when de-
mand exceeds supply the market takes no cognizance of moral or polit-
ical considerations. There also appears to be growing interest in the
idea that US farmers and consumers should be insulated from adverse
effects of international price fluctations. As principal custodian of an
object of occasionally intense international competition, moreover, the
US might find it necessary to guard against market manipulation and
possible attempts by wealthy nations—or coalitions such as OPEC—to
employ purchases, stockpiles, investments, or other devices to gain a
measure of control over world food supplies.

Agreement on increased government involvement in food distri-
bution would probably not, however, be accompanied by consensus as
to what the criteria for allocation should be. Whether the US should use
its unique position to maximize economic returns through sales to the
highest bidders, seek primarily political gains with food as leverage, or
emphasize humanitarian values with food aid could be the focus of in-
tense domestic and international controversy.

Deciding to which nations, in what order and proportion, and on
what terms agricultural exports should be allocated during an era of
food uncertainty will, moreover, be complicated by the need to recon-
cile domestic farm and foreign food policies. As needs for imports from
the US fluctuate from year to year, so too will the ease with which do-
mestic and foreign policy considerations can be harmonized. The US
may be faced in one year with having to decide which nations to feed,
and in the next with determining how to dispose of massive surpluses.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The fact that key food-deficient countries have major stakes in
maintaining the allocative status quo is yet another complicating con-
sideration. Political relationships with allies and adversaries alike (e.g.,
Japan and the USSR) will be affected if the US moves toward greater re-
strictions on purchases in order to use food as leverage or to serve hu-
manitarian ends.

Although food leverage remains a potentially powerful source of
international influence, its productive use during the period of food
uncertainty ahead will require selectivity and careful calculation. The
negotiation of extended grain purchase agreements that assure US ex-
port markets and relieve other nations of food uncertainty for several
years may be a particularly promising area for the application of food
leverage. The economic and political benefits obtained from such ar-
rangements must, of course, be weighed against the consequent reduc-
tions in future flexibility.

Long-range US policy considerations in regard to world popula-
tion growth will have to be measured against more immediate do-
mestic and international imperatives. Any US efforts to foster a slow-
down in population growth are likely to be complicated by domestic
controversy over the posture the US should assume toward regimes
that advance population policies the US favors by coercive methods it
abhors. The US will also need criteria for determining when broad
population-related policies (such as a general linkage between US aid
and foreign population control efforts) should take precedence over
more specific shorter range considerations (e.g., maintenance of polit-
ical stability in a particular country).

World food and population trends thus are adding considerable
complexity to the definition and pursuit of US national interests.
Clearly, though, the threats posed by these trends will have to be faced
even if the US would prefer not to seize the opportunities they may
offer. Earnest desires that the bounty of America’s farmers never be
used as a weapon of influence in international affairs are likely to be
frustrated if the disposition of this bounty increasingly becomes both a
domestic and international political issue. The US may be unable to
avoid having to decide how to use food leverage to help manage global
issues and cope with international challenges.

[Omitted here are Chapter V: The Problem of Internationalized
Terror and Chapter VI: Nuclear Proliferation.]

World Hunger and Food Policy
210.

Action Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of
State for Economic and Business Affairs (Boeker) to the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Cooper)
Washington, April 4, 1977
Suggested Changes in the Political Provisions of Public Law 480
Issue for Decision
OMB has urgently requested the views of the Department of State,
on the Administration’s proposed amendments of PL 480 legislation.
One issue still outstanding is whether the Administration should rec-
ommend deletion of some, or all, of the so called “political provisions”
of the current bill (see attachment). It is our understanding that at the
EPG, other agencies agreed to follow the lead of the Department of
State on this question. Thus we need to give OMB our views. The cur-
rent proposed bill, drafted by the Department of Agriculture, does not
provide for deletion of any of the provisions. Therefore, I suggest you
review our outline of expected Congressional reaction, telephone Sen-
ator Humphrey and obtain his views, and then inform us as to which
provisions if any we should seek to have deleted.

Background/Analysis
You will recall that on February 14, we sent you a memorandum
recommending that the Administration seek deletion of these so called
political provisions from the PL 480 Act. You supported removal of
those which would not raise serious controversy or congressional op-
position. We have taken some soundings along these lines and the fol-
lowing is a recap of our findings.
ited Official Use. Drafted by Ogden and Stephen Johnson (EB/OFP/FFD); cleared by
Stahnke, Alexander Watson (EB/IFD/ODF), Charles Roh (L/EB), Ferch, Imus, and
Gleysteen. Johnson initialed for all of the clearing officials except for Ferch. Ortiz also
initialed the memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Section 102—Vietnam—Prohibits the Commodity Credit Corporation
from financing the sale and export of agricultural commodities under PL 480
for any exporter who trades with Vietnam or whose parent company, subsid-
iary or affiliates trade with Vietnam. Under the Trading With The Enemy
Act of 1917 and Foreign Asset Control Regulations, US exporters must
obtain a license to export to Vietnam. It has been the Administration’s
policy not to approve such licenses, and therefore, Section 102 is redun-
dant insofar as US exporters are concerned. However, foreign trading
companies operating in the US are affected by it. Section 102, in effect,
requires a foreign conglomerate to choose between trading with Viet-
nam or having its US subsidiary trading company conduct PL 480 ex-
ports. This proposed deletion should not lead to significant contro-
versy in Congress.

Republic (Egypt) unless the President declares such programming to be in the
national interest. Egypt is currently our largest PL 480 customer and this
provision is routinely waived by the President. Its deletion is not ex-
pected to arouse significant controversy, although staunch supporters
of Israel may prefer to maintain the restriction.
to countries that trade with Cuba and Vietnam unless the President declares
such programming to be in the national interest. This provision, too, is rou-
tinely waived by the President. In the case of Cuba, deletion of the pro-
vision would be consistent with our policy of no longer attempting to
require third countries to observe our boycott. In the case of Vietnam,
deletion of the provision is consistent with efforts to normalize rela-
tions with that country. EA and ARA support deletion. Our soundings
indicate there could be some opposition by conservative forces in
Congress to removing the Vietnam clause, but no major controversy.
tries. The wording of the provisions affords some flexibility in certain
cases, however, and may provide the Administration with the flexi-
bility necessary to provide food aid to certain independent communist
nations should it wish to do so in the future. Our soundings indicate
Administration efforts to delete these proposals could evoke adverse
Congressional reaction. Some would interpret the move falsely as a
new Administration initiative on East/West matters.

Section 411—Provides that no food aid shall be provided to Vietnam
unless specifically authorized by Congress. Proposed deletion of the provi-
sion probably would be controversial in Congress. There is also the
question of whether its deletion would be consistent with Section 109 of

World Hunger and Food Policy
the Foreign Assistance Act which prohibits direct financial assistance to
Vietnam. EA is not now advocating elimination of Section 411. How-
ever, if Congress were to propose elimination. EA believes the State De-
partment certainly should not object.

I believe, however, that we would have a much clearer view of
probable congressional reactions to these proposed changes, were you
to telephone Senator Humphrey and elicit his views. Given his mem-
bership on both the Agriculture and Foreign Relations Committees and
his great interest in the PL 480 program, he is likely to be able to add
considerably to our perceptions as to how these proposals could fare.
We have already contacted the Senator’s staff regarding these pro-
posed changes. They are sympathetic to them, but also recommend that
you telephone him.

Recommendation
1) That you call Senator Humphrey and seek a direct reading from
him of likely congressional reactions on these questions.
2) If the reading is generally positive, that you authorize us to in-
form OMB that the Department of State favors deletion of Section 102
We would not take any action now on the other provisions of the law;
however, it should be understood that we might wish to go back to
OMB later regarding Section 411 if our evolving relations with Vietnam
so warrant.

Alternatively, that we inform OMB that the Department of State

211.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
80276. Rome for FODAG. Subject: Information for FAO Global In-
formation and Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture.
1. At the request of FAO we have undertaken to try to increase the
food information flow which should prove useful to both the U.S. and
the FAO’s Global Information and Early Warning System (EWS).
2. The EWS was established by the FAO Council to collect and dis-
seminate a variety of data on food outlook, food requirements, food
crops and shortages, and food situations. Much of this data is subject to
restricted distribution due to the sensitivities of some aid receiving
countries to release of such information. Nonetheless, increasing
numbers of such countries are joining the system, and have established
units or appointed officers to collect the appropriate information and
provide it to FAO via its in-country representative or other channels.
FAO is preparing to provide assistance to MSA countries in estab-
lishing such early warning units.
3. FAO and/or World Food Program colleagues in the field pre-
pare monthly food situation reports which are sent to Rome head-
quarters. If a potential food supply or related problem is indicated
Rome headquarters requests clarification from the field or takes steps
to send an evaluator for an on-the-spot assessment. Apart from the
EWS, prices, freight rates, supply trends, production estimates, food
aid flows, etc., are monitored by FAO through a variety of sources.
4. FAO and its members are striving to improve the EWS on a pri-
ority basis due to continuing food supply uncertainties throughout the
world and especially in MSA countries. Both the FAO, EWS and the
USG could benefit from sharing more information on a regular basis.
Congress has repeatedly expressed interest in FAO’s Global Informa-
tion and Early Warning System. Efforts are being made to increase U.S.
participation in the EWS. USDA works closely with the FAO and regu-
classified. Drafted by Wolf and Rupprecht; cleared in substance by Byrnes, John Wash-
burn (IO/ML), McNutt, David Moran, Lauralee Peters (ARA/ECP/FDA), Shurtleff,
J. Phillip McLean (EUR/RPE), by Melvin Schuweiler (AID/PPC), in draft by Daniel Chaij
(AID/LADR), Fletcher Riggs (AID/ASIA/TD/RD), Woodrow Leake (AID/AFR/DR/
ARD), Russell Olson (AID/NE/TECH), William Fradenburg (AID/MP/A), and by tele-
phone in USDA/FAS; approved by Wolf. Repeated for information to the Liaison Office
in Peking, the Interests Section in Baghdad, Vientiane, Taipei, Bucharest, Banjul, Beirut,
USUN, the Mission to the OECD in Paris, the Mission in Geneva, the Mission to the EC in
Brussels, the Mission to the IAEA in Vienna, and the Mission to NATO in Brussels.

World Hunger and Food Policy
larly provides Agricultural Attache and other routine reports to FAO.
The FAO provides regular quarterly and monthly EWS reports to USG
as well as food situation reports on specific situations.
5. Action requested. In view of the U.S. strong interest in this pro-
gram missions should foster stronger cooperative relationships with
FAO field officers (if any). This would increase the exchange of infor-
mation necessary for the functioning of the EWS. In addition, missions,
particularly those in countries facing acute or rapidly deteriorating
food situations, should in course of regular reporting send information
copies of unclassified cables on food production or other factors af-
fecting food sufficiency to Rome for relay to FAO. Such cables should
be addressed: Info Rome FODAG FAO/EWS. This procedure would
not apply in cases where missions have specific concerns relating to the
sensitivity of this data.
6. For Rome: Drawing on the substance of para 5, you may inform
FAO the U.S. will be working to increase the flow of information to the
EWS. To this end we are encouraging our missions to develop even
closer contacts with FAO field representatives. FAO may wish to em-
phasize this cooperative effort through its own channels.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

212.

Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser and
Director of the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy (Press) to President Carter
Washington, June 7, 1977
SUBJECT
World Hunger Problem
In December 1974, President Ford commissioned a major study by
the National Academy of Sciences on World Food and Nutrition, which
will be issued on June 20.

In view of its Presidential origins and in light of your comments
yesterday at the Cabinet meeting about world food needs, I am
bringing it to your attention. This Study describes the potential for new
research initiatives to increase world food production, especially in the
less developed countries. Examples of the research initiatives are:
World Hunger and Food Policy
• New genetic strains and other manipulations of breeding and
farming practices to enhance resistance to pests, weather aberrations,
and chemical variations in soils
• Increasing biological nitrogen fixation associated with legum-
inous plants and devising similar biological nitrogen fixation for cereal
grains, to reduce dependence on chemical fertilizer
• Land management, e.g., use of ruminant livestock as foragers on
uncultivable range land and on crop residues to capture one of the
world’s largest wastes in food production
• Soil management practices to permit production on acidic trop-
ical soils
• Reduction in post-harvest losses, which reach 50% in some coun-
tries due to lack of food preservation, storage, or protection from pests
and rodents
The Chinese have used some of these and other methods to
progress from famine to self-sufficiency in food production in 25 years.
This kind of research and technology transfer could form the basis
of a new thrust in our aid to developing countries.
Do you wish a group from the NAS to present their findings to you
prior to briefing Congress?

I will arrange for briefing EOP staff and Cabinet officers.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

213.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to Chip Carter, the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski), the
President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy
(Eizenstat), and the President’s Science Adviser and Director
of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy
(Press)
Washington, June 11, 1977
SUBJECT
World Hunger Initiative
Background:
The President’s interest in World Hunger is very timely and
needed. Recent estimates indicate that 1. billion people are malnour-
ished. Malnutrition is concentrated in the poor, infants and children,
and among women (particularly nursing mothers). The largest number
of chronically hungry people are found in India, Bangladesh, Pakistan,
and Indonesia. The largest number of chronically food-deficient devel-
oping countries are found in Africa with the Sahel and Ethiopia of par-
ticular concern. Malnutrition, however, is endemic to almost all poor
countries. In parts of South Asia, for example, malnutrition affects over
50 percent of the children. In Latin America, where nutrition is consid-
erably better, malnutrition is a primary or contributing cause of almost
60 percent of the deaths of preschoolchildren. Nonetheless, experience
in Sri Lanka, the State of Kerala in India, and China indicates that there
is hope. Even very poor countries, if they strongly focus comprehensive
social programs on the basic needs of the population, can alleviate or
limit malnutrition significantly.

The food production and nutrition problem has several major in-
ternational aspects. The world’s food production is now sufficient to
meet the current needs, and promises to remain so in the immediate fu-
ture. However, the demand for food in developing countries has been
growing and continues to grow more rapidly than the supply of food
distributed to those countries. Poor countries increasingly depend on
food exports from the United States and a few other major agricultural
exporters.

World Hunger and Food Policy
Thus, world hunger is an explosive humanitarian and political
problem, causing either directly or indirectly millions of deaths per
year. In periods of widespread poor harvests and with no coordinated
system of world food reserves to be drawn upon in times of need, cata-
strophic famines are occurring. Even worse, the distribution of avail-
able food is so poor that annually millions starve or are chronically
malnourished. It is estimated that one million people died of hunger in
India in 1972, and the situation that year was worse in Bangladesh. In
this setting, the United States’ position as the world’s largest food ex-
porter, as the largest donor in international food and agricultural assist-
ance is highly visible and extremely vulnerable. Serious thought and
strong leadership will be necessary to achieve humanitarian goals
while at the same time avoiding foreign and domestic crises.
Human Rights Discussion:
We have stressed the need for cooperation and achievement of
self-reliance in health care with developing nations. We should also, as
an aspect of our overall human needs strategy, stress the need for
achievement of self-reliance in food production and nutrition. We
might consider the hunger issue as the touchstone of a major thrust in
our foreign policy, and one in which we stress meeting human needs
through increasing self-reliance in food production and nutrition, care-
fully integrated with health care and population policies. This thrust
will complement our human rights policy, and establish a more firm
foundation for it. The human right to food, similar to the right to health
care, is fundamental. We cannot continue to focus on the deprivation of
rights for thousands of political prisoners and relegate to back pages
the unnecessary deaths of millions.

While our affirmations regarding world political rights may be oc-
casionally elusive in terms of implementation, our specific actions in
terms of social rights can be very tangible and concrete. We can estab-
lish broad but practical and measurable human needs goals, e.g., pro-
grams of food production and basic nutrition, development of low-cost
health delivery systems, adequate maternal and child health programs,
rural sanitary water supply development, humanitarian food trade
policies, etc. Importantly, this must be done on a government-wide
basis to ensure consistency and comprehensiveness. Implementation
would then follow through the development of a comprehensive global
plan, including goals for the basic human needs of life: adequate and
quality food for everyone, basic health care, education, jobs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Therefore, I am suggesting that as part of a human rights (social
justice) strategy, we should develop a human needs policy with hunger
and health as the rallying points.

Problems Associated with a World Hunger Initiative:
“There is no single cause of the world food problem. Part of the ex-
planation is to be found in the operation of many of the world’s interna-
tional systems which deprive Third World countries of the opportu-
nities to develop the resources required to meet their own food needs.
Part can be found in the distribution of available food and, in partic-
ular, the emergence of meat eating in the industrialized countries as a
consequence of affluence, a development which requires an enormous
indirect consumption of grain to sustain it. It is also true that many
Third World countries have themselves contributed to the world food
problem. In some cases they have not given domestic food production
the priority it deserves, choosing instead to invest their scarce resources
in their cities or in ‘prestige’ projects. They have sometimes subordi-
nated their food needs to those of the industrialized world, using some
of their most productive areas for cultivating the cash crops required
by the industrialized world rather than for producing their own food.
In many cases they have also failed to free the small farmer from the
poverty, ignorance, exploitation and discrimination which are tradi-
tionally his lot and thus prevented him from making the major contri-
bution to development he is able to make. They have sometimes, as a
matter of policy, kept prices of farm products very low with the net re-
sult that the small farmer overwhelmingly carries the burden of devel-
opment. Many have been reluctant to initiate the land reforms required
to expand food production and have failed to come to terms with
post-harvest food losses which, in some countries, account for 50 per-
cent of total grain production.”
In this latter regard, the U.S. has strong but little-used leverage,
e.g., favorable terms of trade and eligibility for food aid.
Given careful study and reflection, it is likely that U.S. policies,
public and private, can be altered to encourage improved production
and distribution at home and abroad.

While it is true that the U.S. is the world’s greatest exporter of agri-
cultural products, we have powerful vested domestic interests which
seek to maintain a consistent but complex set of domestic agricultural
production policies, for there is a close relationship between world de-

World Hunger and Food Policy
mand for food and U.S. domestic food prices. Any pronounced change
in prices will set in motion domestic forces, either from producers or
consumers, which could give the President considerable political
problems. On the other hand, the Administration has sought to de-
velop policies which stress cooperation with developing nations, and
we could do more (utilizing already substantial exhibited support at
the grassroots level) to achieve humanitarian and political goals. The
potential political liabilities can be avoided, but only by planning
which avoids “quick fix” policy pronouncements, and by a strategy de-
signed to gain broad-based consensus on a world food and nutrition
policy among 26 Federal agencies and many private farm, labor, and
other interest groups in the U.S.

Finally, we must recognize that the diet and health of our own cit-
izens is strongly influenced by many of the same policies that affect the
problem of world hunger: the food we grow, how we grow it. Our pat-
terns of trade and aid determine in part what our own citizens pay for
and find on their dinner plates. As responsible policy-makers, we must
focus attention on how decisions in agriculture and foreign aid affect
the health and well being of Americans.

Suggested Optional Approaches:
We should explore approaches that will accomplish
these
objectives:
—Place the President in a strong leadership position on world
hunger.
—Develop public and governmental support for new initiatives,
especially among business groups which have strong vested interest
views on food policy and development assistance.
—Establish a framework for long-term follow up.

The following scenarios are suggested for consideration.
Scenario 1
Step 1: The President or a Cabinet member delivers a statement on
world hunger before a world forum, such as the June 20th World Food
Council meeting in Manila.

Step 2: The President issues a statement appointing a Cabinet-level
official, Presidential advisor, or distinguished American from the pri-
vate sector to head up a public/private Council on World Food and
Nutrition Policy. The Council would conduct regional hearings, begin-
ning in Washington, and possibly extending overseas, to assess what
could be done and recommend options for the President to consider.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
One or more members of the President’s family and other prominent
figures might be involved.

Scenario 2
Step 1: The President announces a major reevaluation of food
policy and agricultural development assistance, and calls for a Wash-
ington Conference on Food and Agricultural Assistance.

Step 2: Farm, business, labor, religious and public interests groups,
foreign officials (especially representatives of international organiza-
tions) as well as Congressional and Executive Branch leaders are in-
vited to a 3-day conference to testify before the President and Cabinet
about their views. The President presides over one session each day,
the co-chairman might be the Secretary of Agriculture, and Senate and
House leadership. At the conclusion of the 3-day conference, the Presi-
dent could appoint a three to five-member Cabinet-level Executive
Group (State, AID, Agriculture, Treasury, Commerce) to prepare a de-
cision document based on the findings.

Step 3: The President’s decisions would be made public in the form
of a Message to Congress.

Scenario 3
Step 1: The President requests each Cabinet Department with re-
sponsibilities related to food and nutrition to prepare a position paper
on current policy and proposed initiatives. Papers would focus on do-
mestic and foreign policy actions to improve the world food and nutri-
tion situation within a basic human needs framework, with attention to
domestic nutritional and economic concerns.

Step 2: A specially convened executive group, or one of the existing
Executive Office agencies such as NSC, CEA, OMB, would integrate the
position papers, and prepare a decision memorandum for the
President.

Step 3: Legislative and administrative measures would be devel-
oped to implement the President’s decisions. A message to Congress
and/or a world forum speech could publicize his decisions.
An integral government-wide policy with widespread support for
a major world food program is required. It is not clear that Agriculture,
Treasury, State, Commerce, Transportation, and AID are together on
an approach to the problems previously identified, nor is there agree-
ment in the private sector. Therefore, it is necessary to build support
and to identify opportunities for consensus if the President is to be suc-
cessful in this area. A cross-cutting mechanism of some kind which
bridges domestic and international interests appears essential. People I
have consulted in the private sector agree with this view.

214.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Agriculture
Bergland
Washington, June 15, 1977
SUBJECT
Your Manila WFC Meeting in the Context of Our Emerging Foreign Policy
Your presence at the World Food Council in June presents an ex-
cellent opportunity to press forward with some major Administration
foreign policy themes as they relate to outstanding issues between de-
veloped and developing countries. In particular, the forum seems
highly suited to expand upon the “basic human needs” theme which
the President has sounded in his United Nations and Notre Dame
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
speeches, and which the Secretary of State has elaborated recently at
the CIEC Ministerial in Paris and will be discussing further at the
OECD Ministerial.

Many elements of the Administration’s approach to the “absolute
poverty” problem—the basic human needs problem—are intimately
related
to
the
agenda
of
the
World
Food
Conference.

Since
three-quarters of the world’s “absolute poverty” population lives in
rural areas, and since the “life chances” of the vast majority of them are
tied to increased agricultural production and programs of reform of
rural health and education facilities and agricultural infrastructure, the
Manila Conference is well suited to a further iteration of U.S. goals in
the “basic human needs” area.

I suggest therefore that you might wish to make the following gen-
eral observations in your own language.
1) While the world undoubtedly needs some form of grain reserve
system, what the developing countries need most of all is to develop
greater capacity for domestic food production.
2) Breakthroughs in developing country agricultural production
are intimately linked to a “basic human needs” approach in two crucial
ways:
a) More food will be available to increase nutrition levels for the
poorest strata of developing country populations, and
b) More productive employment opportunities will be created for
this same population group—three-quarters of whom live in rural
areas.
3) The United States is aware that programs to meet the needs of
the poorest do not always work the way they are supposed to; e.g., few
new jobs are created if capital-intensive technologies are used.
4) Therefore, the United States hopes to persuade its OECD asso-
ciates at the late June Ministerial to begin to fashion a comprehensive
approach to a “basic human needs” strategy, and to present this idea
for global discussion in appropriate venues within the coming year.

215.

Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, June 17, 1977
Prospects for Expanded Soviet Bloc Role in North-South Problems
Summary and Conclusions
There are two contrasting motives for encouraging the Soviet Bloc
to play a more active role in North-South problems, particularly in
various measures for economic development, as you suggested at
CIEC:2
a) to elicit a genuinely cooperative effort on the part of the Soviet
Union, with the aim of maximizing the positive role they have to play
in Third World development and dampening East-West political com-
petition; or
b) to silhouette Soviet inadequacies in contributing to Third World
needs, with the aim of revealing the gap between Soviet rhetoric and
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
reality and exposing the Soviets to criticism on the part of the devel-
oping countries.

The relative weight to be accorded these motives shows up when
the complex of North-South issues is broken down into its components:
negotiations focusing on the International Wheat Agreement, other indi-
vidual commodity agreements (except coffee), aid for basic human needs,
and the producer-consumer dialogue in energy offer some promise of
success in integrating the Soviet bloc into the North-South dialogue in a
constructive way.

On the Food Aid Convention, IFAD, general bilateral aid, multila-
teral development efforts via the UN, trade, and technology, in con-
trast, it will be extraordinarily hard to move the Soviets into a pattern of
positive contribution. But it should be relatively easy to expose the
dismal Soviet performance to Third World criticism, without our ap-
pearing to conduct an anti-Soviet campaign.

The United States need not choose definitively, between the two
approaches. Rather, it can explore both options without foreclosing
either.

But there are limits to how much we can expect from this effort.
While some Soviet officials have recently been throwing out hints of
greater interest, Moscow’s official position is that it wants no part of the
“North-South” dialogue as such; that it is a false way of looking at the
world and that the real division—between capitalist and socialist coun-
tries—puts them squarely on the side of the developing states.
Beyond rhetoric and ideology, the Soviets have not wanted to di-
lute the political impact of their assistance by subsuming it within
broader efforts by the industrialized (read Western) nations. And they
focus more on arms and military equipment than on economic aid. This
gives them a short-run political impact disproportionate to their
outlays, and leaves Western countries shouldering the more important,
longer-term economic aid burden.

Finally, we should be under no illusion that LDC pressure on the
West springs from a notion that the Soviets wear white hats and we
black. It reflects, instead, a realistic assessment that we have most of
what the LDCs need, and are more likely to give at least some of it.

World Hunger and Food Policy
Thus, whether we get the Soviets to cooperate in the North-South
dialogue or merely score propaganda points off them, we should not
expect it to lessen LDC pressure on ourselves.

The Issues
1. Agriculture
(a) International Grain Agreement
This fall the United States wants to begin negotiations on a new In-
ternational Grain Agreement. The Soviets want an agreement that will
produce stable prices, but have been reluctant to sign an accord that re-
quires reserve stocks. To ensure food security for the Third World there
must be grain stocks. The Soviet Union must bear central responsi-
bility: variations in Soviet grain production currently account for about
80% of worldwide production variations. And if history is a guide, the
Soviet Union will probably encounter serious weather problems in at
least one or two of the next five years. They have an interest in getting
an agreement to give them some security on price. Pressing them on the
need to contribute to protection against starvation in the Third World
might push them over the top toward making a commitment on re-
serves. Probability of success: moderate.

(b) Food Aid Convention
This fall we shall start negotiations for a new Food Aid Conven-
tion, which will consist of pledges by member countries to donate an
annual minimum amount of food aid. The Soviets have not been a
member in the past. This year we could seek Soviet membership. Prob-
ability of success: extremely low. Prospects for shaming the Soviets:
good.

(c) IFAD
IFAD is a fund to finance agricultural development in the Third
World via projects carried out by the World Bank, regional banks, or
FAO. The Soviets have not promised to contribute. We could press
them. Probability of success: almost none. Prospects for shaming the
Soviets: moderate.
2. Commodity Agreements
The Soviets are already a member of commodity agreements—
cocoa, tin, rubber, and sugar (now defunct). To have successful agree-
ments on sugar, copper, and eventually other materials, we shall have
to insist that they make their bilateral agreements public (e.g., Cuban
sugar) and that they include intra-bloc trade as part of the world trade

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
for purposes of market control (e.g., copper shipments in Eastern Eu-
rope). Probability of success: moderate.
3. Development Assistance
(a) Basic Human Needs
There are some specific areas in which the Soviets might be able to
make a productive contribution to development assistance in coopera-
tion with American aid programs. One is the training of paramedical
personnel, where the Soviets have a comparative advantage and the
South has a great need. Other areas for US-Soviet bloc cooperative aid
programs in the “human needs” category might include: a) water treat-
ment; b) waste disposal; c) joint research in host countries on tropical
diseases; d) responses to protein deficiency; e) immunization; f) clinics
and low-cost health delivery systems. (Note: Cuba has an outstanding
record in organizing and managing programs, especially rural pro-
grams, in many of these areas.)

The US Congress might not like the notion of joint ventures, espe-
cially with Cubans. It might be well to begin by adding LDC needs to
the agenda of ongoing US-Soviet exchanges on, for instance, agricul-
ture, housing, and medical subjects. Probability of success: unknown.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to agricultural issues.]

216.

Memorandum From Lynn Daft of the Domestic Policy Staff
to the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy
(Eizenstat)
Washington, June 27, 1977
SUBJECT
World Hunger as a Policy Initiative
In preparation for your meeting this Tuesday2 to discuss Peter
thoughts.

World Hunger and Food Policy
World Hunger as an Issue

217.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, June 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Some Thoughts and Suggestions for the World Hunger Meeting
This Administration has not yet developed an integrated policy on
world food and nutrition. This is a difficult subject both because it is so
intertwined with highly political domestic issues, and because on the
foreign side it involves so many different agencies and kinds of issues.
While there are no short term deadlines to force adequate attention to
be paid to it, in the medium and long term there is probably no other single
issue that will more affect global peace and security than the availability and
distribution of food.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Bourne has written a memorandum for today’s meeting (Tab A) pro-
posing a “World Hunger Initiative”. Please read the section entitled
Suggested Optional Approaches beginning on page 4. You will see that it is
merely a public relations strategy—almost no substance. Scenario 3 sug-
gests a bizarre version of an interagency process—minus the interac-
tions. He would have each agency submit its own tunnel vision view of
the problems and programs, and then have a separate Executive Office
group try to mold these into a coherent policy. To my mind that is a ri-
diculous approach, destined to produce only a rehash of what we al-
ready know. The other two scenarios propose an outreach to the
dozens of outside interest groups before a policy is developed. That
makes no sense.

I have been looking at this issue for several weeks, and am con-
vinced that a serious fairly long lead-time PRM is needed. This issue is
worthy of the most serious consideration at a level which will com-
mand the best talents the agencies have to offer. Though pieces of this
issue are being treated by many agencies, the threads have yet to be
pulled together into a coherent policy. However I do not think that any
new institutional arrangement should be set up (as Bourne suggests) until
after such a comprehensive review is completed. The PRM should be
done in close collaboration with OSTP, OMB and the Domestic
Council. I do not think however that Bourne should be too heavily in-
volved—certainly not in a lead position. His forays into the health field
have created unprecedented bureaucratic chaos.

Regarding substance, my feeling is that Chip’s role should focus on
helping to build domestic support for the concept that certain basic human
needs are an integral part of human rights. Certainly nothing could be
more basic than the right not to starve. As a member of the President’s
family, Chip is perfectly suited to this role, and it would be a contribu-
tion not only to this issue, but to the whole spectrum of human needs
concerns, as well as to the entire human rights policy. Obviously, if suc-
cessful, a major effort at increasing public awareness on this issue,
would help enormously in generating the Congressional support the
World Hunger and Food Policy
President will need if he is to fulfill the promise he has made to double
foreign aid by 1982.

One additional suggestion: The Soviets have traditionally been
very difficult on this issue—refusing to participate in international con-
ferences, etc. As you know, they have proposed three CSCE initiatives
for international conferences on energy, environment and transporta-
tion. Perhaps we could respond with an American proposal at the fall
CSCE meeting for a food and nutrition conference—pegged on the connec-
tion between human needs and human rights. This would: (1) consti-
tute an American initiative at CSCE which the President wants, and
(2) be visible evidence of the fact that the US is not backing off on
human rights, without being provocative to the Soviets (at least in a
way they can acknowledge). Hormats is very dubious about this idea.
He feels that the LDCs would resent it as an attempt to insert a
North-South issue into the East-West conflict. Perhaps some more
work would define some useful variant of it.

Recommendations:
1. That you make clear at the meeting that you view this as a major
foreign policy issue, on which the NSC is preparing to begin an intera-
gency study—in which all concerned Executive Office departments
will be appropriately involved.
2. That you do not think that we should start any public relations
programs, such as Bourne proposes, until we have our policy pretty
well worked out. Public conferences before that time would only serve
to advertise and increase our present lack of direction.
3. That you suggest that Chip’s role be focused on the relationship
of human needs to the global human rights agenda, and that a substan-
tive role for him be developed on that basis. It should be emphasized
that creating domestic support for this idea would be of very real value
to the President.
4. That you approve further work on the proposal to suggest some
kind of food and nutrition conference as an American initiative of the
CSCE Review Conference.

218.

Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research
No. 823
Washington, June 28, 1977
SHARING THE BURDEN IN THE NEXT FOOD CRISIS
At present, countries consuming three-fourths of the world’s grain
follow trade and domestic policies that magnify the impact of a short-
fall in worldwide grain supplies and force larger cutbacks on the re-
maining nations. In the scramble for grains during the 1972–75 food
shortage, some nations increased their grain use by 10 to 20 percent
over their pre-crisis levels, while others were forced to decrease con-
sumption by as much as 16 percent. This disparity raises questions as to
whether there are more equitable ways to adjust to future shortfalls and
reduce economic disruptions.

Contrast in Pricing Policies
When domestic grain production falls in the Soviet Union, the PRC,
and most of Eastern Europe, domestic consumption is maintained by
making available additional imported grain at regular domestic prices.
In the EC, grain prices are kept stable even in times of world shortage
through frequent changes in the tariff rate applied to grain imports
(known as the variable levy). These countries use nearly half of the
world’s grain, yet their policies reduce economic incentives for grain
conservation.

In the LDCs, where grains constitute the major element in the
human diet, most governments try to maintain stable consumer prices
through direct procurement and imports. When prices rise, the gov-
ernments attempt to maintain consumption levels for the poor through
some form of special distribution, by absorbing some of the import and
marketing costs, and by using food aid when possible. In these ways
most LDCs are able to prevent sharp cutbacks in consumption levels,
albeit with shifts in foreign exchange expenditures or increased
indebtedness.

The burden of adjustment has fallen chiefly on countries which use
the remaining fourth of the world’s grain, that is, Canada, Australia,
and the United States (the three major exporters), a few other devel-
oped countries, and some of the poorest LDCs.

In contrast to Europe and the USSR, the US has permitted internal
prices to vary widely. In 1974–75, as a result of sharply increased corn
and wheat prices, domestic US grain consumption decreased by 38 mil-
ited Official Use. Drafted by Witt and approved by Ely.

World Hunger and Food Policy
lion tons). Canada and Australia, despite some protection against high
prices for their wheat consumers, also showed a decline in overall grain
use in the 1974 to 1976 period.

Prior to 1972, when world grain production capacity greatly ex-
ceeded normal demand, unusual demands for imports drew on excess
stocks held by residual suppliers, while ample food aid was available
to hard-pressed LDCs. However, with world grain supply and demand
now more nearly in balance, particularly for feedgrains, a small short-
fall leads to competitive scrambling for exportable supplies, sharp in-
creases in prices, and soaring foreign exchange expenditures.
Adjustments During the 1972–75 Food Crisis
The recent crisis was generated by two very small decreases in
world food production and somewhat larger decreases in per capita
production:
3-percent decrease per capita;
5-percent increase per capita;
in a 2-percent drop per capita; and
caused no change in per capita availabilities.

During the entire period, world production was at least 10 percent
higher per capita than in the 1961–65 base period. Even in the LDCs,
per capita production was above the base years, although it dropped
course, varied widely with changes of as much as 30 percent above or
below the base period.

Grain consumption figures, although of varying reliability, il-
lustrate the uneven adjustment to changes in world supplies. (See
Table 1.)

The LDCs in the aggregate were able to increase total grain con-
sumption during each of the years after 1972, although not on a per
capita basis in 1974–75. Clearly, this was possible only because of a de-
crease in consumption in the developed nations, with most of the de-
cline occurring in the US. The EC Nine also maintained consumption
livestock production. To feed an even more rapidly expanding live-
1976–77,” is attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
stock industry, Eastern Europe and the USSR increased grain con-
sumption sharply until mid-1975; the severe 1975 drought brought dis-
tress slaughter to the USSR and forced a curtailment of consumption,
despite more than 25 million tons of grain imports.

Table 23 shows the differences in consumption patterns of 22 major
countries and areas. The logistical difficulties in distributing grain to
combat the effects of the Sahel drought are evident in the 13-percent re-
duction in Central and West African consumption and the very small
(3 percent) increase in the best year of the period. The remaining LDC
regions show increases in grain consumption, in some cases substantial
increases, partly as substitutes for other foods in short supply. Also,
while obtaining more grain, many of these nations faced such economic
problems as equitable internal distribution of food, increasing foreign
indebtedness, and reallocation of foreign exchange earnings.
Implications
The higher prices received by growers and rising foreign exchange
earnings from grain exports are a mixed blessing in exporting coun-
tries. Desperate LDCs turn to exporters with pleas (or demands) for
concessional supplies. Livestock farmers in exporting countries, con-
fronted with higher grain prices, sharply curtail the use of feedgrains
and livestock production, which leads to early slaughter but subse-
quent shortage of livestock products. Livestock farmers, consumers,
and labor groups seek action to limit price increases and control ex-
ports; these efforts handicap governments in responding to legitimate
LDC pleas for more grain supplies. Wide variations in prices may also
be damaging to the long-run interests of grain producers as land prices
and other production costs increase. Finally, dogged pursuance of glo-
bally inconsistent efforts to maintain usual consumption levels con-
tributes to global inflation, depletes LDC exchange reserves, and, in
some circumstances, reduces world demand for other commodities.
Long-range efforts to expand food production, reduce waste, con-
trol population, and improve nutrition may affect the size of the short-
fall but are relatively unimportant in dealing with a current shortage.
Of the programs to deal with grain shortages, some, such as grain
reserves, must be inaugurated in advance of the shortfall, while others
require adjustments in agricultural resource use and reallocations of
food supplies during the period of crisis. In either case, the burden of
these adjustments falls unevenly upon nations and groups within na-
tions. It will be very difficult to spread the burden more equitably, or
even to define an equitable sharing of the burden.
tached but not printed.

World Hunger and Food Policy
In a world of free trade, flexible prices, and relatively adequate ex-
change reserves among countries, moderate changes in prices would
stimulate many of the appropriate economic adjustments but not nec-
essarily contribute to an improvement in equity. In the absence of such
economic policies, remedies must be sought in other directions and will
be very difficult to achieve. Some of the less difficult ones are listed
below.
—The establishment of grain reserves, whether private, public, or
international, can make a significant contribution to reducing the im-
pact of a shortfall in current production. A reserve designed to stabilize
grain supplies for livestock production must be much larger than one
geared to stabilize foodgrain supplies for human consumption.
—More stable, possibly multi-year, food aid commitments have
special significance for the lower income LDCs. Contributions by an
array of the richer nations, even though they are not food exporters, can
help prevent food aid from diminishing in quantity when the need is
greatest.
—More flexible national policy to stimulate food-grain production
through higher prices and other expansionist policies will help prevent
a second or third year of food shortages.
—Provision
of
emergency
grants
and
credits
will
enable
low-income LDCs to compete more effectively in world grain markets
during periods of shortages; however, this approach can be infla-
tionary unless cutbacks are made in other countries.
Since food shortages bear most heavily on the poor, additional do-
mestic programs are likely to be needed in individual countries to im-
prove access to food supplies for adversely affected regions and eco-
nomic groups.

More difficult measures that require considerable coordination
among national policies for controlling or curtailing grain consumption
include:
—Trade liberalization to extend the area of price-sensitive produc-
tion and consumption.
—An insurance program sponsored by exporters, or by all
high-income countries, to furnish grain to any LDC whose output falls
below 3 or 4 percent of trend production.
—Measures in developed nations, including Eastern Europe and
the USSR, to reduce the amount of foodgrains consumed by animals,
either by switching to grass and fodder or by deliberate reduction of
livestock numbers.
—Discouragement of human consumption of grain in all countries
where alternative food supplies are available.

219.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman and Leslie Denend of
the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, July 9, 1977
SUBJECT
World Food Project
The attached memorandum (Tab A) fulfills your direction to pro-
duce a joint NSC-Domestic Council-OSTP-Bourne proposal—except
that Bourne’s people do not agree with it.

Since our meeting with you, we have held two meetings, pro-
duced
two
drafts,3
and
incorporated
two
sets
of
comments.

Throughout all this, NSC, DPC and OSTP have been in fairly complete
agreement, and all are happy with the final draft. Also, throughout the
whole process, talking to Jerry Fill and John Daly has been like talking
World Hunger and Food Policy
to a stone wall. Fill staged an angry walkout from the second meeting
in response to some perfectly reasonable comments by one of the other
participants. The core of the disagreement is that Bourne’s people look
upon the substantive work that needs to be done as a minor sideshow
to a major effort to build a public constituency for hunger, while ev-
eryone else believes that it makes little sense to solicit support for a
policy before you know what your policy is.

Bourne’s comments (prepared in response to an earlier draft) are
attached at Tab B, along with final comments by the others. Many of
Bourne’s comments, such as the suggestion to add Transportation,
Labor and ERDA to the list of addressees were discussed by the group
and, I thought, disposed of. However, Bourne’s office declined to pro-
duce comments to the second draft.

In sum, we made a good faith effort to produce a consensus pro-
posal—but ended up as far apart from Bourne’s office as we were at the
first meeting. Frankly, all of the rest of us who participated in this effort
(including Hormats, Hansen, Huberman and Denend) were amazed at
Jerry Fill. I am sure he has honest convictions on this issue, but he has
been totally unresponsive to our efforts to reach consensus and move
forward.

I don’t know where to go with Bourne’s people from here (or even
whether Fill’s convictions are shared by Bourne himself), but I believe
that the attached proposal provides a sound basis to proceed with fur-
ther work.

Recommendation:
If you approve of this proposal, I would suggest that we draft a
memorandum to the President explaining what we have done and
what we are proposing. Specifically, we would want him to understand
that under this plan, major Presidential initiatives on this issue would
be postponed until the PRM is completed—probably around the end of
the year.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Tab A
Memorandum
Washington, undated
TOWARD A PRM ON WORLD FOOD POLICY
I. The Mechanics of the Study
A. Process: We are agreed that the PRM process is appropriate for
this review. The strengths of the PRM process are that it is a tested ap-
proach to problems which cut across departments and agencies, and it
is respected by the bureaucracy which will delegate high-level atten-
tion to its preparation.

B. Participants: Every agency which will play a significant role in
the policy implementation should be included, but every effort should
be made to limit the participants to those who have a legitimate in-
terest. Suggested participants include:
Agencies
Executive Office of the President
State
National Security Council
Treasury
Office of Management and
Commerce
Budget
Agriculture
Domestic Policy Council
Health, Education and Welfare
Office of Science and Tech-
Agency for International
nology Policy
Development
Office of the Special Represent-
Central Intelligence Agency
ative for Trade Negotiations
United States Representative to
Office of the Special Assistant
the United Nations
for Health (Bourne)
National Science Foundation
National Institutes of Health
C. Chair: Since a committee cannot be successfully run by a com-
mittee, the PRM would be run under joint NSC-Domestic Policy
Council management with full participation by other Executive Office
of the President offices as appropriate. Serious problems have arisen in
World Hunger and Food Policy
the past due to joint management arrangements and the consequent
lack of a single point man. There are strong reasons to strive for joint
domestic-international management but this may prove to be infea-
sible. A more precise definition of who will do what can probably be ar-
rived at during the process of drafting the PRM tasking memorandum.
D. Timeframe: There are several studies in progress now which bear
(October 15). The conclusions of these studies should be digested be-
fore another is begun. Therefore, we would expect to issue the PRM in
late October for a study requiring several months.
II. A Role for Chip Carter
A. Chip Carter, following his father’s initiative, is anxious to get
started and do something about world hunger. He will be a valuable
asset after a policy is defined. However, until we have a policy, his ef-
forts should concentrate on drawing attention to the broad dimensions
of the problem, and stressing the notion of a world responsibility to
solve it.

B. Chip will need some staff assistance in whatever he undertakes.
Given the nature of his efforts, the best points of contact are probably in
the Office of the Assistant to the President for Public Liaison.
C. Specific activities might include:
—Attendance at public hearings by various interest groups.
—Travel as a concerned member of the “world community”.
—Sponsorship of an information clearing house.
D. Care must be taken so that Chip is not seen as a government
spokesman during the early stages. His exposure should give him cred-
ibility as a spokesman on the issue, and later, when we have a policy for
him to support, he will be an effective advocate.
III. A Focus of the Study
A. The concern of the President and Chip Carter is hunger. We
have learned through painful experience in this field that well meant
efforts to produce short term benefits (i.e., by trying to directly feed
people) can often produce counterproductive results. To avoid a “quick
fix” solution to an emotional and pressing issue, the study must be
broadened to include the full scope of international agricultural policy
and many central aspects of domestic agricultural policies so that an ef-
fective long-term policy can be developed. While the issue of world
volume III, Foreign Economic Policy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
hunger is obviously related to the whole spectrum of human needs, the
scope of the study must be kept to manageable limits.
B. Consequently, our efforts should center on three sets of issues:
1. Food Production
—Fluctuations in world-wide production, including climate
change.
—LDC food production.
—Pre- and post-harvest losses.
—Agricultural research.
—Production incentives.
2. Food Distribution
—International trade and commodity policy.
—Domestic and international food reserves—control and access.
—Role of food aid and grants.
—Food distribution systems—efficiency, equity, different avail-
able mechanisms.
3. Food Consumption
—Social change—land reform, urgan-rural balance, etc.
—Economic change—purchasing power, income distribution, etc.
—Nutrition.

These three broad areas may be well studied without in depth con-
sideration of issues of health or population planning.
IV. First Steps
This paper represents a first step towards a full definition of the
scope of the PRM. During the interim period between now and Oc-
tober, in addition to monitoring the progress of the related studies
mentioned above, we will want to undertake the following:
—Lay the bureaucratic groundwork through detailed consulta-
tions with key individuals in the involved agencies.
—Continue to define the study and begin drafting the PRM.
—Collect and classify work that has been done to date in and out
of government on this issue and broadly related topics.
—Develop a fairly detailed understanding of just how the many
agencies involved in food participate in the policy and implementation
process.
—Identify and categorize areas of persistent and acute hunger in
the world by country, region, distribution methods, agricultural tech-
nology, hunger causes.

World Hunger and Food Policy
Tab B
Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to the Members of the World Hunger
Organizing Committee
Washington, July 7, 1977
SUBJECT
World Hunger Initiative
The following are my views on Ms. Tuchman’s discussion paper
on the President’s interest in developing a World Hunger Initiative.
I. The Mechanics of the Study
A. Process. The PRM process is an appropriate policy review mech-
anism for the National Security Council. It is not clear that this process,
in the absence of early public involvement (i.e., a Washington Confer-
ence on Food and Nutrition), is the best approach to deal with com-
peting domestic and international interests, both within the gov-
ernment and the private sector, and promote high-level attention and
the attendant constituency in the development and execution of a U.S.
policy. Therefore, I would propose that this initiative not be viewed as
a study, but instead, a policy review which includes involvement by
the private sector.

B. Participants. Several other agencies should be included in the
process. Suggested additional agencies would include: Department of
Transportation which effects domestic price and therefore distribution
of international food commodities; the Department of Labor; and
perhaps ERDA.

In addition, I believe it is sufficient to mention HEW and not also
the National Institutes of Health. Also, I believe that mention of the
State Department is sufficient and that special consideration of the U.S.
representative to the United Nations which falls under the organiza-
tional framework of the Department of State is unnecessary.
With respect to the Executive Office, my view is that the Office of
the Special Assistant to the President for Health Issues should be in-
cluded in the consideration of the institutional entities included as
major participants in this review. The Office of Drug Abuse Policy
(ODAP) is not relevant to this issue. In addition, and transcending my
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
own interest in involvement, is the concern that we have an overabun-
dance of Executive Office representation and that this would have a
tendency to detract from the Cabinet-level responsibility. Therefore, I
am suggesting that a structure be developed which includes only one
EOP individual within the Executive Committee level of any cross-
cutting mechanism developed.

Consideration must also be given to other options which are not
included in this particular discussion paper, e.g., a public/private
cross-cutting mechanism, or a solely private mechanism with private
leadership dependent upon the final decision.

My principal concern is that there is no mention of the public’s par-
ticipation in the development and formulation of the world hunger
policy of the United States government. The point was made at the ini-
tial meeting chaired by Dr. Brzezinski (and I believe agreed to by him)
that crystallizing attention on hunger and involving the public would
be a useful approach for the President to mobilize constituent support
for foreign policy initiatives across the board. This position is not re-
flected in your paper. Basically I disagree with the tactics regarding
the development of this initiative where it concerns the President’s
involvement.

C. The Chair. A joint NSC-Domestic Council management mecha-
nism does not meet the need for a single individual to manage, arbi-
trate, and mediate the government review on world hunger. Further-
more, it detracts from the relevant Cabinet agency leadership. I believe
that major visible participation by the Department of State, the Depart-
ment of Agriculture and AID is essential to this review.

D. Timeframe. Should there be a policy review which involves the
private sector, it would be necessary to develop guidelines for the con-
duct of the review that would take the better part of 8 weeks. However,
it is questionable whether it would take more than that time to plan.
October 15 seems later than necessary.

II. A Role for Chip Carter
I believe that it is unnecessary for Chip Carter to wait until a gov-
ernment policy is established. As I understand it, Chip wants to be only
involved as it relates to the private sector initially. It would be inappro-
priate to provide him with staff assistants within the government re-
gardless of where that assistance comes from. Therefore my suggestion
is:
Not to wait until the completion of the policy, but encourage, ad-
vise, and assist Chip in the development of, for example, an informa-
World Hunger and Food Policy
tion clearinghouse on world hunger, but with assistance from the pri-
vate sector.

Regarding section II, C, attendance at public hearings of various
interest groups seems to be inappropriate. Chip can attend any public
hearing he wants to as a citizen of the United States as well as travel
throughout the world. More pertinent is his participation as an active
spokesman within the private sector articulating a particular point of
view. We need a sound proposal for his participation within the private
sector. We should encourage him to hire an appropriate consultant to
work closely with him so that his efforts are productive and comple-
mentary to the activities going on within the government. This strategy
will ensure that Chip not be viewed as a government spokesman in the
early stages. Later, perhaps, and after the government has initiated a
number of actions over the short term or intermediate term of the
long-term policy that I assume would be developed, he may be more
closely associated with Administration initiatives.

III. Focus of the Study
A. Again, we believe the word “study” will have a negative conno-
tation. The Congress and the private sector have been overwhelmed by
a multitude of studies for the past decade on this subject. The approach
that I believe is most appropriate includes the development of a basic
policy framework, within which any initiative should be developed.
My own view is that the expression “international agricultural policy
and domestic agricultural policies” is inappropriate. My recommenda-
tion is to conduct an International Food and Nutrition Policy Review
and to characterize relevant domestic policies as domestic food pol-
icies. This approach transcends agriculture assistance, removes the
connotation of welfare, and develops a posture of looking at this issue
as an international economic issue. A welfare approach would be objec-
tionable to multilateral organizations, the Congress, and the private
sector.

B. I believe that the expression “food production” is inappropriate.
I recommend that the category be called “food supply.” Furthermore,
the statement at the end of this section that these two broad areas could
be studied without in-depth consideration of domestic agricultural
subsidies, health, nutrition, or population planning, I believe, is
inaccurate.

I have given this issue considerable thought and would like to pro-
pose an alternative focus for the policy review conducted by a public or
public/private organization as follows:
1. Strategy: First, the President should be able, with the assistance
and advice of the various agencies in the government and key public
interest organizations in the private sector, to develop a set of goals that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
he wants to move toward by 1980 so that a measure of his Administra-
tion’s progress on hunger and malnutrition in foreign countries can be
taken by the American public. Broadly stated, the policy review should
focus on the following basic areas:
a. Policies to provide more equitable access to available food. People are
hungry today not only because there is a scarcity of food but because
many are poor; food goes to the highest bidder not the neediest person.
Therefore,
—U.S. policies should be designed to encourage poor nations to
become more self-reliant in the development of their own agricultural
capacity.
—U.S. policies should encourage an increase in income and devel-
opment for the poorest billion people on earth.
b. Policies to increase the supply of food in relation to demand. This in-
cludes the following types of actions:
—Policies to increase food production and rural development in
the developing nations.
—Policies to encourage a higher level of food production in the
United States.
—Policies to provide food security through our international
system of grain reserves. Perhaps serious consideration should be
given to an international insurance scheme as now being debated
within the World Bank community for this particular problem area.
—Policies to eliminate the waste of food, particularly post-harvest
food losses.
c. Policies to provide food or food assistance for those unable to purchase
sufficient food for adequate nutrition.
d. Policies to deal explicitly with the organization, management, and re-
sources appropriate for the United States government to implement these pol-
icies. This is a universally accepted problem of governments’ inability
to come to grips with this important responsibility area.
This would lay the groundwork for a set of goals broadly stated
with which the President could establish the basis for specific actions
designed to move toward an action-oriented government policy. It is
extremely important that we do not send a signal to the Congress or to
the American people and our neighbors abroad that the most President
Carter is going to do is “study” the issue. At the same time, we certainly
would not want to pursue a policy of “quick fixes” as is pointed out in
the first draft discussion paper outline. However, this is not to suggest
that short-term, intermediate and long-term approaches cannot be de-
veloped throughout the process.

Having established a broad policy framework, the President then
can decide with minimum delay what kind of measurable goals he
wants to move toward so that by 1980 the public and Congress will un-

World Hunger and Food Policy
derstand what he has accomplished in this critical international human
needs area.
2. The following represent actions that could potentially engender
the kind of position in 1980 where the President could say he has met
specific milestones established in 1977 to pursue the concept of meeting
international human needs in the food and nutrition area. They are as
follows:
—A redeployment of U.S. foreign assistance resources that reflects
the highest priority he has accorded to helping poor countries solve
their most pressing food consumption problems. His redeployment
might include a “food and nutrition discretionary fund” to allow quick
response to crises and to targets of opportunity. It might require con-
solidating and rationalizing foreign aid, food-for-peace, and other leg-
islation and agencies.
—A significant and measurable decrease in malnutrition-related
child mortality in prospect in selected recipient countries as a result of
this redeployment of foreign aid resources.
—A procedure to test proposed U.S. policies and programs in
terms of their effect on food consumption and nutritional effects (e.g.,
trade policies that may encourage inappropriate food exports from
food-poor countries). This test could also be applied by U.S. gov-
ernment representatives to policies, programs and projects of interna-
tional organizations.
—A set of U.S. trade policies (e.g., sugar quotas, most favored na-
tion treatment) that take into account opportunities for encouraging
countries to adopt equitable food and nutrition policies in their own
countries.
—Special food and nutrition consortia of donor countries in place
and working with, say, five countries with serious nutrition problems
that are committed to actions on food production, distribution and con-
sumption policies, programs and projects.
—An efficiently operating international grain supply and price
stabilization system of demonstrable benefit to the poorest countries in
backing up national food reserves arrangements.
—A vigorous internationally coordinated food and nutrition re-
search program under way in the U.S. and, especially, in developing
countries dealing with those technical and scientific issues that repre-
sent potential breakthroughs toward solutions of key problems.
—Government policy machinery with public and private sector
representation in place and at work in recommending and overseeing
the implementation of changes in the U.S. food systems that will har-
monize conflicting interests and objectives as they relate to broad pol-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
icies, key commodities, and the balancing of economic, health, and so-
cial policy considerations.

Having told the agencies where he wants to be by 1980, the Presi-
dent must then ask them to tell him what must be done now to get
there:
—Mobilize private sector efforts
—Refine the objectives
—Establish an adequate organization
—Propose legislation
—Assignment of lead agency responsibility
—Develop public understanding and support.
Attacking world hunger by mobilizing public support, setting
some reasonable attainable 1980 goals (this does not take a year to de-
cide), and assigning a high priority to this human needs initiative can
and will foster support for the President’s overall foreign policy
objectives.

220.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Secretary of the Cabinet
(Watson)
Washington, July 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Bergland Memorandum on Proposed Human Rights Conference on Food
At the direction of the President, Frank Press, Peter Bourne, Stu
Eizenstat and myself have been involved in an effort to define a sound
World Hunger and Food Policy
approach to the problem of world hunger. We have been concerned
both with developing the substance of a coherent Administration
policy and with the related need to build public support for it. Our ef-
forts include the definition of a role for Chip who has a strong interest
in this area. At this point, our work indicates the need for an intensive
interagency review before major public initiatives are undertaken. How-
ever, I should add that these proposals have not yet been submitted to
the President for his approval.

I would suggest that Secretary Bergland’s memorandum be held
by you for further action pending the President’s decisions on the
memorandum which I will be forwarding to him shortly. Based on his
decisions we can then decide how best to proceed with it. I will keep
you fully informed.

Attachment
Memorandum From Secretary of Agriculture Bergland to
President Carter
Washington, July 7, 1977
RE
Proposed Human Rights Conference on Food
The availability of food and access to an adequate diet are major
problems which affect nearly all the world’s people. For most of the
world, the lack of enough food is translated into hunger; and for them,
food is a human right yet to be realized. In the United States, hunger is
still a visible problem, but it is more complex. As a nation, we do not
lack enough food; more than enough is available. For some low income
persons, the problem is access to adequate food, and their lack of access
can translate into hunger and malnutrition. For millions of others in our
population, the means to purchase sufficient food is present, but the
lack of information about nutrition and health leads to increased inci-
dence of disease and spiraling health care costs.
before it is approved.” (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box
cated that the Department of State supported such a conference but noted that the confer-
ence agenda needed to be strengthened. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
These thoughts have been very much on my mind since the World
Food Conference in Manila, and have been sharpened as the likeli-
hood of a bountiful harvest this year becomes clearer.
The time is right for a White House Human Rights Conference on

221.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to Secretary of State
Vance
Washington, July 18, 1977
The World Food Council and the North-South Dialogue
Results of the Third Ministerial Session
The successful conclusion of the Third Session of the World Food
viability of this organization and gives it the potential to become one of
the primary fora for continuation of the North-South dialogue in food
and agriculture. The meeting was successful not only in reaching a
classification marking. Drafted by McEldowney on July 13; cleared by Hathaway, Bos-
worth, Ferch, and Byrnes and in draft by Donald McClelland (AID/PPC). McEldowney
initialed for McClelland; Bosworth did not initial the memorandum. According to the of-
ficial report of the United States delegation to the World Food Council third session, the
delegation consisted of Bergland, Hathaway, Ferch, Byrnes, McEldowney, Anthony
Cruit (USDA/FAS), Jo Ann Hallquist (USDA/FAS), and McClelland. (Official Report,
“A Just Consensus, A Stable Order, A Durable Peace,” Kissinger called upon the United
Nations to convene a world food conference. Kissinger’s speech is printed as Document

World Hunger and Food Policy
consensus for the first time in the body’s history, but also in conducting
deliberations in an atmosphere remarkably free of bloc politics or con-
frontation. The major reasons for the outcome include the strong and
positive leadership role assumed by the United States, enhanced
greatly by the attendance of Secretary Bergland; the dynamic involve-
ment of Philippine Agriculture Secretary Arturo Tanco, Jr., who was
elected as WFC President; the location of the meeting in a moderate de-
veloping nation interested in an amicable outcome and widespread
disappointment with the Preparatory Meeting4 and previous WFC ses-
sions where confrontation tactics were tried but failed.

Aside from the general success of the Session, the United States in
large part achieved its own objectives, though they were admittedly
modest and largely symbolic and informational in nature. For the first
time since the 1974 World Food Conference, high-level attention, espe-
cially in developing nations, was drawn to the fact that complacency
about world food problems is not tolerable. Such attention is all the
more significant in view of three years of good harvests. Widespread
recognition was accorded to US leadership in addressing food
problems, both because of the presence of Secretary Bergland and be-
cause of recent US initiatives in food security, food aid, development
assistance and other areas. Also, developing nations accepted to a sig-
nificant degree the essentiality of a balance of responsibility in solving
One of the conference outcomes was the establishment of the World Food Council.
whether the World Food Council will be able to fulfill its function to provide overall,
integrated and continuing attention for the successful coordination and follow-up of
major world food policies.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
food problems. Such balance is reflected in the Session’s final report
which recognizes that developing countries must substantially increase
internal investment in agriculture, provide a share of the agricultural
inputs needed to sustain output increases, and incorporate nutritional
well-being as a major objective in development planning. Such explicit
acknowledgements have not been obtained previously.

At the same time, developing countries succeeded in using the
World Food Council as a mechanism for advancing their position on
food policy issues beyond results achieved at the recently concluded
Conference on International Economic Cooperation, despite wide-
spread resistance among developed countries in earlier meetings to
treating the Council as a “negotiating forum.” Thus, the Council ac-
cepted the designation of “food priority country” and advised interna-
tional organizations to assist such countries to determine internal and
external investment and other requirements for achieving at least a
4 per cent annual increase in food production. International organiza-
tions were also asked to determine a minimum package of agricultural
inputs for such countries, a portion to be provided on concessional
terms. Rice was explicitly mentioned as a possible component of a new
international grains arrangement, as well as the subject of exploratory
consultations proposed by WFC President Tanco to determine interest
in a commodity agreement. In food aid, participants recommended
that donor countries do their utmost to achieve a previously-agreed
food aid convention be negotiated as part of a new grains arrangement
with a view to contributing in an appropriate manner to a sustained
achievement of this target.

Implications for the Future
The United States was in a particularly favorable position as a re-
sult of six months of exhaustive review of our policies, which
high-lighted those areas where changes were possible. The Third Ses-
sion succeeded partly because there were compromises on positions
taken by all sides. The United States should explicitly recognize in pre-

222.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to the President’s Assistant for
Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat)
Washington, August 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Food Aid Assistance
As I discussed earlier today, I suggest we carefully examine the po-
tential economic and political benefits of establishing a Federal pur-
chase guarantee of five or six million tons under a new Title III of the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Agricultural Trade and Development Assistance Act (PL–480). The
floor would assure American farmers, business, and government
planners that this amount of grain would be purchased by the Federal
Government. The budget impact is roughly $1. billion. This policy
would include authorizing the Secretary of Agriculture to decrease the
floor if there was a crop failure and increase the floor if there was a
bumper crop. The Secretary’s determination would require that an in-
crease in food aid under this program would not jeopardize the price of
food in the U.S. marketplace. The developing countries would be as-
sured of a minimum available amount; this would have the potential to
encourage them to meet requirements we could predetermine such as
using the proceeds from the purchase of grain toward agricultural de-
velopment (self-reliance criteria), showing evidence that equity was a
factor in making available the grain to people and, where feasible, that
government efforts demonstrated policies which encourage more small
farmers to enter into the production of food.

Domestically, food policies are potentially one of the key “en-
gines” of inflation. The President can use the guaranteed 6-million-ton
floor (the average annual U.S. food aid commitment to developing
countries in the last 20 years) in periods of long supply years as the past
few have been as a two-edged sword to improve the psychological and
economic relationship with farmers and business and at the same time
encourage more food aid by Canada and Australia. It also signals
others that the President means it when he speaks about a commitment
to assisting in the economic development of the poor countries of the
world. The insecurity and unpredictability of the present PL–480 pro-
gram which requires individual determinations by the Secretary of Ag-
riculture concerning excess commodities should be eliminated through
this scheme.

This is, of course, a complex issue, one which I am still working on
in connection with the President’s World Hunger Initiative which he
has asked me to undertake.

223.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to President Carter
Washington, August 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Bergland Memorandum dated August 15, 1977, re Report on International Food
and Agriculture
The comments contained in this memo were coordinated with the
NSC, DC, OMB, OSTP, CEA, and the Cabinet Secretary.

I. Summary Analysis
Secretary Bergland’s excellent report is encouraging in that he pro-
poses that the Department of Agriculture become a full collaborator on
international food policy governmentwide, and expresses a concern for
food policies which address the basic human needs of the poor in the
world. The key step to take now is to establish, where possible, specific
Administration goals to achieve by 1980 which will dictate the policies
to pursue. The flaws in the report are the absence of specifics con-
cerning a procedure to arrive at an Administration position, a tempo-
rary coordinating mechanism, and lack of emphasis on particular as-
pects of the needs of the poor in the developing world. However, this
can be resolved through a deliberative forum where the views of pri-
mary departments and agencies (State, Agriculture, AID, Treasury, the
Peace Corps, etc.) and the private sector (in particular, farmers, busi-
nessmen) are taken into consideration in molding Administration food
policy.

II. Key Proposals of Importance
—A UN speech by the President. It was felt that the UN speech
should be considerably broader than simply a discussion of the world
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
food problem, and indeed broader than basic human needs. It needs to
lay out the President’s global approach, particularly focusing on the
type of world we envisage in coming decades. In so doing, however, it
should communicate clearly the necessity of addressing the world food
problem. The view was that an early October speech would be prema-
ture and that the President should await development of specific pol-
icies first.
—An expanded role for the Department of Agriculture. This newly ex-
panded role should be developed in close collaboration with State,
AID, NSC, OMB, and the White House, also with adequate involve-
ment of the private sector as well as Congress.
—U.S.D.A.’s approach to commercial food sales, food reserves, trade, and
food aid. However, what is required is the balancing of interests in this
area with other interests including ensuring more equitable distribu-
tion of food to the poor, the relationship of our present U.S. and foreign
agricultural production policies to nutrition (both at home and abroad),
and the institutional linkages required to bring about a coordinated
policy in these areas.
—Foreign Food Assistance. Provided, however, that the emphasis is
on the poor nations.
—Scientific and technical collaboration. Provided, however, that the
emphasis is on useful technology in support of the poor producers. In-
vestment in basic agricultural research both here and abroad will be
necessary in order to enhance the world’s productive capacity for the
intermediate and longer term. This is essential both to provide ade-
quate food supply abroad as well as to keep food costs down
domestically.
—International trade arrangements.

III. Specific Negative Attributes of the Report
—The report, though well conceived, was developed in somewhat of a
policy vacuum. To the best of our knowledge, many of the principals in
and out of government did not officially engage in collaborative con-
sultation with Agriculture in developing the report. This can easily be
rectified by convening a steering group made up of the principal
agencies, to develop a set of governmentwide recommendations for the
President to consider.
—The report lacks a budget impact analysis.
—The report lacks a specific set of measurable goals which identify
what it is that all these policy initiatives will accomplish.
—Downplays the conflicting, competing, and overlapping policies now
in place among the many agencies (26 agencies involved) and does not
suggest how these problems will be worked out beyond consultation.

World Hunger and Food Policy
Much more is required and leadership from the Executive Office could
ensure that all views were considered in a policy evaluation.
In fact, what appears to be needed is to reform the present patch-
work set of authorities and functions and, during the interim, establish
a temporary coordinating mechanism which ensures that the various
government and private interests are taken into consideration in
making and executing policy over the short run and until the reforms
are implemented.
—More attention should be given to the “demand” side of hunger, i.e., the
ability of people to buy food. One key element in overcoming world
hunger is to promote adequate development to enable people to earn
enough money to buy the food they need. Simply focusing on in-
creased production might lower food costs, but unless the question of
hunger is looked at in an overall developmental context, we will be ad-
dressing only the supply side and not the demand side. This argues for
avoiding too much of a shift from AID to the Department of Agricul-
ture in dealing with the problem of world hunger.
—There is no objective analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of
policy recommendations, and no alternatives suggested. The President needs
to know the political and economic implications of a recommendation
and the various alternatives available before deciding on a policy. Oth-
erwise, there is no way to judge how one recommendation impacts on
overall Administration objectives in this area.
—The report does not address the OMB Food Policy Reorganization Ini-
tiative or the AID and Brookings Development Assistance studies.
IV. Next Steps
A. It is recommended that you send a memorandum to Secretary
Bergland commending him for the very welcome, thoughtful, and in-
novative report. Furthermore, the letter should indicate that plans are
to include Secretary Bergland as a principal participant in the interna-
tional food policy issue. A proposed draft letter to the Secretary of Ag-
riculture is attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
B. As you may recall, you requested Peter Bourne, Zbig Brzezinski,
Stu Eizenstat and Frank Press to suggest a plan on World Hunger. We
have been working on this and within the next two weeks will be sub-
mitting for your consideration a memorandum that proposes some ini-
tial steps needed to develop a coordinated world food policy.
Attachment
Report by Secretary of Agriculture Bergland to President
Carter
Washington, August 15, 1977
INTERNATIONAL FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
Situation
You have made clear your commitment to fulfilling basic human
needs in the United States and abroad. You have emphasized that food
is a centerpiece of your foreign policy. These policy positions have to be
translated into action.

The United States exports $24 billion worth of agricultural
products each year. Our surplus in agricultural trade is the dominant
factor in our foreign exchange earnings. This Administration’s actions
must reflect this economic reality.

Now that domestic farm legislation is taking shape, the Carter Ad-
ministration should focus on initiatives in international food and agri-
culture. In this report I suggest the directions these initiatives should
take.

International Organizations
At the World Food Council meeting in June the United States
moved into leadership on problems of food in the Third World. This
advantage will be lost unless we exercise further leadership promptly
and consistently.
—I understand you are considering a speech before the United Na-
tions General Assembly in September. This would be an excellent
forum for you to specify initiatives on basic human needs, especially
food, and to specify objectives we seek in international organizations
World Hunger and Food Policy
concerned with food and agriculture. I will send you suggestions for
topics to be included in such a speech.
—The meeting of the Food and Agriculture Organization in Rome
in November provides another opportunity for this Administration to
make a positive turn in American policy. Mainly because of attitudes
carried over from the past, the United States is seen as being more inter-
ested in haggling over FAO’s budget than in FAO’s real purposes. In
my speech to the meeting in Rome I plan to emphasize this Administra-
tion’s commitment to the FAO as a principal instrument for progress in
world food and agriculture as well as our commitment to helping im-
prove the effectiveness of the FAO.
—In order to sustain our leadership in international organizations
concerned with food and agriculture, Secretary Vance and I need to
work out better means for exercising that leadership. Because of habits
from the past, the Departments of State and Agriculture (and some
other departments) tend to compete for leadership rather than concen-
trate on substance. Our working arrangements should reflect the facts
that the Department of State has primary responsibility for coordi-
nating foreign policy and that the Department of Agriculture has pri-
mary responsibility for substantive and technical decision-making on
food and agriculture. I will work out necessary arrangements with Sec-
retary Vance.
—The Department of Agriculture also needs to work closely with
international development banks on agricultural projects. In 1976 agri-
cultural projects financed by these banks amounted to about $3 billion.
The World Bank has invited our participation, and we will take up that
invitation.

Foreign Food Assistance
In September you will receive recommendations from the Devel-
opment Coordinating Committee and the Brookings Institution about
the overall shape and scale of the United States’ official development
assistance. Probably you will have to choose among divergent options
on substance and organization.

In my view, this Administration’s foreign assistance program
should be built on effective actions to deal with malnutrition and with
inadequate rates of growth of food production in poor countries. I be-
lieve there is widespread support among the American people and in
the Congress for this approach. But the structure we have inherited—
with its confused objectives and complicated administration—is not
delivering the goods.

I will submit for your consideration:
—Proposed legislation to improve foreign food assistance now
carried out under Public Law 480. The legislation would provide spe-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
cific programs and specific budget items for: emergency assistance, in-
cluding food-security arrangements for poor countries; humanitarian
assistance directed to malnourished poor people and combined with
local self-help projects for these families to raise their incomes; food for
development, both to support major developmental projects such as land
reform and to support long-term developmental policies by the gov-
ernments of poor countries; and supporting assistance for situations,
such as the Middle East, where the United States’ strategic interests are
involved. The legislation would provide for multiple-year commit-
ments and reserve stocks of American food to back up these commit-
ments. The legislation also would provide for active participation by
voluntary organizations and land-grant universities and for collabora-
tion between the Department of State/Agency for International Devel-
opment and the Department of Agriculture in administering foreign
food assistance.
—Recommendations for introducing effective management of for-
eign food assistance. Now the lines of responsibility and authority in
Washington and the field seem designed to maximize conflict and min-
imize accomplishment. The P.L. 480 Interagency Staff Committee—a
group composed of non-policy-level people, many of whom have inad-
equate knowledge of food and agriculture and the countries to which
our food assistance is directed—should be abolished. After consulting
with Secretary Vance and Governor Gilligan, I will recommend to you
an arrangement between State/AID and the Department of Agricul-
ture which will establish executive responsibility for P.L. 480 and will
bring together our foreign policy and developmental interests with
professional knowledge of food and agriculture in developing
countries.

Scientific and Technical Collaboration
On June 20 the National Research Council (NRC) submitted to you
an excellent analysis of the world food and nutrition situation and rec-
ommended actions by the United States Government to deal with that
situation. The NRC stressed the need to expand food production in
poor countries and to improve the distribution of the benefits of that in-
creased production to satisfy nutritional needs of the poor. The NRC
also emphasized that efficient food production here and abroad re-
quires sustained scientific and technical collaboration between the
United States and other countries. In fact, such collaboration supports
both our developmental interests and our commercial interests.
Already the Department of Agriculture has collaborative arrange-
ments with some 20 countries outside the group of countries served by
World Hunger and Food Policy
the AID. Taking these two groups of countries together, the existing
and prospective demand on the United States’ scientific and technical
resources in food and agriculture is huge. These resources exist pri-
marily in land-grant universities and the Department of Agriculture
and, to a lesser but significant extent, in the private sector.
However, the United States Government is not organized to mar-
shall these resources and put them to work. For example, except for ar-
rangements which are fully financed by other countries, such as Saudi
Arabia, and particular projects financed by the AID, the Department of
Agriculture has no specific funds for international scientific and tech-
nical collaboration in food and agriculture. Although existing foreign
assistance legislation authorizes funds for collaboration by land-grant
universities and this Department on problems of food and agriculture
in developing countries, in fact these funds are not being used. The re-
sult is piecemeal efforts far short of what the NRC recommends.
In the Department of Agriculture’s budget estimates for fiscal year
1979, I will recommend funds to be used by land-grant universities and
this Department to undertake scientific and technical collaboration
with other countries—both developed and developing—along the lines
recommended by the NRC. These estimates will include funds for the
universities and this Department to develop resources for serious, sus-
tained contributions to developing food and agriculture in poor,
food-deficit countries. I don’t propose to go into competition with the
AID abroad, but I do intend to press the case for this Department’s
having sufficient funds and expertise to sustain scientific and technical
work on international problems of food and agriculture.
—I am designating a senior officer of the Department of Agricul-
ture to be responsible for organizing this Department’s participation in
and our arrangements with land-grant universities for scientific and
technical collaboration with other countries.

International Trade Arrangements
Negotiations in the International Wheat Council (IWC) and the
Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN) will begin in earnest in Au-
tumn 1977. Our basic objectives in these trade negotiations are to
dampen wide swings in prices for producers and consumers, improve
world food security, and expand trade flows of agricultural products.
The Office of the Special Trade Representative (STR) and the De-
partment of Agriculture are collaborating closely in these negotiations.
This Department is providing staff to the STR and is doing substantive
and technical analyses for the agricultural trade negotiations.
—The Carter Administration should give prominence to our agri-
cultural objectives in these multilateral negotiations, because agricul-
ture may be the knottiest area. So you can put your personal stamp on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the negotiations, I suggest that you, Ambassador Strauss, and I meet in
the White House with Congressional leaders to discuss our agricultural
objectives and that you then meet with the press. This best could be
done in September, before serious discussions in the IWC and the MTN
begin.
—In parallel with our seeking dependable multilateral arrange-
ments, we should make clear our intention to be affirmative marketers
of America’s agricultural products. Among other things, this might im-
pose some discipline on our competitors and encourage them to take
the multilateral negotiations more seriously. In the following section I
outline initiatives in commercial export promotion. We should proceed
now with bilateral arrangements with centrally-planned countries
which do not participate in the MTN and with other initiatives which
do not conflict with multilateral negotiations.

Commercial Export Promotion
Commercial sales are by far the predominant element of our inter-
national agricultural trade. We need an effective commercial export
strategy and effective program management to support that strategy.
This Administration should assure that the United States is a depend-
able supplier of high quality agricultural products to the world.
The Department of Agriculture is taking these actions:
—We are analyzing individual countries abroad, and we are
looking especially for those situations where rising economic demand
can create rising markets for American agricultural products, now and
in the future. Using this information, we will design three- to five-year
plans with American agricultural export-promotion associations for
markets in individual countries. Depending on the characteristics of
each market, these plans will combine market-development activities
by the private export-promotion associations, credit facilities from the
private sector and from the United States Government, and commercial
supply arrangements backed up by appropriate commitments from the
Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC). We intend to complete these
plans for major countries by June 1978 or earlier.
—We will examine whether American agricultural cooperatives
need special help from the Department of Agriculture to operate di-
rectly in foreign markets. Our international grain trade is dominated by
a handful of private companies which operate as multinationals; they
do not seek to optimize American exports. American cooperatives
might enliven competition and expand exports of American grain. We
will consult with cooperatives in order to develop definite plans by the
end of 1977.
—We will design an intermediate credit program to fill in the gap
between the one- to three-year credits now available from the CCC and

World Hunger and Food Policy
gram would address situations, such as Korea and Portugal, where de-
velopment is not a primary consideration and help us market products,
such as breeding cattle, for which the CCC’s three-year credit max-
imum is unrealistic. The intermediate credit program will be designed
this year, in time to be included in the budget for FY 1979, but probably
should be held in reserve pending the outcome of multilateral trade ne-
gotiations. We will work with the Export-Import Bank in designing this
program.
—In our budget for FY 1979 we will recommend establishing a first
group—perhaps half a dozen—of American agricultural trade offices
abroad. IBM, Chase Manhattan, and Pan Am maintain highly visible
presences abroad, but American agriculture does not. These trade of-
fices would be operated on contract in collaboration with American
export-promotion associations and would bring together some activ-
ities now conducted independently by these associations and by agri-
cultural attaches.
—We are acting to assure the quality of American agricultural ex-
ports through better inspection arrangements. These actions include
tighter licensing and monitoring of inspectors, better means for fumi-
gating stored grain and for detecting hidden insect infestation, and
better testing of the protein content of wheat.
—We will work with private industry and governmental agencies
to help develop storage and distribution facilities in countries whose
imports are constrained by lack of such facilities. These facilities are es-
pecially important to poor, food-deficit countries.

I plan to highlight these initiatives in commercial export promo-
tion in speeches during the coming weeks.

Program Management
Many of the initiatives I have outlined in this report interact with
each other. A foreign food assistance program along the lines I have
sketched requires a different approach to reserve stocks and forward
planning than the United States has practiced until now. Multilateral
trade negotiations interact with both our assistance to poor countries
and our commercial trade. And so on. Because of these interactions, the
Carter Administration needs to develop a pattern of policies and ac-
tions which links our domestic and foreign concerns in food and
agriculture.

The absence of such a pattern can be painful to people in the
United States and to people in other countries. For example, because
our predecessors had no strategy for dealing with changes in interna-
tional supply and demand for agricultural products, the United States’
trade has had to absorb most of the fluctuations in world market condi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tions. For the same reason, food supplies for hungry people in the
poorest countries were curtailed when their needs were critical.
In order to create a pattern for dealing with international food and
agriculture, the Department of Agriculture is analyzing these program-
management instruments and how they fit together:
—Farmer-controlled stocks to be used primarily for stabilizing do-
mestic market conditions in the interests of producers and consumers
in the United States.
—Government-controlled stocks to be used primarily for exer-
cising the United States’ obligations in international agreements—both
multilateral and bilateral—and in food-security and developmental ar-
rangements with poor, food-deficit countries.
—Adjustments in agricultural production in the United States,
through acreage adjustments and other means, to maintain appropriate
supplies for stocks and for current demand.
—Bilateral and multilateral trading arrangements as they interact
with the above instruments.

We intend to complete much of this analysis by the end of 1977.
We expect this analysis will yield legislative recommendations.
Also, in analyzing the food and agricultural situations in devel-
oping and developed countries abroad, we are examining the range of
instruments available to the United States for dealing with individual
countries. Particular countries may be candidates simultaneously for
food assistance, scientific and technical collaboration, commercial
export-promotion, bilateral agreements, and multilateral commodity
agreements. To fit this range of instruments to individual countries re-
quires information, planning, and management which by and large
have not been done until now. We also intend to complete a first round
of these country plans by the end of 1977.

Action
I have outlined the several actions underway in the Department of
Agriculture.

The FY 1979 budget and the legislative agenda for 1978 will be ve-
hicles for your taking decisions on items which represent significant
new departures or financial commitments.

Many of the items in this report should be included in formal Pres-
idential messages at the beginning of 1978 and in speeches between
now and then. My colleagues will work with Stuart Eizenstat to see that
you receive recommended language for these messages and speeches.
If you agree it will be useful, I will plan to present informal reports
on international food and agriculture to you and the members of the
Cabinet each quarter.

World Hunger and Food Policy

224.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and Lynn Daft of the Domestic
Policy Staff to President Carter
Washington, August 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Establishment of an Interagency Working Group on Food and Agricultural
Policy
Secretary Bergland has recommended that you establish an Inter-
agency Working Group to assist in the formulation of food and agricul-
tural policy.

We endorse this recommendation. We think it offers a means of
more systematically involving the several agencies that have a stake in
the formulation of agricultural policy. Also, we think it can be done in a
way that will complement the new decision process now being de-
veloped. In addition, it underscores your commitment to Cabinet
government.

Peter Bourne raised a concern regarding the role of this working
group vis-a`-vis Peter’s role in developing an Administration initiative

225.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
207344. Inform Consuls. Subject: World Food Security and
Set-Aside Plans.
1. There follows Undersecretary of Agriculture White’s statement
of August 29 announcing the new acreage set-aside policy for wheat
and domestic reserve levels for all grains. Comments will be trans-
mitted septel.

Begin quote: Acting Secretary of Agriculture John White an-
nounced today the following decisions:
food and feed grains in reserve prior to the beginning of the 1978/79
classified; Priority. Drafted and approved by Ferch.

World Hunger and Food Policy
marketing years, including a proposal to create a special international
emergency food reserve of up to 6 million tons.
2) The administration’s intention to implement a 20 percent set-
aside on 1978-crop wheat.
3) An immediate increase in the loan rates for 1977-crop feed
grains.

Strategic Grain Reserves
Strategic grain reserves will be acquired in three separate actions:
First, the administration will seek congressional approval to create
a special international emergency food reserve of up to 6 million tons.
This reserve could only be released for noncommercial food aid for
world nutrition assistance and to meet United States’ obligations under
a proposed international reserves agreement.

Second, the farmer-owned wheat and rice reserve program an-
nounced by the Secretary in April will be expanded to include feed
The minimum release price for feed grains is expected to be equal to
corn).

Under the food grain (wheat and rice) reserve program announced
market until the price exceeds 140 percent of loan levels, and loans can
be called when prices exceed 175 percent of loan levels.
House on September 13. Neither version of H.R. 13835 nor a Senate version of the bill

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Third, some 1975-crop rice and 1976-crop wheat has or will be
turned over to the government when CCC price support loans mature
in coming months. This grain will also become part of the overall grain
reserve.

The establishment of these reserves at this time with provisions for
their orderly management are intended to meet several objectives.
—They will serve as a hedge against the inflationary effects of a
poor crop in the future. Though world grain stocks have risen dramati-
cally this past year, to the point that market prices are severely de-
pressed, this situation could change abruptly. If we are to rebuild our
stocks in a way that will help us avoid a repeat of the severe shortages
and extreme price volatility of 1973–75, this is the time to do it . . . when
it can be done at least cost to the taxpayer and most benefit to the
farmer.
—The formation of these strategic reserves and the proposed cre-
ation of an international emergency food reserve demonstrates and
underscores the President’s commitment to the fight against world
hunger. It is also consistent with the U.S. announced position at the
World Food Council Ministerial in Manila6 this past summer and with
our position in the negotiations for an international grains agreement,
soon to begin at the International Wheat Council in London.
—Our domestic grain supplies are now more than sufficient to en-
able us to acquire enough reserves to ensure our food aid commitments
to less developed countries.

Set-Aside
Even though Congressional action on the Food and Agriculture
Act of 19777 is not complete, I am announcing our intentions for a 20
percent set-aside on 1978-crop wheat at this time since farmers are now
beginning to plant the 1978 winter wheat crop. While the program is
voluntary, farmer compliance with the set-aside is a condition of eligi-
bility for loans, purchases, and payments in any USDA commodity
program. Also, designated set-aside acreage must be put into a soil con-
serving use.

We are not announcing a 1978-crop feed grain set-aside today; the
final decision will be made after we know more about 1977 production
and consumption prospects. However, the current feed grains produc-
World Hunger and Food Policy
tion estimate indicates that a 10 percent set-aside may be needed just to
keep our stocks from climbing to excessive levels.

Since 1975, the world’s total grain stocks have increased from 126
to 183 million metric tons. Nearly 60 percent of the increase the past
two years has occurred in the United States where stocks rose from 27
million tons and the U.S. held only 19 percent of them. Today, world
stocks total 100 million metric tons and the United States holds 30 per-
cent. In the case of feed grains, world stocks totaled 51 million metric
tons last year; the United States held approximately 34 percent. This
year world stocks total nearly 69 million tons of which the U.S. holds 44
percent.

Current estimates place total world stocks at 200 million tons and
season. At this level, the U.S. would hold nearly 35 percent of the
world’s stocks of wheat and approximately half of the world’s food
grain stocks.

Stocks of this magnitude are quite adequate to meet our domestic
and export requirements. Furthermore, the establishment of strategic
reserves insures the United States commitment to world food security.
Our analysis indicates that even after we acquire sufficient reserve
stocks, world production in 1978/79 under the “most likely” weather
conditions will again be in excess of market requirements, causing
stocks to rise even further.

If this does occur, two results are likely. First, there would be re-
duced incentive for other nations to participate in an international
grain reserve system. Though the United States is willing to hold its
“fair share” of world stocks, we expect other nations to do likewise.
Second, we are concerned that with excessive stocks and low grain
prices there would be reduced incentive for the developing countries to
increase their own food production. Over the long-term this could have
disastrous consequences. In our conversations with world leaders and
world food experts, there is one issue on which all agree: the devel-
oping countries of the world must increase their food production sig-
nificantly in future years to meet the demands of growing populations.
Thus, in an effort to keep U.S. and world grain stocks in reasonable bal-
ance with consumption, we are implementing a modest set-aside pro-
gram for 1978-crop wheat.

Since a decision to have a set-aside is an annual determination, a
set-aside program for 1978 crops should not be interpreted to imply
that there will be set-aside programs for subsequent crops. This is a de-
cision made for this year alone based on the current situation.
Loan Rates
Given the severe cost-price squeeze that is now adversely affecting
many farmers, loan rates for 1977-crop feed grains are being raised im-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
mediately. The corn loan rate is being increased from 1. dollars to
2. dollars per bushel with other feed grains set in the proper relation-
ship to corn. This change, which is being done under existing authority,
is consistent with recent congressional actions and will return the loan
rate for feed grains to its appropriate relationship to the loan rate for
wheat.

We would anticipate no change for 1978 in the loan levels announced
today, though they are subject to change. Holding loan rates at these
levels will allow market forces to operate more freely and help main-
tain U.S. competiveness in the world markets. End quote.

Christopher

226.

Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, September 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Hunger Initiative
At a meeting today on the hunger initiative, Jerry Fill presented his
latest draft of a memorandum from Peter Bourne to the President. Al-
though this version still tends to confuse policymaking and the drafting
of a message on hunger, it is an improvement over earlier versions.

227.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to President Carter
Washington, September 14, 1977
SUBJECT
World Hunger Initiative
This memorandum was prepared by an Ad Hoc Executive Office
Working Group on World Hunger, chaired by my office, with partici-
pation of the National Security Council, Domestic Council, White
House Intergovernmental Relations Office, Office of Science and Tech-
nology Policy, Council of Economic Advisers, Office of Management
and Budget, Office of the Special Assistant for Consumer Affairs, and
Council on Environmental Quality.

I. Purpose
To respond to your request for ideas and policy options on world
hunger and to seek your guidance on how to develop policy initiatives.
II. Background
Interest in the world hunger issue is extensive within Government
agencies and throughout the private sector.
—Executive Office. Interest in and a desire to be part of the develop-
ment of any world hunger initiative has already been expressed by the
agencies which make up the Ad Hoc Executive Office World Hunger
Working Group.
—Congress. A letter to you signed by 33 members of Congress in
June encouraged a Presidential world hunger initiative. Recent legisla-
World Hunger and Food Policy
tive changes designed to make development assistance and food aid
policies more human needs oriented reflect Congressional interest on
which a Presidential initiative might build. A substantial number of
members in both Houses plan to introduce on September 27 a resolu-
tion calling on you to establish a Presidential Commission on World
Hunger. Their efforts are in principle supportive of your interest in a
hunger initiative.
—International Organizations. The world hunger issue has received
priority attention in recent years in organizations such as the World
Food Council, the U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization, the Inter-
national Fund for Agricultural Development, and the World Bank;
these and other organizations could be important vehicles for helping
to implement a Presidential initiative.
—Private Sector. Interest includes both experts and organizations
wishing to participate in the development of policies and to organize
public support for appropriate Presidential actions once announced.
In addition, several foreign policy and food studies have been con-
ducted or are in progress. These studies include departmental reviews,
such as USDA’s International Food and Agriculture Assessment (re-
cently submitted to you) and OMB’s Food and Nutrition Reorganiza-
tion Study5 as well as inter-departmental and private sector reviews
such as the National Academy of Science’s World Food and Nutrition
Study, the Development Coordinating Committee Study on Foreign
Aid, the National Security Council PRM–8, the Vance-Blumenthal
Study on Foreign Aid as it relates to multilateral assistance, the
Brookings Institution study of foreign aid, and the International
Health Assessment (currently being conducted by my office).
tember 27. The resolution called on the President to establish a commission on domestic
and international hunger and malnutrition and directed the resultant commission to es-
tablish the causes of domestic and international malnutrition, identify and critique Fed-
eral programs related to hunger, and develop for the President and Congress initiatives
designed to reduce hunger and malnutrition. (Letter from Bennet to Zablocki, October 26;
companion resolution in the House (H. Res. 784) that same day, cosponsored by 24 Rep-
resentatives. The Senate approved S. Res. 271 by voice vote on October 27, and the House
approved H. Res. 784 on November 1.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
To make maximum use of this broad interest in the hunger issue, a
mechanism is needed which reports directly to you and is coordinated
with Stu Eizenstat’s proposed Cabinet-level Group on Food and Agri-
cultural Policy. This would assure that preliminary planning for a Pres-
idential world hunger initiative adequately involves the Executive Of-
fice, the line Agencies, the Congress, international organizations, and
the private sector. Since Stu received your views on his proposed on-
going mechanism, we have reached an agreement with him. In order
to ensure coordination, I should be a member of the Full Committee
as well as continue to serve as White House Coordinator on World
Hunger.

III. Assumptions
In developing the process for shaping such an initiative, we are
making the following assumptions:
1. That you wish to demonstrate publicly in the near future your
commitment to do something about world hunger—perhaps within
the next 2 months. We sense that you do not want another study but
prefer a series of actions.
2. That you view world hunger as a global issue, including concern
for malnutrition at home as well as abroad.
3. That you intend your interest in world hunger to be understood
as part of your overall concern for basic human needs, not an isolated
issue. Your initiative would thus be one major further step in demon-
strating concretely your commitment to improve the quality of life
throughout the world.

IV. Strategy
If you agree with the above assumptions, we propose the follow-
ing actions:
1. Development of a Policy Statement on World Hunger
There is broad agreement among experts in the field that one of the
most important Presidential actions would be to make a crisp, concise
statement of United States policy with regard to world hunger. Your in-
volvement is critical to mobilizing national and international efforts to
alleviate global hunger. Recent food-related legislation, ample current
grain supplies, and the constructive developing country attitudes man-
ifested at the June meeting of the World Food Council offer you an op-
portunity to play a timely leadership role.

A statement based on policy options developed by the Depart-
ments and the Executive Office of the President could specify actions
such as:
World Hunger and Food Policy
—To help developing countries accelerate their efforts to achieve
food self-reliance.
—To assure adequate food aid levels on a multiyear basis for hu-
manitarian and developmental purposes and to increase the effec-
tiveness of such aid.
—To work with other nations to develop international food re-
serves for food security, emergency relief, and price stability.
—To increase access to food through special trade arrangements
and other measures.
—To strengthen the capacity of multilateral food-related institu-
tions such as the World Food Council and the U.N. Food and Agricul-
tural Organization.
—To accelerate relevant food and nutrition research activities.
Other specific policy areas could be included based on further
agency inputs during the planning process.

The basic goal of these policy measures would be to help improve
the nutritional well-being of the world’s hungry people. The hunger
statement would also serve as a basic point of reference in the Adminis-
tration’s overall human needs initiative.

The policy statement should be specific enough to define your
commitment yet should avoid closing off ideas and options which
might grow out of the various studies now underway. While the state-
ment would allude to domestic food and nutrition problems and pro-
grams, its primary focus would be international. Policy options under-
lying a statement on hunger could be prepared by the World Hunger
Working Group in 8 to 10 weeks. After choosing your preferred op-
tions, you could deliver a message describing U.S. policy actions to the
United Nations, to the Congress, or in another forum of your choosing.
Decision:13
Approve
Disapprove
2. Expansion of World Hunger Working Group
The Ad Hoc Executive Office Working Group (which has prepared
this memorandum and previous comments on material sent to you by

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Secretary Bergland and Stu Eizenstat) should be expanded to include
direct representation from the relevant Departments and Agencies. The
resulting World Hunger Working Group (WG) chaired by me would be
in effect a subunit of Stu’s proposed Cabinet-level Interagency Group
on Food and Agricultural Policy of which I would also be a member.
The WG (subcommittee) would as rapidly as possible develop policy
options and subsequently a Presidential statement on world hunger.
The expanded membership of the WG may increase the difficulties of
coordination; however, we believe that the participation in the process
by the Agencies that would implement the initiative is indispensable.
A small task force of private consultants representing a variety of
interests and expertise as well as personnel temporarily detailed from
the Agencies will serve with my staff to support the Working Group.
Decision:
Approve
Disapprove
3. Preparation of Cabinet Memorandum (attached)
The World Hunger Working Group would prepare a memo-
randum for you to issue to Cabinet Departments and Agencies. The
memorandum would announce the establishment of the Working
Group and would direct Cabinet Secretaries and Agency heads to pro-
vide it with their views and recommendations.

Decision:
Approve (send attached memo)
Disapprove
4. Involvement of the Private Sector
Private sector representatives—from agriculture, business, labor,
universities, foundations, and the religious community—should be in-
cluded in the above process. Informally this could be done through
contacts by the Working Group with private sector individuals and or-
ganizations. On a more formal basis, private sector input could be as-
sured by the establishment of a small but prestigious private sector
Consultative Group to serve as the visible public advisory body in the
development of the Administration’s world hunger initiative.
Informal consultation with the private sector could lay the basis
for eventual public support, avoiding the risks of public discussion
World Hunger and Food Policy
prior to the announcement of the policy. Use of a more formal mecha-
nism would make for more visible public involvement in the process
but might delay it and produce recommendations with which you
might have to disagree publicly.

Decision:
Involve private sector informally
Establish Private Consultative Group (prepare names for my review)
5. Presidential Communication with Selected Members of Congress
Building on increased Congressional concern for world hunger,
you should communicate your interest to members of Congress, in-
cluding those advocating a Presidential Commission on World
Hunger. The purpose would be to state your intention to launch an Ad-
ministration program on world hunger and solicit their views on food
policy issues. We believe that by discussing these matters with the
House and Senate leadership you will engender support for the initia-
tive and demonstrate your resolve to act. This also may develop addi-
tional support for overall foreign aid policies.

Decision:
Arrange meeting with selected members of Senate and House by early
October to discuss broad issues of international food policy
Prepare draft letter to selected members of Congress on my plans in
this area
Defer contacts with Congress on hunger issues
Summary of Comments on Who Should Chair the WG
The respective positions are as follows:
—NSC proposes that the World Hunger Working Group be
co-chaired by my office and the NSC staff in order (1) to increase coor-
dination necessary among members of the Working Group, and (2) to
ensure that the Working Group’s work is fully related to all aspects of
U.S. development assistance and foreign economic policies.
—OMB supports NSC’s recommendation that the Working Group
be jointly chaired by my office and the NSC staff. OMB contends that
continuing involvement of my office is obviously needed if the
Working Group is to maintain the momentum already developed by
my efforts these past months; however, they contend that if NSC
co-chairs the Working Group, it will ensure that the world hunger ini-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tiative will reinforce, and in turn be reinforced by other U.S. efforts
abroad.
—My position is that I should chair the Working Group and NSC
should continue to participate fully as a key member as it has up to
now. This ensures coordination with ongoing foreign policy reviews.
Moreover, if NSC were made co-chairman, in the eyes of the public and
Congress this would not separate hunger from NSC’s major policy re-
sponsibilities such as weapons sales, nuclear proliferation, and rela-
tions with the Soviets and Chinese.

Finally, I was designated the lead person in the White House on
this issue by you in an August Cabinet meeting. Changing this posi-
tion may create confusion in the private sector and Congress as to your
intention to crystallize public support for basic human needs using
world hunger as the rallying point.

Decision:
World Hunger Working Group chaired by Peter Bourne (as stated in at-
tached proposed presidential memorandum to heads of departments
and agencies)
World Hunger Working Group co-chaired by Peter Bourne and NSC
(NSC, State, and OMB support)

228.

Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to the President’s Special
Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)
Washington, September 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Your Memorandum of August 24 to Stu Eizenstat on Food Assistance
Thank you for sharing your thoughts on possible adjustments in
our food assistance program with me. I am sorry to be so long in re-
plying. I agree that relative predictability in the level of our aid is some-
thing we should strive to attain.

I can see certain problems in your suggestion, however. If we
really try to stick to a policy of the Government buying five to six mil-
lion tons of food a year, the cost of such a program could vary consider-
ably with changes in prices. I would anticipate that a relatively open-
ended budget commitment of this nature would be opposed by the
Office of Management and Budget. On the other hand, if the floor is ad-
justed with harvest levels, your proposal would retain some of the de-
fects of the present system. There also might be some objection from ag-
ricultural interests to abandoning the present method in which
purchasers of PL 480 Title I commodities deal directly with private
American exporters for what, I infer from your memorandum, would
be a system of purchasing from the Government. Notwithstanding
these difficulties, I believe your proposal has merit and it should be
given further careful consideration.

We might also consider using our emergency food reserve pro-
posal, which was announced after you wrote your memorandum, to
stabilize PL 480 program levels. Stocks for the reserve could be accu-
classification marking. Drafted by Stephen Johnson on September 20; cleared by Bos-
worth and Boeker.
upon Bourne’s proposal: “It is not clear, but seems to suggest an annual commitment for
5 or 6 million tons of grain purchases for annual food aid disbursements. The annual
amount could be varied. I cannot follow the reasoning in the bottom two-thirds of the
paper, and the whole thing may, in fact, be completely overtaken by the President’s deci-
sion. However, in view of Bourne’s importance in the hunger campaign, I suggest you
consider drafting a memo from Cooper, commenting on this note, since Bourne is likely
to resuscitate his idea later. If you think it not worthwhile, we can forget it.” (National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
mulated when American prices are low and released when prices are
high and potential recipient country stocks are low. In this way, fluctu-
ations in PL 480 program levels caused by domestic commodity price
and availability swings could be minimized. The Agriculture Depart-
ment is now preparing legislation to implement the reserve proposal.
The problems of world hunger and food aid levels are complex
and I look forward to continued close cooperation with you on the
issues involved.

Richard N. Cooper

229.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter
Washington, September 26, 1977
SUBJECT
World Hunger/International Food and Agricultural Policy

230.

Memorandum From President Carter to the Heads of
Executive Departments and Agencies
Washington, September 30, 1977
As you know, I have repeatedly emphasized as a major goal of U.S.
foreign policy the importance of meeting basic human needs—in par-
ticular, the alleviation of world hunger and malnutrition. In order to
develop a major initiative in this area, I have formed a World Hunger
Working Group headed by my Special Assistant, Peter Bourne, to coor-
dinate a White House study of world hunger with other U.S. domestic
and international food and agricultural policies. Peter Bourne, repre-
senting the Working Group, will participate on the soon to be formed
classification marking. Another copy is in the Carter Library, White House Central Files,
orandum are in the Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—
Peter Bourne Files, White House Office Files on World Hunger Group, Box 50, Govern-
Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 324, World Hunger [1].

231.

Editorial Note
In advance of President Jimmy Carter’s issuance of the memo-
randum creating the World Hunger Working Group (WHWG) on Sep-
Health Issues Peter Bourne initiated forward planning for the comple-
tion of the Presidential Policy Options Memorandum regarding the
world hunger initiative. Bourne had earlier established a Hunger Staff
Task Force, headed by his assistant Gerald Fill, to manage the proce-
dural aspects of the Working Group. In a September 21 memorandum,
Lynn Daft of the Domestic Policy Staff sent President’s Assistant for
Domestic Affairs and Policy Stuart Eizenstat a draft schedule, prepared
by Bourne, which anticipated that the WHWG would submit a formal
policy options paper to the President at the end of October. Daft com-
mented: “If his [Bourne’s] enthusiastic energy could be effectively har-
nessed with those who have knowledge and experience in this area, the
President would be far better served.” (Carter Library, Staff Office
Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 324, World Hunger [1])
In an October 3 memorandum to Secretary of State Cyrus Vance,
Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal, Secretary of Agricul-
ture Robert Bergland, Secretary of Commerce Juanita Kreps, Agency
for International Development Administrator John Gilligan, Presi-
dent’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski, Ei-
zenstat, Secretary to the Cabinet Jack Watson, Special Representative
for Trade Negotiations Robert Strauss, Acting Director of the Office of
Management and Budget James McIntyre, Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers Charles Schultze, the President’s Science Adviser
and Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy Frank
Press, Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality Charles
Warren, and Special Assistant to the President for Consumer Affairs
Esther Peterson, Bourne drew attention to the first Working Group
meeting, scheduled for October 7, and attached staff guidance to aid in

World Hunger and Food Policy
the preparation of individual agency policy recommendations. The
guidance highlighted five priority areas for consideration and recom-
mendations—food production and consumption in developing coun-
tries, research and technical collaboration, food reserves, food aid, and
trade and investment—and suggested that agencies could propose ad-
ditional areas for discussion. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P770170–1503) Bourne’s undated letter to private
sector addressees also requested “recommendations on what key ac-
tions you and your associates believe the U.S. Government should un-
dertake to alleviate world hunger and malnutrition.” (Carter Library,
Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—Peter Bourne
Files, White House Office Files on World Hunger Group, Box 50, Gov-
Bourne stressed the short turnaround the Working Group faced in col-
lating agency responses and preparing a concise statement for Presi-
dential review. For former Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman’s
response to Bourne’s letter, see Document 237. The Department of State
contribution to the World Hunger Working Group is printed as Docu-
ment 236.

The World Hunger Working Group prepared several versions of a
draft options memorandum containing Consolidated Policy Recom-
mendations and circulated the drafts to relevant agencies for comment,
prior to the submission of a final version to the President. Copies of
these undated drafts are in the Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special
Assistant for Health Issues—Peter Bourne, White House Office Files on
World Hunger Group, Boxes 50 and 51, Government Agency Hunger
the World Hunger Working Group report, November 25, indicated that
Bourne circulated this draft prior to November 22. (National Archives,
report is printed as Document 245. The final report was published as a
60-page document entitled World Hunger and Malnutrition: Improving
the U.S. Response (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
1978).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

232.

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) and the Deputy Secretary of Agriculture
(White) to the Acting Director of the Office of Management
and Budget (McIntyre)

233.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) and the President’s Assistant for
Congressional Liaison (Moore) to President Carter
Washington, October 13, 1977
SUBJECT
Congressional Resolution on World Hunger
As mentioned in Peter Bourne’s memo of September 28, 1977,2
both the Senate and the House have had resolutions introduced calling
on you to establish a commission on World Hunger and Malnutrition.
In each house the resolution was co-sponsored by a majority of the
members.

All of the key sponsors are eager to accommodate your wishes and
your own initiatives and have not only consulted with us, but have
World Hunger and Food Policy
modified the resolutions considerably to make them potentially ve-
hicles to build public support for your own program rather than to ini-
tiate new studies. They are, however, unwilling to withdraw the reso-
lutions and are pressing us for you to take a position on them. There is
also a strong desire for a small delegation to meet with you to discuss
this issue.

We are aware of your antipathy to establishing further Presidential
Commissions and believe that if you would meet with a small delega-
tion to convey your special interest in world hunger and your reasons
for not wanting additional commissions they would be willing to stall
their resolutions. With your approval we will arrange such a meeting.
The Senate Resolution has been ordered reported out of the Com-
mittee on Agriculture. The House version has been referred to both the
Committee on International Relations and the Committee on Agricul-
ture with hearings scheduled for next week.
sponding to problems of world hunger; and third, propose a possible
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
focus for a World Hunger Campaign: an attack on the pervasive world-
wide problem of malnutrition.

Behind
the
suggestions
in
this
memo
lie
several
basic
considerations:
—For a World Hunger Campaign to have any meaning or impor-
tance it must represent a distinct political initiative. Patting ourselves
on the back for past policies or tinkering with current policies will not
provide sufficient content or justification for mounting a new “cam-
paign.” At the same time, however, any proposals we make must stand
on their own substantive merits.
—Policies deriving from a World Hunger Campaign must be con-
sistent with US agricultural policies, with US development policies,
and in particular with our basic human needs orientation.
—Any new policies must strike a responsive domestic chord if
they are to obtain adequate public and Congressional support.
—They must also be consistent with our domestic policies in-
volving efforts to support the poor and, in particular, to overcome
problems of hunger at home.

The Problem of World Hunger
A number of important factors bear on understanding and at-
tacking the problem of world hunger.
—The world does not face a major problem of world hunger or
starvation today; favorable weather and good harvests in most parts of
the world over the last several years have replaced the shortages and
hunger of 1973–4 with adequate and even surplus grain supplies in
many countries. Nor is the world facing a Malthusian3 specter of being
unable to feed itself over the coming years or decades. With normal or
favorable weather conditions the world can produce more grain than it
can consume in any one year. Evidence of this are the near record grain
stocks building up in the US and other major grain producers (in-
cluding India).
—However, the world food system is a fragile one where low
stocks and only slight drops in production can send grain prices sky-
rocketing, as was proven in 1972–3 when world grain production fell
by only 2%. Thus, while grain supplies are plentiful now and prices rel-
atively low and stable, even a small drop in production, as could
happen in an exceptional year, could lead once again to problems of
hunger and starvation, particularly if stocks prove inadequate or are in-
effectively controlled.

World Hunger and Food Policy
—Underlying the problem of hunger is the problem of effective
demand among groups of people and individual countries. In periods
of shortage and high prices poor people often cannot afford adequate
food; in normal circumstances, they often cannot afford a nutritionally
adequate diet. Poor countries often have difficulty finding the foreign
exchange to finance sharply increased food import costs in periods of
world shortage or when crops fail at home; and they must find ex-
panded sources of foreign exchange to finance the expected increase
over the coming decades of their grain import needs.
—Growing out of the problems of effective demand, and occasion-
ally exacerbated by ignorance or cultural traditions, is the widespread
and chronic problem of malnutrition world-wide; it is concentrated in
poor countries but it exists often in large pockets in middle income
LDC’s and in rich countries as well (including the US).
To these important considerations in any attack on world hunger
must be added one further element: none of the problems of world
hunger can be isolated from the broader context of world poverty and
income distribution. Rapidly growing populations increase the need
for expanding food production and distribution. An inadequate social
and physical infrastructure prevents the operation of an efficient and
low cost food distribution system. Agricultural pricing policies in de-
veloped and developing countries alike often discourage an expansion
in food production and efficient world trade in agriculture. In addition,
several regional problems exist, such as the fragile and deteriorating
ecosystems in many countries (e.g., the Sahelian countries which face
an ever expanding desert) where food deficits are most pronounced; or
over-population in other countries (e.g., the Andes) where land tenure
systems and the climate limit increases in agricultural production.
In short, the recurrence of hunger in the world and the pervasive
and chronic problems of malnutrition are enmeshed in a complex of
other problems which must be part of the background of an effective at-
tack on hunger itself.

Making Existing Policies More Effective
The US has a variety of policies which are addressed to the dispa-
rate problems of world hunger. To meet the problems of instability in
grain supplies and price, the US has proposed establishment of an in-
ternational system of nationally-held grain reserves. If they can be
negotiated and operated effectively, these reserves should help stabi-
lize world grain prices and supplies. However, this reserve would not
take care of the problem of production shortfalls in individual LDC’s,
and the sudden and often sharp strains on LDC foreign exchange re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
serves for financing needed grain imports would remain. This problem
could be dealt with through the provision of food aid used countercyclically
to offset crop shortfalls in LDC’s and thereby relieve pressure on scarce foreign
exchange resources. The Bourne World Hunger Campaign paper might in-
clude an examination of how US food aid could be used more effectively in this
way.

If an effective grain reserve system is not established, then the US
could consider proposing the negotiation of a grain reserve specifically for
LDC’s designed to offset world price increases for grain as well as do-
mestic grain production shortfalls in LDC’s. (Preliminary calculations
suggest that a reserve for this purpose would require around 15 million
metric tons of grain—compared to estimates of 60 million tons for a
world-wide reserve.)

Through its foreign assistance programs the US is also making an
effort to foster growth with equity in LDC’s, with greatest concentra-
tion on expanding LDC agriculture. However, the widespread concern
with the effectiveness of US aid suggests that a special effort be made to
assess the past effectiveness of US assistance in fostering the expansion of LDC
agriculture. Specifically, what is needed is
—a methodology for assessing effectiveness
—an examination of past experience in the context of this
methodology
—establishment of regional or country agricultural growth targets
for measuring future effectiveness.

Other US policies specifically aimed at expanding agriculture in
LDC’s might include:
—Developing the knowledge and techniques for greater agricultural pro-
ductivity world-wide: Agricultural experts have been troubled for some
time at the apparent slowdown in productivity gains in agriculture and
believe there is a strong case for greater government finance of basic re-
search in this area. (This was also a conclusion of the recent World Food
and Nutrition Study.)
—Delivering the research to LDC’s: This involves the time con-
suming task of adapting research improvements made in the US to con-
ditions in individual countries or regions within countries abroad. A
number of LDC’s do not even have the agricultural facilities to under-
take efforts at adaptation. Perhaps the 1979 Science and Technology Confer-
ence6 could focus on improving the delivery of agricultural technology
to LDC’s and facilitate its adaptation there.

World Hunger and Food Policy
—Delivering the adapted seeds, fertilizer, pesticides and techniques to
farmers in LDC’s: Few LDC’s have efficient agricultural extension serv-
ices, often reflecting their own budgetary and personnel constraints but
also the low priority many governments place on raising the standard
of living of their rural populations. There may be opportunities for AID,
perhaps together with the Peace Corps, to do more in undertaking and fi-
nancing the development of agricultural extension services in particular
LDC’s. (This is being done to some extent already but whether it might
be undertaken more widely and with closer AID/Peace Corps coopera-
tion, could be usefully examined.)

Finally, the United States has a variety of policies aimed at helping
LDC’s expand their exports, which they must do if they are to earn the
foreign exchange to finance the large quantities of LDC imports pro-
jected for the coming decades. These policies include the generalized
system of preferences, and the current MTN negotiations, aimed at re-
ducing trade barriers generally—and in particular to products of im-
portance to LDC’s. Even with these policies, however, a considerable
gap is expected to develop between LDC food production and desired
food consumption levels. Projected LDC grain import needs by 1985
lion tons of LDC grain imports in 1973–4. The Bourne study could examine
projected LDC grain import needs for 1985 to obtain as accurate and up to date
a picture as possible of these requirements and their implications. The study
could also consider how these needs might be factored into US trade
and agricultural policy and whether planning future food aid pro-
grams in particular might take account of these future needs.
A Focus on Malnutrition
Food is the most basic human need. Though there is at present no
widespread famine in the world, many millions of people (estimates
range between 400 million and 1 billion) do not have a nutritionally ad-
equate diet. Malnutrition reduces the mental and physical capabilities
of these people, and makes them more susceptible to disease; and when
it occurs before the age of 4, malnutrition can result in irreversible
damage to a child’s physical and mental development.

The world-wide malnutrition problem is largely one of the inade-
quate income levels of the world’s poor. This problem is likely to con-
tinue as long as widespread poverty exists, unless direct action is taken

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
to improve the diets of the malnourished. An attack on malnutrition
offers a logical focus for a world hunger campaign and is consistent
with our aid strategy of addressing basic human needs in all countries.
Moreover, it would appeal to the humanitarian instincts of the Amer-
ican people and generate widespread public support at home and
abroad.

The major elements in a world hunger campaign focused on mal-
nutrition should be:
1. Obtaining better information on the extent of malnutrition world-
wide. Special efforts should be made to obtain accurate data in countries
believed to have the most widespread and chronic problems of malnu-
trition, such as those of South Asia, the Sahel, the Andes or Haiti.
2. Developing targets for the improvement of nutritional levels. As a
pilot project of this sort, we might want to concentrate on particular
countries and especially vulnerable groups (pregnant and lactating
mothers and children under 4) in those countries.
3. Expanding the delivery of high protein blended foods to target groups.
(The US now provides nearly 1 million tons per year of grain and other
foods for nutrition intervention programs as part of its Food for Peace
Title II program). This would require greater cooperation with private
voluntary agencies which now manage most of US supported nutrition
intervention programs abroad. It would also lend itself to training and
utilizing locally available labor, thus minimizing the American pres-
ence in the field.
4. Involving recipient governments to a greater extent in nutrition in-
tervention programs, with the objective of having these governments
eventually take over entirely these programs. There might be especially
promising prospects of the US acting as this sort of catalyst in middle-
income LDC’s with pockets of malnutrition (e.g., Brazil; and its north-
east states) where governments could be expected to take over their
own feeding programs in the near future.
5. Transferring available technology and providing necessary financing
to LDC’s for developing their own high protein blended foods, based on
locally available grains and other agricultural products. These coun-
tries would then avoid having to rely totally on importing such foods
(often at relatively high unit prices and costly in foreign exchange)
from the US.
6. Ensuring that the necessary infrastructure for nutrition intervention
programs—particularly in remote areas—is adequate. Required are trans-
port facilities, vehicles, storage, and distribution and cooking facilities.

World Hunger and Food Policy
7. Combining nutrition intervention programs with education in family
planning. (This is already done to some extent; any expansion in nutri-
tion intervention programs should be accompanied by expansion of
family planning where ever possible.) Education in improving general
health and nutrition standards would also be important.
8. Developing and implementing techniques for evaluating the effec-
tiveness of nutrition intervention programs, including weight charts for re-
cipients, incidence of disease and other longer term indicators of the
impact of improved nutrition.
9. Finally, seeking the cooperation of developed and developing countries
alike—including Socialist countries—to attack malnutrition problems
wherever they occur. The Chinese, in particular, might have some
valuable insights in combatting malnutrition based on their own
experience.

A program attacking problems of malnutrition at home and
abroad involves a number of difficulties and these should be well ex-
amined before any decision is made to proceed.
—Such a program can be quite expensive in terms of donor and re-
cipient resources per unit of food delivered. It is particularly costly in
terms of labor and administration.
—Many LDC governments have assigned a low priority to
fighting malnutrition in their countries and it may be difficult to
persuade them to allocate their own scarce resources to fighting
malnutrition.
—Nutrition intervention programs while responding to im-
proving basic human needs, may make less a contribution to recipient
country economic development than traditional AID activities with a
heavier investment orientation. The potential trade-off there between
long-term growth and immediate improvements in the welfare of the
poor should be thoroughly studied before a decision is made to
proceed.

235.

Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter
Washington, October 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Future Budget Commitment for World Food Program
In accordance with your procedures established to approve future
international budget commitments, the Departments of State and Agri-
culture are requesting approval of a $220 million U.S. contribution to
the UN World Food Program (WFP) for calendar years 1979 and 1980
meeting which will set a total WFP budget target for 1978/80. By an-
nouncing the U.S. pledge now, rather than at the official pledging ses-
sion early next year, the U.S. delegation hopes to influence the selection
of a slightly lower target for the two year period.

Background
Established at U.S. initiative in 1963, WFP provides food grants to
needy people in developing countries through projects of their gov-
ernments, including food for work, school and preschool child feeding
and disaster relief. The program has grown rapidly and now exceeds
on an annual basis the P.L. 480 Title II feeding programs of the U.S. vol-
untary agencies. The U.S. share of the program has fallen from 50% to
25%. The table below shows the relevant statistics for the past two
biennia and alternatives for the 1979/80 period.

World Hunger and Food Policy
(In millions of dollars)
WFP
State/USDA
Proposal
Proposal
Total WFP Budget
US Contribution
Commodity costs
Freight costs
Cash (for Admin)
US as a % of WFP total
(18%)
(25%)
(25%)
(25%)
Food and freight costs are financed under PL 480 Title II, and the
cash through AID funds for voluntary contributions to international or-
ganizations and programs. (The low figure of 18% for the U.S. share in
the 1975/76 biennium is explained by extraordinary Canadian and
Arab contributions).

Analysis
a 27 percent increase in funding. At the current 25 percent share of total
contributions, the U.S. portion would be $238 million. State and Agri-
culture believe the proposed WFP total could exceed recipient gov-
ernments’ absorptive capacity given their management constraints,
and may cause WFP to lower its own programming standards. WFP’s
internal capacity to manage such a rapidly growing program is also
questionable.

State/USDA’s proposed $880 million program would, they be-
lieve, permit more orderly growth while demonstrating continuing
U.S. support for UN food aid focused on basic human needs. The U.S.
proposed $220 million share (25% of the WFP total) would be presented
as a maximum dollar amount. Thus, if other countries decided on a
higher total (we do not have sufficient voting power for a veto), the U.S.
percentage share would decline. Because other donors will probably
not wish to make up for the reduction in the U.S. share, the proposed
approach has a reasonable chance of success in limiting WFP growth.
The proposed increase would utilize P.L. 480 Title II tonnage, using ap-
proximately one-third of the Congress’ recently mandated increase in
Title II (the remaining two-thirds would go to U.S. voluntary-agency
feeding programs.)

As a third alternative, an argument could be made for limiting
total WFP funding to the level of the current biennium, $750 million.
The fact that WFP has not presented specific proposals for additional
funding and the lack of any rigorous plan for management improve-
ment would argue for continuing the current level.

236.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
Summary
This paper is divided into three sections. The first gives back-
ground on the world food crisis and our policy response to it. The
second describes the current food situation and problems, while the
third gives the thrust of future policy and provides some themes for a
possible Presidential speech.

Some conclusions we reach include the following: 1) the direction
of the international food policies we are implementing remains valid;
2) a new world hunger campaign probably is not justified, given the lack
of effective solutions and the risk of over promising; 3) a Presidential
speech on food and hunger may be desirable, however and 4) we
classification marking. Drafted by Ogden; cleared by Katz and in substance by Wolf,
Long, Witt, Lancaster, and Johnston. Tabs A “Relevant Production-Related Proposals
Advanced at World Food Conference,” and B, “Candidate US Initiatives,” are attached
but not printed. Anderson transmitted the paper to Bourne under an October 31 covering
memorandum, indicating that it was the Department of State’s contribution to the World
Hunger Working Group. (Ibid.)

World Hunger and Food Policy
should use a food and hunger initiative to develop public and Congres-
sional support for increased ODA.

Section I
World Food Crisis
Food became a prominent international issue and a major theme in
North-South relations as a result of the 1972–74 world food crisis. That
crisis brought especially harsh consequences for the developing world.
Commercial grain and food supplies contracted, sharply driving up
prices to levels that eliminated many poorer countries from the market.
Badly needed concessional food aid flows also dried up during this pe-
riod; donor countries could not sustain food aid levels in the face of
short supplies and rising prices. The threat of widespread starvation
appeared a real one.

Responding to these events, the United States took the initiative to
call for and organize the 1974 United Nations World Food Conference.
There, agreement was reached on resolutions which established an in-
tegrated and comprehensive framework dealing with production, con-
sumption and distribution aspects of the world food problem. (See Tab
A) The major conclusions of the Conference, in summary, were that
a) food deficits for many of the poorer developing countries could only
be met through increased domestic agricultural production, and in-
creased Official Development Assistance (ODA) should be directed
toward this objective; b) an international system of nationally held
grain reserves should be established to offset the impact of future short
supply situations; c) increased food aid is needed in the short term to
address immediate food aid needs; and d) agricultural trade should be
liberalized to expand production and exports. These conclusions, in ad-
dition to providing a basis for international action on food and hunger,
represent the backdrop for recent U.S. food policies.

U.S. Policy Response
The United States moved quickly to frame and implement a policy
responsive to the thrust of these conclusions. United States bilateral
and multilateral assistance for agricultural and rural development has
been doubled. AID presently targets approximately 55% of its bilateral
assistance into the agricultural sectors of recipient countries. The
United States also has given strong backing to multilateral food and ag-
riculture institutions; for example, supporting FAO and seeking rapid
establishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Develop-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ment. US food aid levels have been increased to more than six million
tons annually in recent years. This is 60% of the 10 million ton global
food aid target endorsed by the Conference. Recently, the United States
agreed to participate in the World Food Program’s 500,000 Emergency
Food Reserve and to increase its pledge to the WFP. US food aid pro-
grams also have been made more developmentally effective. To in-
crease world food security, the United States has formulated proposals
for an international grains reserve system. In the trade area, the U.S. is
actively pressing for broad based trade liberalization at the MTN nego-
tiations in Geneva. Its GSP system offers a wide range of new export
opportunities to developing countries.

Section II
The Current Situation
The world does not face a major problem of world hunger or star-
vation today; favorable weather and good harvests in most parts of the
world over the last several years have replaced the shortages and
hunger of 1973–74. Large grain stocks are building up in the US and
other major grain producers (including India). However, the world
food system remains a fragile one, where low stocks and only slight
drops in production can send grain prices sky rocketing, as was proven
grains supplies are plentiful now, and prices relatively low and stable,
even a small drop in production, as could happen in an exceptional
year, could lead once again to problems of hunger and starvation par-
ticularly if stocks prove inadequate or are ineffectively controlled.
Problems of world hunger remain deeply enmeshed in the broader
issues of world poverty and income distribution. Rapidly growing
populations increase the need for expanding food production and dis-
tribution. An inadequate social and physical infra-structure prevents
the operation of an efficient and low cost food distribution system. Ag-
ricultural pricing policies in developed and developing countries alike
often discourage an expansion of food production and efficient world
trade in agriculture. In addition, a number of regional problems exist,
such as the fragile and deteriorating ecosystems in many countries (e.g.
the Sahelian countries which face an ever expanding desert) where
food deficits are most pronounced; or over population in other coun-
tries (e.g. the Andes) where land tenure systems and the climate limit
increases in agricultural production.
term structural food problems, including the growing food gap in the
poorest developing countries, and awareness that another crisis could
occur on short notice.

There also are new and encouraging steps which the world com-
munity is taking to deal with new factors of world hunger. These in-
clude, for example, increased global awareness of the food/population
problem and of the degradation of the land and resource base, reflected
in recent United Nations Global Conferences on Food, Population,
Water and Desertification; new “action plans” approved by nations at
the Water and Desertification Conferences; and ever improving institu-
tional and technological capabilities to apply to problems, e.g. interna-
tional agricultural research institutions, evolution of the Sahel Devel-
opment Program, new monitoring and assessment capabilities for food
production and disease detection etc. (satelite remote sensing), and
new varieties of drought resistant crops, food storage and preservation
techniques, land management systems etc. These recent developments
hold promise for the future.

Hunger Problems
It’s clear from the above that a wide range of problems needs to be
addressed in attacking world hunger and malnutrition. A list of the
most important of these might include the following:
—Increasing food production worldwide, but particularly in food
deficit developing countries. Developing country food production in-
creases in recent years have exceeded the 4% target agreed to for the
United Nations Second Development Decade. This favorable perform-
ance, however, must be attributed primarily to favorable weather con-
ditions, rather than to basic underlying reforms. Inadequate economic

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and political policies and conditions still prevent sustained food output
increases in many developing countries, and in addition reduce private
and public investment flowing to agriculture. There also are other con-
straints to expanded food output in developing countries which must
be overcome such as inadequate management and shortage of trained
manpower, capital shortages, inadequate and inappropriate tech-
nology, substantial post harvest losses due to inadequate storage facil-
ities, and productivity losses due to people debilitated by hunger and
disease.
—Dealing effectively with problems of under consumption and
malnutrition. Though there is at present no widespread famine in the
world, many millions of people (estimates range between 400 million
and one billion) do not have an adequately nutritional diet. Underlying
this problem is the issue of effective demand among groups of people
and individual countries. We have learned that economic growth and
prosperity does not necessarily produce additional benefits for the
poorer members of society, including access to necessary food supplies.
While the problem is focused in the poorer developing countries, it is
worldwide in scope, existing often in large pockets in middle income
LDC’s and in rich countries as well.
—Feeding the hungry and malnourished requires significantly im-
proved food distribution systems both among countries and within the
poorer developing nations. The food crisis of 1972–1974 evidenced
many instances of localized famine in countries and regions where ade-
quate food supplies were available, but inadequate transport systems
made it impossible to deliver the food where it was needed most. Im-
proved distribution systems mean not only getting more food to the
neediest, but also ensuring better food supply/demand balance locally
and regionally. Unless food imports are kept in reasonable balance
with local production and purchasing power, domestic food prices and
agricultural incentives may be reduced. We need to carefully review
the level of our food aid and other food exports and seek to establish in-
ternal programs in recipient countries to increase productivity, pur-
chasing power, and demand prior to and along with the arrival of im-
ported food.
—Restraining excess population growth rates which represent a
threat to long term food supply/demand balance. In this connection,
responsible population growth control programs are required. Based
on current growth rates, the world’s population will double to 8 billion
people by 2010. Feeding this many people will be extremely difficult,
with a possibility of widespread famine in years of bad harvests. Since
about 80% of the projected population growth will occur in developing
countries, the population problem will be compounded, even more
than today, by distribution problems.

World Hunger and Food Policy
—Developing flexible policies to deal with the wide range of
problems and situations faced by developing countries in meeting their
food requirements. Some developing countries already have sufficient
supplies and expected foreign exchange earnings to purchase all the
food imports they are likely to need. Another group of countries can at-
tain this position with a modicum of help. For some, increased agricul-
tural development assistance can expand food production, others
would benefit most from reduced trade barriers, while still others need
help such as liberal credits to finance imports in short supply years. An
effective U.S. and international food strategy must deal meaningfully
with all these varied situations and needs.
—Finally, continuing efforts to deal intelligently and effectively
with other factors affecting world hunger such as accelerating world-
wide losses of arable land from mismanagement of the resource base
(deforestation, over-grazing, soil erosion, salination etc.), the rising cost
of chemicals and raw materials required by agriculture, and limitations
on water for agriculture imposed by growing competition among na-
tions and regions for surface and ground water.

Section III
Future Policy Evolution
We believe the broad thrust of the food policies we initiated sev-
eral years ago remains valid. If the third world is to feed itself and ac-
celerate its development through agriculture, the course followed must
concentrate on a mix of agricultural development programs, increased
Official Development Assistance and trade liberalization. These pol-
icies must be dynamic ones, however, adjusting to present conditions
and responding effectively to contemporary problems. The future di-
rection of our food policies is designed to do this.

Reserves
We continue to seek a viable international reserve system to stabi-
lize prices and promote supply security. In the London talks, the
United States has proposed the establishment of an internationally
coordinated system of nationally-held reserve stocks, shared among all
major grain trading countries. The reserve system operations, acti-
vated by movements of world wheat prices, would stabilize interna-
tional prices and improve food security by shifting grain supplies for-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ward from years of excess supply to years of scarcity, and thereby
provide a form of world food insurance against the unpredictable oc-
currences of major crop failure and adverse weather. In addition to spe-
cific obligations for reserve stocks, the United States suggested frame-
work would also provide for the correction of adverse market
conditions through such measures as the elimination of trade barriers
and adjustments in the amounts of wheat fed to animals. To provide for
U.S. participation in the international system, and to handle other
emergency food requirements, the Administration will soon submit to
Congress new legislation establishing a domestic emergency reserve of
up to 6 million tons of grains.

Food Aid
A major element in this comprehensive policy for greater food se-
curity is the assurance of adequate and timely food assistance to the
poorest parts of the developing world. To meet this objective, the
United States has called for the negotiation of a new Food Aid Conven-
tion within the context of an International Wheat Agreement. The new
convention should ensure the availability of food assistance at not less
than 10 million tons on an annual basis, in accordance with the recom-
mendation of the World Food Council. Donating countries would also
take steps to improve the effectiveness of food aid flows, to improve
coordination and to promote efficiency in domestic production in re-
cipient countries. The Administration also is continuing efforts to im-
prove the developmental effectiveness of PL 480 food aid programs.
This is being done, inter alia by a) seeking rapid implementation of long
term Title III Food for Development programs b) considering new
mechanisms to assure more dependable food aid programming and
c) improving donor co-ordination of food aid programs in support of
development objectives. We also should examine the possibility of pro-
viding food aid counter cyclically to offset crop shortfalls in LDC’s and
thereby relieve pressure on scarce foreign exchange resources.
Trade
The United States has a variety of policies aimed at helping LDC’s
to expand their exports, which they must do if they are to earn the for-
eign exchange necessary to finance the large quantity of imports pro-

World Hunger and Food Policy
jected for the next decade. These policies include the Generalized
System of Preferences (GSP), and the current MTN negotiations,9
aimed at reducing trade barriers generally and in particular for
products of importance to LDC’s. At the MTN, the United States will
continue to press for the multilateral reduction of tariffs and non-tariff
barriers—including agricultural products of particular interest to de-
veloping countries. In this connection, liberalization of trade barriers
by the LDC’s themselves would not only in many cases make agricul-
tural imports cheaper and more available, but could also in some in-
stances encourage policies more favorable to agriculture. We also
should consider whether additional agricultural commodities of partic-
ular interest to developing countries could be added to our GSP offer.
AID
In this area, the Administration has determined that a substantial
increase in our Official Development Assistance is required to meet our
international commitments and to contribute more effectively to devel-
opment. The “new directions” aid effort seeks to foster economic
growth with equity, and to meet Basic Human Needs of the neediest
members of society. Particularly high priority is being given to in-
creasing ODA flows to agriculture. In this connection, two areas for
possible additional emphasis are the following:
Developing the knowledge and techniques for greater agricultural pro-
ductivity world-wide. Agricultural experts have been troubled for some
time at the apparent slowdown in productivity gains in agriculture and
believe there is a strong case for greater government finance of basic re-
search in this area. (This was also a conclusion of the recent World Food
and Nutrition Study.) Delivering the research to LDCs. This involves the
time consuming task of adapting research improvements made in the
U.S. to conditions in individual countries or regions within countries
abroad. A number of LDCs do not even have the agricultural facilities
to undertake efforts at adaption. Perhaps the 1979 Science and Tech-
nology Conference could focus on improving the delivery of agricul-
tural technology to LDC’s and facilitate its adaption there.
United Nations Efforts
US support for United Nations and other multilateral institutions
operating in the area of food and agriculture is being increased. Partic-
ular attention is being focused on the FAO in view of the key role which
this institution plays in agricultural development efforts. The U.S. also
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
continues to give full support and encouragement to IFAD which will
channel additional resources to priority agricultural projects. In the fu-
ture, the US may want to give added priority to international activities
dealing specifically with new measures to protect and sustain the nat-
ural resource base on which food production depends over the longer
term.

Focus on Malnutrition
An attack on malnutrition is one possible focus for a new world
hunger initiative. While not entrirely new, higher priority and em-
phasis on malnutrition would be consistent with our aid strategy of ad-
dressing basic human needs in all countries and should enjoy popular
support in the United States. Following are some elements which might
be included under a malnutrition focus:
1) Involving recipient governments to a greater extent in nutrition in-
tervention programs, with the objective of having these governments
eventually take over entirely these programs. There might be especially
promising prospects of the US acting as this sort of catalyst in middle-
income LDCs with pockets of malnutrition (e.g., Brazil; and its north-
east states) where governments could be expected to take over their
own feeding programs in the near future.
2) Expanding the delivery of high protein blended foods to target groups.
(The U.S. now provides nearly one million tons per year of grain and
other foods for nutrition intervention programs as part of its Food for
Peace Title II program). This would require greater cooperation with
private voluntary agencies which now manage most of U.S. supported
nutrition intervention programs abroad. It would also lend itself to
training and utilizing locally available labor, thus minimizing the
American presence in the field.
3) Developing targets for the improvement of nutritional levels. As a
pilot project of this sort, we might want to concentrate on particular
countries and especially vulnerable groups (pregnant and lactating
mothers and children under 4) in those countries.
4) Transferring available technology and providing necessary financing
to LDCs for developing their own high protein blended foods, based on
locally available grains and other agricultural products. These coun-
tries would then avoid having to rely totally on importing such foods
(often at relatively high unit prices and costly in foreign exchange)
from the US.
5) Ensuring that the necessary infrastructure for nutrition intervention
programs—particularly in remote areas—is adequate. Required are trans-
port facilities, vehicles, storage, and distribution and cooking facilities.
6) Combining nutrition intervention programs with education in family
planning. (This is already done to some extent; any expansion in nutri-

World Hunger and Food Policy
tion intervention programs should be accompanied by expansion of
family planning wherever possible.) Education in improving general
health and nutrition standards would also be important.
A program attacking malnutrition problems at home and abroad
does involve a number of difficulties which should be carefully consid-
ered. For example, such a program can be quite expensive in terms of
donor and recipient resources per unit of food delivered. It is particu-
larly costly in terms of labor and administration. Many LDC gov-
ernments have assigned a low priority to fighting malnutrition in their
countries and it may be difficult to persuade them to allocate their own
scarce resources to fighting malnutrition. Finally, nutrition interven-
tion programs, while responding to improving Basic Human Needs,
may make less a contribution to recipient country economic devel-
opment than traditional AID activities with a heavier investment
orientation.

Money Is Needed
The policies outlined above represent an integrated and cohesive
effort to deal with world hunger and malnutrition problems. They seek
to deal with global and national agricultural production, distribution
and consumption, broader development issues, international food
trade, food reserves and short and long run food aid. They also include
concurrent efforts in other areas such as population growth control,
maintenance of the global resource base, new energy and resource
saving production techniques and inputs and improvements in local
science, technology, extension and management capabilities (particu-
larly in the poorer countries).

Effective programs in all these areas require money which
Congress will be reluctant to provide. In this connection, a hunger ini-
tiative could usefully be turned to our advantage. Funds to support it
should be more easily forthcoming. We believe, in particular, that
Congress would be more willing to support increased AID appropria-
tions linked to this objective. We hope this important connection will be
made and maintained by the Administration.

A World Hunger Campaign
While it may appear attractive, our tentative conclusion is that a
major World Hunger Campaign probably is not desirable. Although re-
serving judgment, we doubt that the Working Group will be able to de-
velop genuinely new initiatives providing effective solutions to the diffi-
cult food problems we face. There is the risk of over promising, with
subsequent disillusionment over results. In addition, we see a distinct
threat that such a campaign could lead directly to confrontation with
the Administration’s human rights efforts i.e. do we assist hungry
people in Uganda.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
A Presidential Speech
On the other hand, an effective speech by the President on the
theme of world hunger and malnutrition could be very useful. In par-
ticular, it could serve to pull together and explain our food policies for
the Congress and public. This would greatly help to win support for
new resources to support them. Some possible themes for a speech are
suggested below:
Focus on Malnutrition
—Emphasize the importance of attacking problems of malnutri-
tion at home and abroad. Explain what the Administration is doing in
this area.

AID
—Emphasize planned increases in ODA levels and link them to
the solution of world food and hunger problems. Explain that US ODA
as a percent of GNP is low and should be raised to appropriate interna-
tional levels.
—Build on the “Basic Human Needs” concept, relating ODA in-
creases to helping the poorest and neediest. The overall thrust should
be to remove constraints which prevent food from reaching the indi-
viduals who need it.

Population
—Dramatize the point that no solution will endure unless we can
bring food production into balance with population growth and a sus-
tainable natural resources base. Specifically highlight both the need for
appropriate population policies to reduce current population growth
rates; and the need to maintain the long-term productive capacity of the
land and associated natural resources.

Food Reserves
—Indicate that the United States is negotiating a new international
wheat agreement including an international security grain reserve
component. Urge all countries to adopt the political will and flexibility
necessary for a successful conclusion.
—Explain how the international reserve system would benefit all
countries, but particularly the developing nations, by stabilizing price
fluctuations, assuring security of food supply and reducing trade
barriers.
—Emphasize the importance of the emergency food reserve bill
which the Administration will soon present to Congress. Explain its
dual purpose i.e. to offset emergency food shortages in developing

World Hunger and Food Policy
countries and to provide for US participation in a new international se-
curity grain reserve system.

Food Aid
—Announce U.S. support for a new Food Aid Convention in-
cluding a 10 million ton minimum obligation for annual food aid flows.
—Emphasize U.S. efforts to increase the developmental priority
and effectiveness of its food aid programs. Cite the usefulness of
multi-year Title III food aid programs to support long term agricultural
development efforts.

Food Research and Technology
—Cite U.S. commitment to strengthening the international science
and technology base, particularly as it applies to LDCs, through sup-
port for international agricultural institutes, FAO and UNEP efforts,
OECD food activities, Sahel Development Program.
—Announce intention to give higher priority to LDC oriented re-
search on improved food production techniques and methods within
US bilateral science and technology agreements and other programs;
and call for similar actions by other nations and international organiza-
tions. (Potential areas for concentration are identified under Tab B.)
Trade
—Express the determination to achieve a successful outcome of
Multilateral Trade Negotiations in Geneva. Explain how liberalization
of trade could help to expand and make more efficient LDC agricul-
tural production and encourage exports with which to pay for needed
food imports.

United Nations
—Emphasize US support for UN food agencies such as the FAO
and WFP. Express the hope that IFAD will perform a constructive role
in channeling additional resources into agricultural projects.
Domestic Food Policy
While the above themes deal with international food issues, we be-
lieve a speech by the President also should include domestic factors
which impact on them. It is clear that domestic policies and productive
capacities of the United States and other current food surplus countries
will be extremely significant in meeting world hunger over the near
and medium terms. If a significant hunger initiative is launched, do-
mestic food policy decisions will have to be supportive. A Presidential
message in any event should highlight steps we are taking to maintain
US agriculture. These might include, for example, pending revision of
domestic policies, implementation of a multiple use approach to the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
management of public lands, measures to protect the best agricultural
land from conversion, and the high priority assigned to soil erosion
control and the development of new tools for crop inventorying
(LACIE remote sensing effort is an example).

Additional Initiatives
In addition to all of the above, there are several other initiatives
which the Inter-Agency Working Group might usefully consider.
These include the following:
—A new program of U.S. institution building and research de-
signed to strengthen our domestic food production capacity and con-
currently address global requirements. Particular priority for new De-
partment of Energy, USDA and NSF programs aimed at reducing
energy component of food production.
—Specific financial commitment to proposed Sahelian Institute
($3–5 million initial contribution).
—High priority to new U.S./Mexico cooperative program de-
signed to protect and restore resource base and achieve agricultural po-
tential of large semi-arid region we share. This concept emerged from
UN Desertification Conference and is being developed in the State De-
partment. The Government of Mexico and relevant USG agencies (esp.
Interior and USDA) must be brought in prior to any announcement.
—Review U.S. policies and programs to determine if something
can be done to expand LDC agricultural exports. Particular priority
might be given to adding additional agricultural commodities of in-
terest to LDCs to our GSP list.
—Create a new “food corps” within the U.N. system or elsewhere.
Its members would be recruited to undertake grass roots projects
aimed at increasing agricultural production at the small farm level.

237.

Letter From Orville Freeman to the President’s Special
Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)
New York, November 4, 1977
Dear Dr. Bourne:
Your October 5th letter2 was on my desk when I returned from an
extended trip in Asia. I would like to respond in considerable length to
all five of the questions to which you direct my attention. However,
your letter calls for response by October 21st, so let me quickly summa-
rize where the first four areas you name are concerned by emphasizing,
as I sure others to whom you have written will do, that the key is
“political.”
I could name on the fingers of one hand the developing countries
where strong and determined programs to accomplish the necessary
increase of food production and distribution have been carried out.
Historically, few political leaders have had the will or strength to de-
velop and carry out the necessary programs to affect the major changes
that are essential if the long and complex chain of relationships, run-
ning from land ownership to finance, inputs, technology application,
production, storage, processing, and, finally, marketing is to be altered
in a fashion designed to accomplish the necessary increase in produc-
tivity. In my judgment, the President could do nothing more important
for the food and hunger cause than to press, in every way possible and
on all occasions personally, on the chiefs of state that they must put
their “back” into agriculture and food development. No country in his-
tory (except a few city-states), has enjoyed marked economic progress
without a vigorous and successful agricultural base. As you are well
aware, only about half of the good land in the world is being used, and
probably only about one third of the technology is currently effectively
applied. The “makings” are all there; what is needed is the political will
to put together and carry through programs (including outside sup-
port) to expand production and distribution in the country where it is
needed. The political risk to do so is usually high and payoff in visible
results comes slowly.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
In question five, you refer to private investment in low income
countries, and in the last sentence of the first paragraph of your cov-
ering letter you call for participation of the private sector. This is, of
course, elemental, for most of the applied agricultural technology is
held in the private sector and the ability to efficiently apply that tech-
nology is peculiarly within the private sector. The problem, of course, is
that the risks and the potential for return are disproportionate. In a
world that is largely capital and technology short, under present cir-
cumstances private sector leadership feels compelled to apply their
limited resources in areas more likely to bring returns to the share-
holders to whom they are responsible. Here, again, a clear, sharp, pow-
erful commitment by the political leaders at the very highest level in
the countries that are most desperately in need is necessary. Assur-
ances that commitments made will be met, and that support committed
will be forthcoming, and that cooperation, up and down the line, is as-
sured, are necessary. Such has seldom been forthcoming, with commit-
ments frequently breached, although solemnly entered into. I believe it
can be fairly said that most multinational agribusiness companies wish
to invest in less developed countries and recognize their responsibil-
ities to contribute to the world hunger problem. Attention should
therefore be given—carefully and methodically—to the conditions
under which they are able to meet their responsibilities to their share-
holders and still involve themselves in the hunger problem in the de-
veloping countries.

For some years I have been advocating that there should be some-
where a cadre of highly experienced and competent business political
leaders who have had experience and credibility at the highest levels,
in both public and private sectors. Such professionals could play the
part of “honest brokers,” identifying opportunities in developing coun-
tries, and notifying companies who have the technology and knowhow
to meet that need. They must, of course, be able to reach leadership at
the very highest level in both government and the private sector. By
definition, their credibility must be the highest, so that they can bring
about a thorough examination of the potential on both sides of the
project in question; i.e., in government and by multinational agri-
business companies. Once the possibilities are called to the attention of
top leadership in both private and public sectors, the negotiations,
looking to results, will take care of themselves. Attention might also be
given to some effective backing by the US Government or an interna-
tional organization so that the kind of protection that has been ex-

238.

Letter From Senator Hubert Humphrey to President Carter
Washington, December 5, 1977
Dear Mr. President:
This fall both Houses of Congress passed resolutions asking you to
appoint a commission to explore initiatives through which the United
States can combat hunger and malnutrition in the world. I was among
the original co-sponsors of the Senate resolution because I believe such
classification marking. Another copy of Humphrey’s letter is in the Carter Library, RG
220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Linowitz’s Subject Files, Box 42,
Members of the Commission [3].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
a commission would provide a unique opportunity to mobilize the na-
tion to support efforts that can substantially improve the nutritional
well-being of citizens of the United States and the world.
Too often in the past, public interest in hunger and malnutrition
has been aroused spasmodically, largely in times of famine, and there
has been no attempt to build strong, sustained public interest in and
support for, comprehensive food and nutrition policy undertakings.
There is a wide and diverse constituency that will support thoughtful
governmental action on food and nutrition, and a commission on
hunger and malnutrition can help build that support.

I see such a commission undertaking two basic tasks. First, it
would be a vehicle for public involvement and education. Through
hearings across the country, people would have the opportunity to ask
questions about our food and nutrition policy and present their ideas
for improving it. In addition, the hearings would inform the public in a
continuing way about the problems of hunger and malnutrition, at
home and abroad.

Second, the commission would analyze general economic and ag-
ricultural trends in the developing world, particularly with respect to
changes that will take place because of the rise in energy prices, and de-
termine how our current policies will affect nutritional wellbeing in
this changing context. It is imperative that this two-fold evaluation be
done on a continuous basis if we are to avoid policies that do more
harm than good, and if we are to establish a clear recognition of the
connection between problems of food and nutrition in the United States
and such problems abroad.

There is always the question of whether commissions are really
useful. It has been my experience that the benefits of a commission are
in direct proportion to the strength of its mandate, the quality of its
membership, and the level of support it receives. May I also suggest
that Dr. Jean Mayer, President of Tufts University, who organized the

239.

Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, December 8, 1977
SUBJECT
Congressional Resolution on World Hunger
The Congress has passed resolutions calling on the President to
create a Commission on Domestic and International Hunger and Mal-
nutrition. (The House version is attached at Tab A.) An effort to head
off the resolutions in October came to naught when it proved impos-
sible for the President to meet with the key sponsors as Frank Moore

240.

Memorandum From Jeffrey Garten and Carol Lancaster of
the Policy Planning Staff to Acting Secretary of State
Christopher
Washington, December 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Peter Bourne’s World Hunger Initiatives
We know Tony has been discussing the Bourne initiatives with
you and we wanted to keep you posted in his absence.
On December 23, we received a draft memorandum for the Presi-

241.

Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, January 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Draft Report of World Hunger Working Group
Some time ago Peter Bourne circulated a draft of the report of the
World Hunger Working Group, an inter-agency body staffed by pri-
vate experts and government officials. The report’s findings are critical
of many current US food and agricultural programs: the report cites the
lack of research priorities, inadequate implementation of development
goals, deficiencies in organization and management within the gov-
ernment, and a frequent conflict between U.S. foreign investment and
food and agricultural needs of developing countries. The report makes
a large number of proposals but does not set priorities. Most gov-
ernment agencies were not pleased by the report. Since a considerable
amount of line-by-line editing would have been required to pull the re-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
port completely into line with current agency policies, such an effort
would have deprived the report of much of its “punch” and antago-
nized food activists. After considering the report, Owen, Thornton and
I decided to focus on the draft decision memo for the President that
Bourne and Fill were preparing.

A preliminary version of that memo included options which re-
peated those that Henry Owen and I will address in the NSC memo on
foreign assistance organization (to be considered by the PRC and then
forwarded to the President). Owen and I met with Bourne and Fill and
recommended that all decision options related to the organization of
foreign assistance be referred to the NSC memo and that questions re-
lating to the Administration’s hunger initiative remain in the Bourne
memo. We now await the next version of the memo on which I expect
NSC and other agencies will have a further opportunity to comment
before it goes forward.

World Hunger and Food Policy

242.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to President Carter
Washington, February 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Meeting with Congressional Delegation Concerning a Presidential Commission
I. Purpose
These are the key sponsors of the resolutions passed in both
Houses calling on you to establish a Presidential Commission on Do-
mestic and International Hunger and Malnutrition. The purpose of the
meeting is to allow them the opportunity to convince you to act on the
resolutions and establish such a commission.

243.

Memorandum From Secretary of Agriculture Bergland to
President Carter
Washington, February 7, 1978
SUBJECT
The Food Aid Convention
The 1971 International Wheat Agreement—consisting of the
Wheat Trade Convention and the Food Aid Convention—will expire
on June 30, 1978. A negotiating conference to replace this Agreement
the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop-
ment (UNCTAD).

The United States must determine its contribution to the new Food
Aid Convention. Under this Convention, the U.S. and other countries
commit themselves to a minimum annual quantity of food aid to devel-
oping countries for the next several years.

The 1971 Food Aid Convention is an agreement by which nine
countries pledge minimum annual contributions of food aid to devel-
oping countries. Total contributions under the current Convention are
4. million tons of wheat and coarse grain, of which the U.S. share is
have been much greater than our current FAC commitment.
During 1972–74, when grain prices were very high, the U.S.
sharply reduced its food aid primarily in order to hold down budget
costs and inflationary pressure. However, in these “world food crisis”
years the developing countries had the greatest need for food aid. I be-
lieve that the U.S. should strive to avoid a repetition of the 1972–74 pat-
tern. Our program of grain reserves, especially the proposed Interna-
World Hunger and Food Policy
tional Emergency Wheat Reserve, will help ensure that the U.S. can
maintain its level of food aid even in years of high grain prices and tight
supplies. By accepting a larger obligation under the new Food Aid
Convention, the U.S. would commit itself internationally to do so.
At the World Food Conference of 1974 and subsequent meetings of
the World Food Council and the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO), the U.S. has endorsed a world food aid target of 10 million tons
of grain per year. In the International Wheat Council discussions prior
to the upcoming negotiations, the U.S. has proposed that, in accordance
with this target, the new Food Aid Convention should ensure the an-
nual availability of 10 million tons of food aid. The U.S. has empha-
sized that responsibility for food aid must be widely shared among
donor and potential donor countries.

Recommendations
The size of the U.S. contribution to the new Food Aid Convention
has been discussed by the Working Group on Food and Agricultural
Policy. Based on these discussions, I am submitting three recommen-
dations which involve progressively increasing levels of U.S. commit-
ment to provide food aid.

First, I recommend that, at the upcoming negotiations, the U.S. should
make a minimum commitment to contribute 4. millions tons annually
under the new Food Aid Convention.

This quantity represents a U.S. share of the 10 million ton target
which is equivalent to our 44.7% share of the current Convention. To
commit less than this quantity would be inconsistent with our support
for the 10 million ton target. In making this commitment, it would be
assumed that the new Convention would allow similar financial terms
for aid as the current Convention.

The budget impact of this commitment depends on grain prices.
Currently programmed food aid quantities and budget outlays for FY

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tons under the FAC, as shown in Table 2. Of course, if grain prices rise
above projected levels, this FAC commitment would require that the
U.S. increase its budget outlays for food aid rather than reduce the
quantity below this level. For each 10¢ per bushel increase in the price
of wheat and corn, food aid costs for FY 79, which would be the first full
year of the Convention, would increase by about $16 million. However,
if grain prices do rise, budget outlays for farm income support now an-
ticipated for FY 79 would fall sharply.

This recommendation has been considered by the Working Group
on Food and Agricultural Policy and is concurred in by all members
present.

DECISION
Second, I recommend that, if useful in obtaining the contributions of
other countries toward the 10 million ton target, the U.S. negotiator should be
authorized to offer that the U.S. would increase its contribution above 4.
million tons so that the U.S. share would be no less than 50% of total contribu-
tions—up to a maximum U.S. contribution of 5 million tons.
In other words, if the contributions of other countries exceed 4.
million tons, the U.S. would match these contributions on a ton-for-ton
basis until the 10 million ton target is achieved. Such a conditional offer
would provide an incentive for other potential donors to increase their
contributions.

In making this offer, the U.S. would first assure that its Currency
Use Payments (CUPs) for certain Title I agreements would not make
those agreements ineligible under the FAC. In this way, almost all of
our current Title I agreements could be counted toward fulfillment of
our FAC contribution, as shown in Table 2.

Currently programmed food aid quantities and budget outlays for
million tons under the FAC, although the exposure to potential in-
creases in budget costs would be correspondingly greater.
The commodity coverage of the FAC will be negotiated. If rice or
other commodities are included in the FAC, it will be easier for the U.S.
to meet this 5 million ton commitment, as shown in Table 2.
needs. I believe that the new Convention should establish rules for
sharing responsibility for such increased food aid.

In general, the U.S. would propose that, whenever foodgrain pro-
duction in the low-income developing countries is more than an agreed
percentage below trend, all donor countries would meet to consider
jointly increasing food aid by up to an agreed percentage of each
country’s basic contribution under the Convention. Specific guidelines
for such a proposal have been developed by the Working Group on
Food and Agricultural Policy.

The potential budget impact of such a proposal depends on the
maximum size of the U.S. callable food aid commitment and the proba-
bility that the criteria for calling up this additional food aid would be
met. I recommend that the U.S. negotiator be authorized to accept a
callable food aid commitment for the U.S. up to 1. million tons—that is,
up to 20% of 5 million tons—provided that the percentage shortfall
from production trend which would trigger consideration of such ad-
ditional food aid would have an estimated probability of less than
one-fourth in any one year. Thus, the potential budget exposure of the
U.S. would have an upper limit.

This recommendation has been considered by the Working Group
and is supported by all members present.

DECISION
Bob Bergland

244.

Memorandum From Secretary of Agriculture Bergland, the
President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne), the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski), the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs
and Policy (Eizenstat), the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre), and the Chairman of
the Council of Economic Advisers (Schultze) to
President Carter
Washington, February 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Presidential Commission on World Hunger
Background
During the last session, the Congress passed a resolution calling on
you to establish a Commission on Domestic and International Hunger
in the House. At a meeting on February 3 with key Congressional
sponsors of the resolutions you announced that you planned to estab-
lish such a Commission. Following that meeting, you asked us to pre-
pare an options paper on the subject.

Commission Objectives
The first and most important step in charting the course of the
Commission is to identify its objectives as clearly and completely as
possible. Most of the remaining decisions regarding the make-up and
operation of the Commission are largely dependent on the task as-
signed the Commission. Commissions can and are called upon to serve
a variety of different purposes ranging from issue definition and basic
World Hunger and Food Policy
fact-finding to the promotion of public awareness through public rela-
tions activities.

We are persuaded that the Hunger Commission must be designed
to pursue several related objectives including:
• the development of a solid factual base that identifies the causes
of the problem,
• identify existing authorities and programs, public and private,
and national and international, and
• assess the programs to determine which are working, which are
not, and why.

These objectives are generally consistent with those in the Con-
gressional resolutions. Such data gathering and analysis has not been
done on a comprehensive basis. Until it is, there will be no clear view of
the problem nor will we know the magnitude of present world-wide ef-
forts and how the problem can be dealt with more effectively. Before
launching an aggressive effort, we must know where we are and how
we got here. Much of the analysis has already been done through the
World Hunger Working Group, and their report, a summary of which
is being sent to you separately today, can serve as a basis for their
work. This Commission provides a unique opportunity to assemble
free of institutional constraints, a comprehensive and in-depth review
in a thorough and integrated way.

Once the factual base is developed, we hope this could be accom-
plished during the first 6 to 9 months, the Commission would then pre-
pare an options paper on actions to be taken. Any initiatives requiring
legislation should be prepared in time for possible inclusion in the Ad-
ministration’s 1979 legislative package. At that point, we would see the
Commission turning to the promotion of improved public under-
standing and awareness of the issue and the role of the United States in
helping alleviate the problem.

The key decision then, as we see it, is the extent to which we rely
on the Commission to help develop hunger policies and design pro-
grams or whether the Commission is used primarily to promote public
awareness and generate support. The major argument in favor of using
the Commission as a principal means of fashioning policies and pro-
grams is that the assembly and assessment task requires concentrated
effort by a staff unencumbered by other duties. The central drawback
to using the Commission in this capacity is that given its independent
status vis-a`-vis Presidential control, its conclusions and recommenda-
tions will not necessarily correspond with those of the Administration.
In fact, to the extent we succeed in obtaining a dynamic, well-balanced
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
membership, one can almost guarantee there will be strong differences
of opinion and dissension within the Commission. But this can be
useful and requesting an options paper minimizes the risks. We recom-
mend that you look to the Commission as one mechanism for identi-
fying and assessing hunger policies and programs and presenting
options for consideration. Certainly it will provide an important infor-
mation base whether or not you accept all their recommendations.
Bourne and Brzezinski feel the the emphasis of the Commission
should be primarily on building public attention and support for this
issue rather than too heavy a focus on conducting additional studies.
DECISION
Focus primarily on conducting study and policy formulation.
Focus primarily on building public support with policy formulation
secondary.

As described in the Resolutions, the Commission would focus on
hunger in the United States as well as internationally. We question the
advisability of attempting to deal with the fundamentally different
issues of domestic and world hunger within the confines of a single
commission. For this reason, we recommend that the Commission con-
centrate on world hunger, but that domestic policies and programs be
assessed so this experience can, where applicable, be brought to bear.
Some of us feel (Bourne and Brzezinski) that the Commission should
informally9 broaden its scope to serve as a vehicle for building support
for foreign assistance in general, consistent with your decision memo
on that subject, and the evolving program to gain public support in
this area. This broad approach might not be acceptable to some of the
Congressional sponsors, if it was explicit. However, the choice of
chairman can be an important factor in the focus the commission
adopts.

DECISION
Emphasis on world hunger (Bergland, Eizenstat, Schultze)
International and Domestic Hunger
World Hunger and General Foreign Assistance (Bourne, Brzezinski)

World Hunger and Food Policy
Mechanism for Establishing the Commission
Two choices exist for establishing the Commission
(1) Executive Order
A Commission authorized by Executive Order can be initiated im-
mediately with a prescribed membership; be given carefully prescribed
responsibilities; and operate under a statutory base for agency funding
and manpower sharing. This approach would clearly define Presiden-
tial interest, allow more direct control over the Commission by the
White House; and provide a test of public reaction and interest before
the Administration modifies programs or requests legislation. Such au-
thorization, however, would still require an appropriation from the
Congress. To enable the Commission to be established immediately,
some money could be allocated from the President’s Discretionary Ac-
count while an appropriation was being sought.

(2) Executive Order Accompanied by a Message on World Hunger to the
Congress
This variation of the Executive Order mechanism offers the advan-
tage of option (1), but also provides an opportunity to communicate the
recommendations of the World Hunger Working Group, to broaden
the framework within which the Commission will conduct its work
and offers an opportunity to make near-term changes in existing pro-
grams. Perhaps most important it provides a very appropriate oppor-
tunity to lay out your overall world hunger policy, without having to
wait until the Commission completes its report. To wait that long
without any major statement from you might be too long. Such a mes-
sage could also contain a request for an appropriation for the
Commission.

DECISION
Executive Order Only
Executive Order and Message to Congress

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Budget
of the Commission’s operation. There are three options for funding:
(1) Funding by the Agencies
Utilizing funds from agency budgets is difficult because most
funds are already committed. In addition, present interagency conflicts
might be aggravated as the agency contributing the bulk of the support
could feel it had a preemptive right over the work of the Commission.
A small amount of funds from the agencies might, however, be added
in the early months to those from the Presidential Discretionary Ac-
count to allow the rapid implementation of the Commission.
(2) Congressional Appropriation
Members of Congress who have sponsored the resolutions could
be asked to sponsor legislation to provide funds for the Commission.
However, this would open the opportunity for Congress to specify the
form and operation of the Commission more narrowly than we prefer.
(3) Supplemental Appropriation Submitted by the Administration
This option is favored by OMB. While it might be slower than op-
tion (2), it would allow us to maintain control over the Commission as a
Presidential initiative. We recommend this option with a funding level
would be sought from the Presidential Discretionary Account and from
existing agency budgets to allow the Commission to begin operating
until Congressional action is completed.

DECISION
Funding by the Agencies
Congressional Appropriations
Supplemental Appropriations (recommended)
Duration of the Commission
The Congressional resolutions call for the Commission to have a
life of two years. This is probably reasonable. A shorter period of time
would make it difficult to staff-up and carry out the kind of activities
planned.

World Hunger and Food Policy
DECISION
2 years (recommended)
1 year
Other
Size and Make-Up of the Commission
The Congressional resolution recommends that “the Commission
shall be a balanced membership composed of fifteen persons appointed
by the President from individuals who represent diverse back-
grounds.” You are free, however, to create a Commission of any size,
selected
on
any
basis,
and
with
or
without
Congressional
representation.

We recommend a Commission of twenty people selected to repre-
sent a broad cross-section of interests including business, humanitarian
groups, technical experts, entertainers with demonstrated interest in
world hunger, with appropriate ethnic and geographic diversity. Be-
cause of the intense Congressional interest in this Commission, we rec-
ommend that inclusion of four Congressional members (two from each
House and party).

Given the widespread interest in this issue and the many groups
that would like to be represented on the Commission a careful selection
process is required. This is particularly true with regard to the chairman-
ship of the Commission. Since the members depend upon the objec-
tives of the Commission, they cannot now be selected. We suggest that
the signers of this memo serve as a nominating committee16 and that we
provide you with a list of candidates within 7 days.
DECISION
Approve
Disapprove

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

245.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
International Health Issues (Bourne) to President Carter
Washington, February 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Report of the World Hunger Working Group
Attached is a summary of the report prepared by the World
Hunger Working Group involving 26 agencies which you asked me to
chair.

The report analyses the major causes of hunger and malnutrition
and identifies the key elements necessary to alleviate the problem.
Present United States programs are reviewed and their shortcomings
identified.

246.

Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, February 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Nominations for the Presidential Commission on World Hunger
Peter Bourne has asked for my comments on the following names
that are to be submitted to the President as candidates for the Chair-
person of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger:
Sol Linowitz
David Bell
James Grant
Sargent Shriver
Ted Hesburgh
Jane Cahill Pfeiffer
Bill Moyers
John Knowles
J. Erwin Miller
Nelson Rockefeller
John Hannah
Frank Stanton
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
In my view, only the following are strong candidates for the Chair
of the Commission: Sol Linowitz, James Grant, Bill Moyers, J. Erwin
Miller, and Jane Cahill Pfeiffer. Father Ted Hesburgh would be a strong
candidate but is committed to the Administration’s preparation for the
UN Conference on Science and Technology, as well as his numerous
other activities.

Regarding possible Commissioners, Peter has suggested the fol-
lowing names, plus some candidates for Chairperson:
Cliff Wharton
Warren Henegar, County Com-
Steve Schlossberg
missioner, farmer, Indiana
Marina Whitman
Dr. Eugene Stockwell
D.W. Brooks
Jean Gussow
Eugene Patterson, Editor,
St. Petersburg Times
Bess Myerson
All are potentially good candidates but none represent the scien-
tific community. Hence I propose to recommend that Peter submit to
the President the name of Sylvan Wittwer, Director of the Agricultural
Experiment Station, Michigan State University, and a member of the
Steering Committee of the National Research Council’s recently con-
cluded World Food and Nutrition Study. Unless you inform me to the
contrary, I will inform Peter of my recommendation, by COB, Monday,
February 27.

World Hunger and Food Policy
247.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for International Organization Affairs (Maynes) to Secretary
of State Vance
Washington, March 1, 1978
SUBJECT
Food Corps Proposal
Issue for Decision
Is the Food Corps a viable idea? If so, we should maintain the mo-
mentum accorded it by Ambassador Young’s speech. Ambassador
Young has requested that this memorandum be presented to you be-
fore his March 3 departure for Asia.

Essential Factors
Ambassador Young in an address given in his personal capacity to
the FAO Conference on November 14, 1977, proposed the idea, first
suggested by Dr. Ruth Morgenthau, of a Food Corps, as one step
toward reducing hunger. The unique features of Food Corps are its em-
phasis on development at the village level, through recruitment and
training of specialized volunteers coming mostly from the less devel-
oped countries, the exchange of volunteers among developing coun-
tries, and management largely by LDC officers themselves.
Though the FAO delegates had no advance notice, many spoke in
favor. The West Africans expressed support, but in private conversa-
tions were concerned about having an effective voice in Food Corps
and not having it tied too closely to the FAO. The Philippine President
of the World Food Council and delegates from several of the industrial-
ized countries also endorsed the proposal. A few were skeptical, partic-
classified. Drafted by Roy Haverkamp (IO/AGR), Alberto Mora (IO/AGR), and Morgen-
thau on February 28; concurred in draft by Holloway; Butcher; Shear; Handwerger; Luz-
zato; Kriesberg; Boyle; Farrar; and Vernon Johnson. Byrnes initialed for all the officials
with the exception of Morgenthau and Mora. Mora also initialed for Haverkamp.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ularly the Cubans and the Chinese. The Tanzanian delegation enthusi-
astically wanted to push a strong action resolution through the
Conference. To allow further study, they softened their position. They
persuaded the African Group to sponsor, and the Conference to sup-
port, a consensus declaration asking the FAO Director-General to study
To examine the proposal within the U.S. Government, IO formed a
Study Group with representation from AID, Peace Corps/ACTION,
Agriculture, and USUN. The White House, OMB, and a number of
congressional staffers also participated.

This memorandum only addresses the central premise behind the
Food Corps proposal. The actual structure of the Food Corps and its in-
ternational acceptability will only emerge after an evaluation being
conducted by the FAO and proposed consultations with interested
governments.

A. The Need for a Food Corps
The inter-agency Study Group concluded that the Food Corps idea
is viable. Under certain conditions, it can help reduce world hunger if
enough attention is paid to the lessons of the past, both of existing vol-
unteer organizations and of food and agriculture efforts in poor coun-
tries. This conclusion was based on the following:
—Village level impact: Local as well as international volunteers
working together can promote better nutrition and higher incomes at
the village level by ensuring the delivery and adaptation of technical
assistance and by involving villagers.
—Effectiveness of extant volunteer programs: Existing programs are
involved in various anti-hunger efforts. Unfortunately, the number of
volunteers is too few and the efforts are too fragmented and seldom
coordinated with local volunteer programs.
—Cost effectiveness: AID estimates that the annual cost to support a
development technician exceeds $60,000. Full-time volunteers would
complement and extend the work of such technicians. (Peace Corps es-
timates that total agency cost per volunteer is $15,000.)
text of the consensus declaration, adding: “We believe this successfully launches the in-
ternational Food Corps idea.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
indicated that the review of Morgenthau’s proposal would focus upon the general merits
of a food corps, taking into account budgetary and programmatic issues, in addition to
the program’s relevancy in light of other bilateral and multilateral development pro-
grams. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren

World Hunger and Food Policy
B. Method of Operation
The consensus of the Study Group was that the corps of food vol-
unteers should:
—Bring the best technical expertise to bear on the food and agricul-
tural problems of the food deficient developing countries;
—Go only where they can become an integral part of on-going
rural, social and economic development efforts;
—Augment, not duplicate, current national, bilateral, multilateral,
and non-governmental efforts;
—Operate with minimal bureaucracy by working through the ex-
isting international system;
—Strengthen the training and technical institutions of the devel-
oping countries and not drain their human resources;
—Establish stringent criteria for selection and training so that vol-
unteers would be qualified both technically and in cross-cultural com-
munication; and
—Work with local volunteers and provide for the orderly phase
out of the non-local volunteers within a strict time frame.
C. Tasks
An international volunteer group would stimulate improved vil-
lage food production, food storage, water management, fish farming,
poultry production, range management, food processing, and mar-
keting so as to improve nutrition.

D.

Cooperation
between
Food
Corps
and
Existing
Volunteer
Organizations
The Study Group concluded that:
—Bilateral efforts are sometimes suspected of being motivated by
national interest. Multilateral efforts usually best overcome these
suspicions;
—The food volunteers would not compete with the Peace Corps
and other such groups but could involve these groups in recruiting and
perhaps training volunteers so as to engage their support, learn from
their experience, and keep new costs to a minimum; and
—Joint projects could be developed to ensure that the activities
and resources of the Food Corps and other volunteer programs com-
plement one another.

Conclusions
—Volunteer programs should be seen as effective and compara-
tively inexpensive resources for the accomplishment of development

248.

Editorial Note
Following on the recommendations of the Interagency World
Hunger Working Group (see Document 245), the President’s Special
Assistant for International Health Issues Peter Bourne began preparing
a message to Congress on world hunger. Under a March 17, 1978, cov-
ering memorandum, Bourne circulated to the members of the World
Hunger Working Group a draft message to Congress and a draft
charter and executive order for the proposed Commission on Domestic
and International Hunger and Malnutrition. Bourne’s draft provided a
historical overview of U.S. food aid, summarized current U.S. food
policy, discussed the establishment of the World Hunger Working
Group, and highlighted administration initiatives in the area of food re-

World Hunger and Food Policy
serves, P.L. 480, international trade and foreign investment, nutrition,
and private sector involvement. Bourne concluded the draft with the
following paragraphs:
“World arms expenditures were estimated at $107 billion in 1960;
they are now approximately $400 billion. Thirty million people bear
arms today, as compared with 24 million only a decade ago. We must
begin to give food the sort of attention we have given to weapons; for
our strongest weapons will ultimately be compassion and the will to
help and to cooperate with those who are now less fortunate, before the
problem becomes entirely uncontrollable. We need an increased and
sustained debate, both nationally and internationally, on the issue of
world hunger. The United States cannot alone solve these problems.
But they will not be solved without us. Our leadership is needed, and
our assistance is crucial if the hungry nations of the world are to be-
come self-sufficient in food by the end of this century. That goal can be
reached. It must be reached. Working together, we shall reach it, by of-
fering other nations our unmatched agricultural skill, by working with
them to adapt our science and technology methods, and to help them
develop new ones suitable to local conditions.

“In the interests of our national security, and in keeping with our
moral responsibility to help our fellow man, we must and we shall do
our utmost to combat world hunger while there is still time to act. I ask
Congress to join with me in this most important undertaking.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Of-
fice File, Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1978)
National Security Council Staff member Guy Erb sent a copy of
Bourne’s draft to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
Zbigniew Brzezinski on April 3. In an attached covering memorandum,
Erb noted that the draft message was “rather long and contains nu-
merous weaknesses.” He added that he could handle “detailed
drafting suggestions” with Bourne and his staff members but sug-
gested that Brzezinski send a memorandum to Bourne explaining the
NSC’s major concerns with the draft. (Ibid.) In an April 4 memorandum
to Bourne, Brzezinski explained that the draft message “appears very
long for a document intended to have an impact on Congressional atti-
tudes toward the Administration’s hunger policies. I would suggest
greatly shortening the message and moving specific requests to the
Congress to the front of the paper. I understand that those requests and
recommendations for U.S. trade, investment, and nutrition policies will
be cleared by the appropriate agencies.” At the conclusion of the mem-
orandum, Brzezinski stressed that Erb would provide additional de-
tailed comments to Bourne and his staff members. (Ibid.)
In an April 5 action memorandum to Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs Richard Cooper, Assistant Secretary of State for Eco-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
nomic and Business Affairs Julius Katz noted that Bourne’s March 17
draft message “contains a number of unrealistic or controversial pro-
posals,” and added that it “is important that the Department clear the
final version.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P780068–0745) Katz also provided Cooper with a copy of the Depart-
ment of State’s response to Bourne’s draft, prepared by Frederick McEl-
downey of the Food Policy Division, Office of Food Policies and Pro-
grams, International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic
and Business Affairs, which recommended that Bourne redraft the
message with the Department’s assistance. (Undated Department of
State Comments on Draft Message to Congress; Draft Charter and Ex-
ecutive Order to the Commission on Domestic and International
Hunger and Malnutrition; ibid.) Tarnoff had sent the Department’s
comments to Bourne under cover of an undated memorandum, which
McEldowney had drafted on April 4. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, P780067–1963)
Cooper, in an April 11 memorandum to Bourne, referenced the De-
partment of State’s proposed changes and commented: “The subject
matter of the Working Group’s paper is obviously important and the
issues associated with it are being dealt with in several fora such as the
UN Overview Mechanism, the UNCTAD, and the MTN.” Cooper con-
tinued, “Because these issues bear on many important aspects of for-
eign economic policy—and the current draft contains major changes in
them—it is vital that the Department be permitted to clear the final
paper which goes forward to the President. On at least two previous in-
stances we were told we would have the opportunity to clear on such
messages, but papers went forward to the President without our
having had an opportunity to review them. If there are any difficulties
in reshaping the paper along the lines suggested in Tarnoff’s memo-
randum, please let me know.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P780067–1962)
Bourne subsequently circulated a revised draft at the end of May.
The Department of State’s response to this draft, which Deputy Execu-
tive Secretary of the Department of State David Anderson sent to
Bourne on June 6, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
retary of State for International Organization Affairs Charles William
Maynes, Paul Brynes, Agency Director for Agriculture in the Bureau of
International Organization Affairs, discussed the most recent version
of the proposed message to Congress:
“The latest draft message to Congress on World Hunger (late May)
was on the surface a vast improvement over earlier drafts. It had, how-
ever, very little revolutionary substance, very few bold new thoughts.
Previous drafts were extremely poor but at State’s insistence the im-

World Hunger and Food Policy
practical and unrealistic ideas mostly were winnowed out. The current
message recapitulates the President’s intention to further focus foreign
assistance along ‘new directions’ lines.

“State’s June 6 response to this draft objected only to (a) the por-
trayal of U.S. wheat reserves (inconsistent with legislative proposals);
(b) statements on the Wheat Trade Agreement (the suggested special
LDC preferences and trade stabilization proposals are inconsistent
with U.S. policy); (c) a proposal to separate the Food Aid Convention
from the Wheat Trade Agreement (premature). We also urged the in-
vestment section be reworked to eliminate the appearance that compul-
sory measures would be considered to ensure (all) U.S. multinational
paid due regard to the nutritional consequences of their investments.
“OMB and NSC (Erb) have sent a stiff memo to Bourne saying the
message is no good and should be scrapped in favor of a simple (yet
lofty) proclamation on the new Commission. They feel, I believe
rightly, the Bourne message to Congress would simply restate our
good intentions without being able to commit ourselves to anything
really new. With the Foreign Assistance bill at risk this seems a particu-
larly sensible caution, since the message as now written could be criti-
cized by anyone knowledgeable as an empty shell.” (National Ar-
chives,
RG
59,
Bureau
of
International
Organization
Affairs/
International Development Assistance/Agriculture Division, Subject
Files of the FAO, US Mission, International Food Organizations, Lot
Ultimately, President Carter did not send a world hunger message
to Congress, rather opting to issue an executive order establishing the
Presidential Commission on World Hunger. For additional informa-
tion about the Commission’s charter and composition, see Document
251.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

249.

Memorandum for the Files by Sol Linowitz
Washington, May 3, 1978
RE
President’s Commission on World Hunger
On Tuesday, May 2nd, I had a meeting with the President at the
White House to talk about his suggestion that I become Chairman of
the new President’s Commission on World Hunger. Earlier Dr. Peter
Bourne, Special Assistant to the President for Health and Related

250.

Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, undated
MEETING GLOBAL FOOD NEEDS: MODEST PROGRESS;
CONTINUING PROBLEMS
Hunger and malnutrition continue to be a problem in almost all devel-
oping areas of the world, even though world grain harvests have generally been
good in recent years. The World Food Conference of 1974 urged national gov-
ernments and international agencies to assign greater political priority to
solving food problems within the context of domestic development and interna-
tional economic cooperation. This ambitious shift in priorities has not yet taken
place. In countries of particular concern to the Conference—those food deficit
countries that lack foreign exchange to finance import needs—progress in
stimulating food production has been slow, and population growth rates con-
tinue to exceed agricultural production growth rates.

Progress; Continuing Problems. Confidential. Prepared in the Office of Regional Political
Analysis; coordinated with the Office of Economic Research and Office of Geographic
and Cartographic Research.

World Hunger and Food Policy
The World Food Conference was convened by the United Nations in re-
sponse to the harmful effects of the world grain shortage of 1973–74. This ar-
ticle reviews the status of the institutions set up as a result of the Conference
and finds that limited progress is being made toward Conference goals. The
World Food Council functions as a forum for an international dialogue on food
and agriculture, although it is generally recognized that the Council’s limited
authority is incommensurate with its responsibility for overseeing food policy
and the implementation of international food programs. Negotiations continue
on a new International Wheat Agreement, though at a slower pace than the de-
veloping countries would like. The OPEC- and OECD-funded International
Fund for Agricultural Development went into operation in December 1977,
but it is expected to disburse only a relatively insignificant amount of money
in its first year.

The key finding of this study, then, is one of modest progress amid contin-
uing problems in international efforts to cope with global food needs. Despite
these problems, however, a joint effort to meet global food needs will probably
be one of the few instances of productive cooperation between LDCs and the
OECD states. This record of perceptible progress could serve as an incentive to
keep the North-South dialogue going, even if, as now seems likely, the general
tone of North-South relations becomes more strained during the coming year.
The World Food Council
The World Food Council, the food policy oversight and evaluation
body for all agencies affiliated with the UN, was established in 1975 on
the recommendation of the World Food Conference. After a slow start,
in which ministerial sessions became mired in bloc politicking, the
Council issued a comprehensive food policy statement in 1977. Both
the developing and the industrialized countries consider this docu-
ment, the Manila Communique´, to be a good compromise on issues of
food production, security, aid, and trade.

The Manila Communique´ recommends a commitment by the de-
veloped countries to provide $8. billion in agriculture production aid
annually. This is the amount of external assistance that the Council Sec-
retariat estimates is needed to achieve a 4 percent rate of growth in food
production in developing countries. Traditional and potential new
food aid donors are requested to increase their food aid commitment to
ensure that a minimum annual level of 10 million tons in cereals is
available for delivery in 1977–79. The Communique´ recommends es-
tablishing an international system of nationally held grain reserves. It
calls on all countries, particularly those that are developed, to stabilize,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
liberalize, and expand world food trade, and urges national gov-
ernments and international agencies to give higher priority to nutrition
and rural development in development plans. It also recommends that
governments and international agencies support the basic human
needs approach to foreign aid.

The generally constructive pattern of the 1977 meeting in Manila,
the tone and substance of the Manila Communique´, and the election of
a potentially strong Council president from a developing country (Ar-
turo Tanco of the Philippines) raised hopes that the organization would
be able to function as the world food security agency that the World
Food Conference had envisaged. Basic structural problems which be-
came especially evident at the June 1978 meeting, however, now inhibit
the agency from performing a command function. In particular, the
Council was not given direct authority on food policy matters over
other UN entities or members, as the Conference had recommended.
Although a number of UN agencies are requested to make periodic re-
ports to it, many comply only minimally.

The fourth ministerial session of the Council was held in Mexico
City from 12 to 15 June of this year. The meeting was devoted almost
entirely to the line-by-line drafting of the “Mexico Declaration,” to the
intense dissatisfaction of some high-level participants. In informal dis-
cussions in Mexico City, the ministerial and plenipotentiary-level dele-
gates demanded fuller participation in substantive preparations for the
Council’s Ministerial meetings by governments of developing coun-
tries and by regional bodies, as well as the World Bank, the UN Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and the UN Development Pro-
gram. They emphasized the need to develop information on internal
resource commitments to increased food and agriculture production
and on plans to reduce food losses due to inadequate storage facilities.
They suggested that future meetings of the Council would be more
productive if they concentrated on recording varying country view-
points rather than producing a fully agreed text. If these recommenda-
tions are not implemented, it is likely that a drop in the level of repre-
sentation at Council meetings will occur, thus reducing its usefulness.
Nonetheless, although there is some legitimate concern about the
Council’s bureaucratic viability, and though the results of the Mexico
meeting are not expected to affect directly the production, consump-
3 [2 lines not declassified]

World Hunger and Food Policy
tion, transfer or stockpiling of food, it was able for the second consecu-
tive year to issue a coherent set of food policy recommendations. The
developing countries continued to press the advanced countries for
funds and technology, and the industrial countries continued to press
LDCs to increase agricultural production. Although there was no sign
of increased resource commitment on either side, there was an obvious
desire to sustain a discussion. The WFC has proved to be one of the
least acrimonious of forums for high-level discussion of North-South
problems, and in the next year it may be the only such meeting to pro-
ceed with relative congeniality.

Multilateral Aid for Agricultural Development
The 1974 World Food Conference heavily emphasized the need to
intensify cooperative international efforts directed toward the goal of
food self-sufficiency for developing countries. Primary responsibility
for rapid rural development and population control was declared to
rest with the developing countries, with the industrial states providing
sustained technical and financial support. The outlook for this Confer-
ence goal is not encouraging. In 1977–78, cereal imports for all devel-
oping countries are expected by the FAO to achieve record levels in
excess of 65 million tons. More important, however, dependence on im-
ports among the countries the UN considers to be “most seriously af-
fected” by recent adverse economic conditions is projected to increase
year’s levels. According to the World Food Council, the growth of
food production in these countries fell from 2. percent annually
tural growth rate is historically acceptable, production has not kept
pace with population growth. Per capita production growth in these
countries has thus continued to decline in this decade.

External financial assistance for increasing food production is still
substantially below the recommended target of $8. billion, but inter-
national efforts to stimulate and divert funds to food production con-
tinue. For example, among the terms of a new economic and technical
cooperation agreement between the USSR and Ethiopia was the stipu-
lation that such aid be channelled to food industries and agriculture, at
least for the present. The World Food Council’s most important contri-
bution has been its role in the creation of the International Fund for Ag-
ricultural Development (IFAD), with a $1 billion commitment from the
OPEC and OECD countries. The Fund will provide grants and low in-
terest loans to stimulate food production in low income, food deficit

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
countries. The Fund’s contribution to agricultural investment, while
not impressive in terms of the amounts already being spent, is expected
to act as a catalyst, spurring other financial flows. Another objective of
the Fund is to help the poor and landless by fostering the use of appro-
priate technologies and generating rural employment. So far, however,
the Fund’s executive board has approved only two projects, and it is ex-
pected that less than $100 million will be disbursed in the first year of
operation. IFAD commitments are expected to average less than $350
million a year, at least during the first three years.

World Bank loans for agriculture and rural development increased
curred as a part of a World Bank rural development strategy, estab-
lished in 1973, which is aimed at sustaining increases in per capita
output and incomes, expanding productive employment, and achiev-
ing greater equity in the distribution of the benefits of growth. For ex-
ample, about 25 percent of the Mexican rural development program
during 1977–79 is being financed by World Bank and Inter-American
Development Bank loans. Most of this foreign money will go into di-
rectly productive infrastructure, such as irrigation, livestock, and de-
velopment credit.

Another international activity to stimulate food production is the
FAO’s International Fertilizer Supply Scheme to expand fertilizer and
pesticide production in developing countries. In addition, a number of
countries have informed the World Food Council that they are willing
to provide a wide range of technical agricultural assistance, such as irri-
gation, to countries with serious food shortages.

Grain Reserve Negotiations
The most important food-related issue to developing countries
probably is the attempt to establish a multilateral system of grain re-
serves intended to stabilize prices and assure adequate supplies even
during bad crop years. Such reserves were first proposed in the 1940s,
and the FAO revived the idea in 1973 when North American grain
stocks became depleted, and the United States declared its intention
not to build up government stockpiles again. The 1974 World Food
Conference recommended the establishment of food security stocks,
and subsequent meetings of the World Food Council have emphasized
the importance of establishing such a system of reserves.
Extensive discussions of the subject of reserves have taken place in
the International Wheat Council in London, to some extent in the Mul-
tilateral Trade Negotiations in Geneva, and most recently in a United
Nations Negotiating Conference held in February and March 1978 to
try to reach a new agreement to replace the International Wheat Agree-

251.

Editorial Note
On September 5, 1978, President Jimmy Carter issued Executive
Order 12078, formally establishing the Presidential Commission on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
World Hunger (PCWH). The Executive Order permitted Presidential
appointment of 20 Americans from “public and private life” to the
Commission and allowed the President of the Senate and Speaker of
the House of Representatives to appoint 2 members from each house. It
also outlined the Commission’s charge: “The Commission shall de-
velop factual data as to the causes of world hunger and malnutrition. It
shall review existing authorities and programs, public and private, na-
tional and international, which seek to address the problems of hunger
and malnutrition; and, shall assess to the extent to which those pro-
grams are meeting their objectives, and why.”
It continued: “The Commission shall develop recommendations
designed to significantly reduce world hunger and malnutrition; and,
shall develop various options for harnessing available resources to
carry out those recommendations, including policy options for im-
proving the capacity of the United States to reduce the problems of
world hunger and malnutrition.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II,
pages 1498–1499)
The White House announced the appointment of 14 members to
the Commission on September 12. The public members of the Commis-
sion included John Denver, Harry Chapin, Sol Linowitz, Dr. Norman
Borlaug, D.W. Brooks, Dr. Walter Falcon, Dr. Jean Mayer, Dr. Steven
Muller, Bess Myerson, Dr. Howard Schneider, Dr. Adele Smith
Simmons, Raymond Singletary, Dr. Eugene Stockwell, and Dr. Clifton
Wharton. Linowitz was designated Chairman, and Mayer and Muller
Vice Chairmen. (Ibid., page 1511) The President subsequently ap-
pointed Thomas Wyman and former Secretary of Agriculture Orville
Senators Robert Dole (Republican–Kansas) and Patrick Leahy (Demo-
crat–Vermont),
and
Representatives
Benjamin
Gilman
(Republi-
can–New
York)
and
Richard
Nolan
(Democratic-Farmer-Labor–
Minnesota) served as the congressional members of the Commission.
In a September 12 letter to Linowitz, Commission members
Denver, Chapin, Leahy, Gilman, and Nolan described what they be-
lieved should be the Commission’s guiding principles:
“The first principle is morality. It is the most fundamental right of
every man, woman and child, to live free from hunger and the fear of
hunger. This most basic right must be guaranteed if other human rights
are to have any meaning. The Congressional Right to Food Resolution
reinforces this concept. Thus all hunger, regardless of cause, must be
considered immoral. There is a practical application to this principle:
the old adage, that when one is in doubt, one should always do the
moral thing, is the appropriate way to resolve the potential uncer-
tainties in our deliberations.

World Hunger and Food Policy
“The second principle is the inherent value of the truth. Accurate
knowledge is the first step towards the solution of any problem.
Without the willingness to face the full dimensions of world hunger,
the Commission will be unable to carry out its mandate. Truth has an
unusually long life expectancy. Just as plants and water can crack or
wear down the hardest stone, so the principle of truth can help us over-
come the problem of world hunger. We should not let short-run expe-
diencies distort our vision of what actually is, and what needs to be
done.

“The third principle for the Commission is effectiveness. Our goal
is to end world hunger, not to create more programs. We must establish
criteria to evaluate past and present programs, and those that are inef-
fective should be discarded. Currently successful ones should be con-
stantly re-evaluated; new programs should be tested against such effec-
tiveness criteria.

“The fourth principle is direct, personal contact with the problem.
The Commission should not be an ivory tower body, deliberating in
Washington, D.C. and talking in purely technical terms about abject
human misery. All the Commission members together should have
first-hand experience of the realities of world hunger. Therefore, we
recommend that there be in-the-field hearings both domestically and
internationally.” (Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on
World Hunger, Linowitz’s Subject Files, Box 41, Meetings)
Carter agreed to attend the initial meeting of the PCWH scheduled
for October 5, 1978. National Security Council Staff member Henry
Owen, the White House point of contact for the Commission following
President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues Peter Bourne’s resigna-
tion in July, provided Carter with talking points, the draft version of a
formal press statement, and a list of Commission members. Owen high-
lighted the need for Carter’s attendance at the meeting, noting, “Media
coverage has been minimal to date. Your participation in this opening
session should draw greater attention to the Commission (which Sol
very much wants) and underscore your personal interest in its activ-
ities.” (Memorandum from Owen to Carter, October 2; Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1978)
Following his meeting with the Commission, Carter issued a gen-
eral statement on October 5, asserting that the United States bore re-
sponsibility for solving the hunger problems “not only because of our
humanitarian concerns but for other reasons as well. We cannot have a
peaceful and prosperous world if a large part of the world’s people are
at or near the edge of hunger. So long as food shortages exist in devel-
oping countries, the possibility remains of another world food crisis
like that of 1973–74. Such a crisis could trigger another ruinous cycle in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
food prices and thus contribute powerfully to inflation.” The President
also outlined the Commission’s charge, noting that he remained “confi-
dent that this new venture, which will entail close cooperation between
the private sector and U.S. legislative and executive branches of Gov-
ernment, will produce a notable advance in the war on hunger.” (Public
Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, page 1712)
Commissioners met formally in Washington on November 6. Ac-
cording to a draft decision paper prepared in advance of the meeting,
the Commissioners first had to answer the question as to why the
United States had “failed so far to turn the tide against increasing
hunger in this country and throughout the world.” The decision paper
then laid out the challenges facing the Commission:
“There are no limitations on the range of recommendations for ac-
tion that can be made by the Commission, and we would not want to
prejudge the end-product of our labors before we have begun to work.
“But the problem will be to identify a relatively few points of major
focus—both to orient the work of the Commission to the highest action
priorities and to avoid the familiar sin of producing a long laundry list
of undifferentiated things to do. And for this purpose guidance can
also be found in statements by the President and in the legislative his-
tory of this enterprise.

“For one thing, it is clear that the Commission is expected to make
recommendations on how to go about putting our own house in order
here in the United States. Whether it would be productive for the Com-
mission to make detailed recommendations for structural changes in
governmental organization is a matter for very careful consideration as
the work proceeds. But the Commission is mandated explicitly to cope
with the interrelationships and interactions of domestic purposes, pol-
icies and programs with global goals, obligations, and opportunities.
To perceive the domestic and international aspects of food and hunger
policy as inherently antagonistic would betray the charge placed upon
the Commission—which is to formulate an approach to hunger and
malnutrition which simultaneously supports domestic objectives,
moral concerns, and the considerable task of helping other countries
meet their food and nutrition needs with their own resources and ex-
pertise. This is extremely difficult—conceptually and in terms of both
policy and operations. But it is the heart of the Commission’s task.
“Further, a major item that the President and Congress want the
Commission to undertake is to find ways to engage more deeply and
systematically the great resources of the American private sector to
help turn the tide against hunger—from the business world through
scientific and professional societies to church-related and other organi-
zations inspired by humanistic concerns.

252.

Letter From Secretary of State Vance to the Chairman of the
Presidential Commission on World Hunger (Linowitz)
Washington, November 6, 1978
Dear Mr. Chairman:
Thank you for your October 24 letter2 which requested the desig-
nation of a contact person between the Presidential Commission on
World Hunger and the Department of State. The letter also asked for a
summary of issues which I believe most appropriate for the Commis-
sion’s attention.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
As you know, analyzing the causes of world hunger and malnutri-
tion and finding solutions to these often intractable problems is no easy
task. Both the private and public sectors in our country and in other
countries have been making considerable efforts in the post-World War
II period to resolve these problems. Progress has been made but, world-
wide, the number of hungry and malnourished is growing. Obviously,
more needs to be done and I am pleased you and the members of your
Commission will assist in this effort.

Some of the most important issues which I believe the Commission
should address are the following:
—Increasing food production worldwide, but particularly in food
deficit developing countries. Developing country food production in-
creases in recent years have exceeded the 4 percent target agreed to for
the United Nations Second Development Decade. This favorable per-
formance, however, is primarily attributable to favorable weather con-
ditions, rather than to basic underlying reforms having been made in
the food and agriculture sector. Inadequate economic and political pol-
icies and conditions still prevent sustained food output increases in
many developing countries, and in addition reduce private and public
investment in the agricultural sector.

Other constraints to expanded food output in developing coun-
tries must also be overcome. Examples of these are inadequate manage-
ment and shortage of trained manpower, capital shortages, inadequate
and inappropriate technology, substantial post-harvest losses due to
inadequate storage facilities, and productivity losses due to people de-
bilitated by hunger and disease.
—Dealing effectively with problems of under-consumption and mal-
nutrition. Though there is at present no widespread famine in the
world, many millions of people (estimates range between 400 million
and one billion) do not have an adequately nutritious diet. Underlying
this problem is the issue of effective demand among groups of people
within individual countries. We have learned that economic growth
and prosperity in a given country does not necessarily produce addi-
tional benefits including access to necessary food supplies for the
poorer members of society. While the problem is focused in the poorer
developing countries, it is worldwide in scope.
—Feeding the hungry and malnourished requires significantly im-
proved food distribution systems both among countries and within the
poorer developing nations. The food crisis of 1972–74 evidenced many
instances of localized famine in countries and regions where adequate
food supplies were available, but inadequate transport systems made it
impossible to deliver the food where it was needed most. Improved
distribution systems also involve ensuring a better local and regional
food supply/demand balance.

World Hunger and Food Policy
—Developing flexible policies to deal with the wide range of
problems faced by developing countries in meeting their food requirements.
Some developing countries already have sufficient supplies and ex-
pected foreign exchange earnings to purchase all the food imports they
are likely to need. Another group of countries can attain this position
with help. For some, increased agricultural development assistance can
expand food production, others would benefit most from reduced
trade barriers, while still others need help such as liberal credits to fi-
nance imports in short supply years. An effective U.S. and international
food strategy must deal meaningfully with all these varied situations
and needs.
—Continuing efforts to deal intelligently and effectively with other
factors affecting world hunger such as accelerating worldwide losses of
arable land from mismanagement of the resource base (deforestation,
overgrazing, soil erosion, salination, etc.), the rising cost of energy,
chemicals and raw materials required by agriculture, and limitations
on water for agriculture imposed by growing competition among na-
tions and regions.
—Finally, it is impossible to ignore the transcendent problem of
population growth rates, which not only threaten the long-term food
supply/demand balance, but have profound implications for a range
of related factors vitally affecting life on this planet including deforesta-
tion, loss of croplands, urbanization, social unrest, and public health.
Based on current growth rates, the world’s population will double to 8
billion people by 2010. Over 90 percent of the projected population in-
crease will occur in developing countries which are most susceptible to
hunger and malnutrition. Existing population/family planning pro-
grams in many countries have shown first signs of success; clearly they
must be further improved and expanded if we are to avoid prodigious
strains on food and other natural resources.

I hope the foregoing provides a useful list of issues for the Com-
mission’s consideration. Michael P. Boerner, Director of the Office of
Food Policy and Programs will be the Department of State’s liaison of-
ficer with the Commission. You may be assured that the Department of
State will cooperate fully with the Commission in its endeavors.
Sincerely,
Cyrus Vance

253.

Memorandum for the Files
Washington, February 1, 1979
SUBJECT
President’s Commission on World Hunger
chairmanship of Sol Linowitz. All Commission members were present
with the exception of Bess Myerson and Jean Mayer.

The Commissioners first heard from James Grant, President of the
Overseas Development Council. Mr. Grant’s presentation entitled
“Overcoming Hunger and Malnutrition by 2000: How Doable? What
Required of the U.S.” stressed that those countries that are considered
development successes coupled economic development with provision
of basic human needs of their poorest people. He used the examples of
Sri Lanka, Taiwan, South Korea and China. He argued that economic
development should not be looked at in terms of GNP growth rates but
that a life quality index should be constructed and used as an indicator
of how developed a country is. The U.S. and other donors must provide
massive amounts of assistance to developing countries because for
many countries it is politically impossible to divert domestic resources
to the development process. He estimated that the volume of conces-
should provide one-third of that assistance. He said that the Commis-
sion’s task should be to develop the political will in the United States so
that concessional aid from the U.S. would be more forthcoming than at
present.

In his discussion, Grant said that 1979 was a watershed year since
there were many important international conferences focusing on
development and north/south relations such as the UNCTAD,
WCARRD, UNCSTD and the preparations for the Third UN Develop-
World Hunger and Food Policy
ment Decade. Harry Chapin picked this up and said that the Commis-
sioners should be fully informed of these conferences and the U.S. posi-
tion in them. Grant also suggested that as an alternative to the existing
food aid program, there should be a global food stamp program. He es-
timated that this would cost about $5 billion.

The second agenda item was the discussion of an overview paper,2
which had been prepared to highlight those areas that the Commis-
sioners believed they should address. They accepted that their over-
riding priority is to work for the “amelioration and eradication of
hunger as experienced by the poor”. Then there was quite a bit of talk
about the appropriate definition of hunger and malnutrition and
whether the Commission should categorically state that the “trickle
down” theory of development has been a failure.

The paper mentioned that 20 million Americans were hungry.
Some Commissioners noted this and stated that the Commission
should investigate hunger in the US and what official programs were
addressing the problem. Senator Dole and Orville Freeman agreed that
dwelling on the hunger in the US would be counter-productive, that
adequate programs are available and U.S. hunger is not as serious as it
once was. It was generally agreed that the Commission maintain an in-
ternational focus.

In its discussion of famine, the paper suggested that the U.S. estab-
lish an International Emergency Food Reserve. Most of the group was
enthusiastic about this. Orville Freeman noted that famine would be
averted in many cases if a pricing mechanism were in place that stabi-
lized the price of wheat.

The issue of whether hunger can be eradicated at this point in time
became quite contentious. John Denver said that there was enough
food in the world and the American people deserve to know it.
Norman Borlaug and Walter Falcon stressed that Denver was missing
the point, the problem is to produce where hunger is prevalent.
The paper then broke the overall problem of hunger into 4 basic
components: a) production, b) accessibility, c) consumption, and
d) trade.
a) Production—Borlaug and Falcon both cited the need for more
research on semi-arid growing conditions. Harry Chapin brought up
the issue of land reform and argued that it was the basic step in in-
creasing production. Freeman and Falcon cautioned him that land re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
form is only successful when there is a concurrent provision of supple-
mentary services such as credit, roads, etc. Also the need for better ex-
tension service was noted.
b) Accessibility—They will focus on increasing the purchasing
power of the poor and population growth rates.
c) Consumption—The paper states that the first goal is to ensure
that everyone has enough calories to consume and then the Commis-
sion should worry about the nutritional make up of the diets of chil-
dren followed by the nutritional make up of the diets of adults. The
Commissioners agreed that quantity not quality was the first priority in
eradication of hunger. This discussion went off in the direction of
American companies marketing non-nutritious products in countries
where there are severe hunger problems.
d) Trade—This was a very vague discussion and the Commis-
sioners recognized that they needed a fully developed paper in this
area.

The paper ended with a proposed Action Plan which the Commis-
sion would recommend to the President. As explained by Linowitz a
consortia of multi and bilateral donors would be established for food
aid and agricultural development assistance. An LDC would then be
required to present the group with a development strategy, including
the kind of investment the country itself was willing to make, and ex-
ternal assistance would then be tailored to the requirements of the
country strategy. Linowitz was quite enthusiastic about this approach
and said that it would give the USG flexibility to “tailor” program ac-
tions to the particular needs of the developing country. He said that
they did this in the days of the Alliance for Progress and he felt that it
worked very well. After several questions from other Commissioners,
Linowitz said that the details still had to be “fleshed out” and that the
Commission didn’t have to accept this type of program immediately
but that it was very attractive to him.

The last item for the Commission’s consideration was the proposal
that they issue two statements. One would urge the Congress to repeal

World Hunger and Food Policy
the Helms Amendment4 and the other would encourage the Adminis-
tration to upgrade the level of participation at international food and
agricultural conferences such as the WCARRD and the FAO Confer-
ence. They would suggest that the US delegation be led by a cabinet
level official. Orville Freeman called the FAO a “questionable agency”
and said that the Director General was “demagoging unmercifully on
the international scene” and “drove the ICP out of the FAO and the UN
system”. He said the Director General was anti-private industry and
Freeman could not support any statement that was supportive of the
Director General. Steven Muller also criticized Saouma’s leadership in
the FAO but said that the U.S. could be more effective there if we sent
high level representatives to the larger meetings. Linowitz said that
their opinion of the Director General was unimportant but they should
think of the effect on the LDCs if the US sent higher level officials to the
FAO meetings. The Commissioners agreed that Linowitz should scrap
the idea of a statement and convey to the President the thought that a
significant number of Commissioners believe the U.S. should upgrade
its level of participation at international food conferences.
The Commissioners were very uncomfortable with the Helms
Amendment statement. By this time the Congressional members of the
Commission had departed and most of the Commissioners indicated
that they would appreciate their view on this matter. Linowitz men-
tioned that Senator Dole had told him that the Commission should not
try to lobby the Congress. Rep. Gilman’s assistant said that it was a
very contentious issue in the House and that hearings on it would be
held in late February or early March. He suggested that some of the
Commissioners might want to testify at those hearings. It was decided
that Linowitz should discuss the statement with the Congressional
members of the Commission and forward their thoughts to the
President.

(H.R. 12934), which included the Department of State appropriation. The bill included an
amendment authored by Senator Jesse Helms (R–North Carolina), which struck $27.
million from the amount the United States was obligated to contribute to the UN special-
ized agencies and further specified that none of the funds appropriated could be used for
technical assistance by the UN or its agencies. (Don Oberdorfer, “U.N. Dues From U.S.
dent signed the Departments of State, Justice, and Commerce, the Judiciary, and Related
tober 10, he issued a statement critical of the amendment: “If allowed to stand, this action
would cause the United States to violate its treaty obligations to support the organiza-
tions of the United Nations system. Withholding of, or assigning conditions to, U.S. con-
tributions to assessed budgets of these organizations would make it virtually impossible
for these organizations to accept such contributions, would seriously impair their finan-
cial and political viability, and is contrary to the policy of collective financial responsi-
bility continuously advocated by this Government since the establishment of the United
Nations system.” (Department of State Bulletin, January 1979, p. 48)

254.

Letter From Secretary of Agriculture Bergland to the
Chairman of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger
(Linowitz)
Washington, March 26, 1979
Dear Mr. Ambassador:
I wish to pass along some additional concerns and ideas to you
which I hope will enhance and complement the materials that USDA
has been furnishing the Commission up to this time. As I mentioned in
my talk to the Commission, our relations with the developing nations
regarding the world food situation are of particular importance. We
must help these countries increase indigenous food production and
also help them economically so that they become viable participants in
world trade. At this time, however, I would like to stress the impor-
tance of the U.S. linkages to all nations with regard to solving the world
hunger problem.

U.S. agricultural and food policy functions increasingly in an inter-
national environment. There is a growing interdependence among
countries in the production, consumption, and trade of food. The U.S.
economy has become more dependent on other countries as commer-
cial markets for our food and agricultural output, and other countries
have become increasingly dependent upon the United States as a
source of supply for food and agricultural products.

Within the interdependent environment, important international
considerations for U.S. agricultural and food policy are emerging. Es-
pecially significant are those interrelated issues that deal with domestic
supply and demand, commercial agricultural trade, international agri-
cultural development, and food security. Three areas of concern that I
World Hunger and Food Policy
wish to elaborate further on are the need for a national food policy
based upon knowledge of nutrition, the need to encourage economic
development in the developing countries, and the need to provide for
world food security.

A National Food Policy
Traditionally, we have viewed food policy simply as a summation
of our agricultural policies pertaining to the production and pricing of
agricultural commodities. The time has come for the development of an
explicit national food policy derived from knowledge of the nutritional
requirements of our people. The goal of this policy should be to make
available an adequate supply of safe, nutritious food at stable, reason-
able prices while providing an adequate return to farmers, processors,
retailers, and workers in the industry. There are, however, serious
voids in our knowledge base from which this type of national food
policy might be constructed. For example, we know less than we
should about the nutritional status of various socioeconomic segments
of our population, and the relationships between human health and
nutrition. Guidance and recommendations from the Commission in
these complex interrelated areas would be a valuable contribution to
our approach to a national food policy.

Economic Development Assistance
I would agree with the following statement found in the recent
Academy of Sciences study on world food and nutrition. “The maldis-
tribution of food can best be corrected over the longer term by pro-
viding poor people with the means and opportunities to produce or
purchase more food,” and further that, “the major immediate cause of
hunger is poverty.” Poverty here is defined as the lack of resources
with which to buy or produce food. This classical cycle of poverty com-
bines insufficient food with disease, apathy, and other effects of pov-
erty to foster malnutrition and lower human productivity which in
turn result in low income levels.

As you know, the maldistribution of food is more complex than a
simple classification of countries into those with more than enough
food and those with too little food. What we really observe are pockets
of poverty or segments of populations within countries that do not
have the means to purchase adequate levels of food. In attempting to
measure the scope of this problem, however, there is often a tendency
to confuse need and effective economic demand. Need is based upon a
minimal requirement necessary for a human being to function at some
level of productive activity. Thus total need, national or international,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
is based upon this per capita requirement, however defined, times pop-
ulation. Unfortunately, need alone does not generate an effective
means for obtaining the required food or allocating productive re-
sources to produce food.

Effective economic demand, on the other hand, implies that in-
come or goods or resources are available to an individual or country to
use in an exchange for food or for investing in production. Therefore, I
suggest that one part of the solution to malnutrition and hunger would
be to transform need to demand with employment and income creating
policies and programs in the developing countries.

The effective use of economic development assistance to alleviate
hunger and malnutrition over the long run will depend upon the
ability of donor and recipient countries to devise and implement devel-
opment programs that effectively link food availability to investment
in productive activity and employment generation which result in the
improved nutritional status of the population.

Additionally, I believe that U.S. development assistance should
have the long term goal of complementing a developing country’s own
efforts towards self-reliance. Development should be directed towards
building a strong and self-sustaining domestic economy able to partici-
pate fully in international trade. The concept of self-reliance should not
be confused with self-sufficiency. The strategy of self-reliance would be
based upon comparative advantage and would allow a country to reap
the benefits of trade. This would avoid the mistake of self-sufficiency
regardless of cost which, in my judgement, is not sound economic
policy.

World Food Security
Food security, a major problem area related to world hunger, is af-
fected not only by the size and management of reserve stocks, but also
by the degree to which barriers to trade prevent trade flows in response
to market prices. In the food crisis of a few years ago, trade barriers con-
stituted a major factor in causing the adjustment impact of a relatively
small shortfall in world food production to be focused on the United
States, a few other major exporters, and of course, the food deficit de-
veloping countries. We see that individual nations pursuing their own
self-interests at times cause many uncertainties in world agriculture.
Additionally, of course, agricultural production itself is subject to large
variations given the unpredictability of so many of the key variables in-
cluding weather, disease, pests, and the rate of technological advance.
Political and economic realities make the fine tuning of agriculture an
unlikely possibility. It should be recognized that excessive year-to-year
instability in food grain supplies and prices can wreak havoc with
progress toward development goals and solving the world hunger

World Hunger and Food Policy
problem. There are policy actions related to reserves and food assist-
ance that can be taken to ease chronic food shortages and severe distri-
butional problems. I must mention here that without the political will
of individual governments to recognize the problems and to agree and
implement the policies designed to correct them, efforts related to
world food security will not succeed.

An Additional Comment
An abundance of valuable studies have identified many pertinent
issues and have made recommendations for future studies, policies,
and actions. I encourage the Commission to review these studies, (es-
pecially the National Academy of Science study on “World Food and
Nutrition,” and the report that I was responsible for, “New Directions
for U.S. Food Assistance: A Report of the Special Task Force on the Op-
eration of Public Law 480”) and focus its efforts on implementing these
proposed ideas and solutions to the problems of world hunger and
malnutrition.

The Presidential Commission on World Hunger is in a position to
give great impetus to the world effort to conquer hunger and malnutri-
tion. It has at its fingertips the resources of a plethora of concerned
groups and citizens devoting their energy to this issue. It also has the
ears of the administration and the public whose support is vital to the
formulation and implementation of effective policies. You have my
continued assurance of USDA cooperation with the Commission in its
efforts to come to grips with the problem of world hunger.
Thank you for the opportunity to express the Department’s views.
Sincerely,
Bob Bergland

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
255.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to the Under
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Cooper)
Washington, May 3, 1979
The President’s Commission on World Hunger
You asked for an update on the work of the Commission estab-
lished in September 1978 and charged with developing “recommenda-
tions designed to significantly reduce world hunger and malnutrition
. . . including policy options for improving the capacity of the United
States to reduce the problems of world hunger and malnutrition.” The
Commission is to issue a report containing its recommendations by
months working toward the implementation of those recommenda-
tions. The 20-member Commission, chaired by Sol Linowitz, brings to-
gether a variety of expertise and interest in the hunger problem.
The Work of the Commission
The Commission has three subcommittees: international hunger
and development, domestic hunger and nutrition, and public partici-
pation. Since November 1978, the subcommittees have sponsored
hearings with expert witnesses on food aid, agribusiness, world food
security and international grains reserves, famine prevention, etc. The
public participation subcommittee is responsible for “selling” the Com-
mission recommendations to the public and has met with hunger in-
terest groups around the country to mobilize support.
World Hunger and Food Policy
The Commission has agreed that the underlying cause of world
hunger is poverty and that its recommendations must necessarily
be development-oriented. The staff proposed that it recommend a
country-by-country action plan whereby the U.S. would try to develop
a consortium of donors that would meet with each recipient country
and map out a coordinated food strategy for that country. However, at
the May 1 session of the Commission, some of the members pointed
out that the scheme would not be very different from what AID
already does and that the Commission needed broader policy
recommendations.

At the May 1 meeting, the individual members made statements
about what priority areas and future approaches the Commission
should pursue. This resulted in a long list of suggestions with an un-
derlying conclusion that before the Commission could proceed with
specific recommendations, it needed a better understanding of the
hunger problem and a clearer definition of its responsibility in trying to
solve it.

The staff is to provide an “underlying analysis” in the next two
weeks and then target 5–20 areas where practical recommendations
could be made.

Edwin Martin5 has recently been hired as a consultant to the Com-
mission and he has privately expressed some concern to us that in
trying to cover the waterfront of the causes and cures of hunger, the
Commission may come up with a long list of unrealistic and duplica-
tive recommendations.

A few probable recommendations emerge from the Commission
meetings and staff discussion papers:
—Make alleviation and eventual elimination of hunger the pri-
mary objective of U.S. foreign assistance policy. This would involve
providing a greater proportion of aid in the agricultural sector and em-
phasize projects supportive of agrarian reform programs.
—Support the IBRD’s inclination to develop grain storage facilities
in LDCs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Support resumption of negotiations of a new International
Grains Agreement6 and independent negotiation of the Food Aid
Convention.
—Support of an emergency food reserve. Congressman Gilman,
co-sponsor of the pending emergency food reserve legislation, is a
member of the Commission.
—Assistance for the prevention of post-harvest losses in devel-
oping countries.
—Greater flexibility in administering Title II and Title III P.L. 480
food aid agreements.
—Greater emphasis on family planning programs.
—More support for agricultural research in and for developing
countries and related training programs.
—Support for a stronger U.S. assistance agency with a cabinet
level administrator.
tion in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
an emergency stock of 4 million metric tons of wheat. Also, on April 10, McHugh intro-
duced H.R. 3612, which also mandated the establishment of an emergency wheat reserve.
Both bills were referred to the House Foreign Affairs Committee. Subsequently Foley and
cosponsors Zablocki, Fazio, and Bereuter introduced H.R. 4489 on June 15. The bill re-
sembled both H.R. 3611 and 3612 but also contained a provision authorizing the release
of up to 300,000 tons of wheat in any fiscal year for humanitarian relief in developing
countries experiencing natural disasters. Talmadge introduced the Senate version of the

256.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Italy
120985. Rome for FODAG. Subject: Goals and Objectives for the
Office of the US Representative to the Food and Agriculture Organiza-
tion. Reference: State 287307.
1. The following identifies US interests and policy issues and states
the most recent Department approved goals and objectives for US Mis-
sion to FAO:
I. US interests:
—To maintain and strengthen US role in the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), the International Fund for Agricultural Develop-
ment (IFAD), the World Food Program (WFP) and the World Food
Council (WFC);
—To increase the effectiveness of those programs of the four UN
agencies, particularly FAO, which are of direct benefit to US interests
and to developing countries receiving US bilateral aid, but within a
context of budgetary restraint;
—To increase the effectiveness of the agencies as instruments ad-
vancing economic and social development through a basic human
needs approach, such as that defined in current US legislation on for-
eign assistance;
—To increase cooperation and coordination (A) among the four
food agencies, (B) between the UN food agencies and the rest of the UN
system, and (C) between the UN food agencies’ multilateral programs
and the US Government’s bilateral programs.

II. Key policy issues facing the US in the next two years:
—Improvement of US relations with FAO;
—Repeal congressional legislation which currently prevents us
from paying our assessed contribution to FAO;3
—Decision on replenishment of US contribution to IFAD;
Confidential. Drafted by Charles Watkins (IO/EX/OB); approved by Don Eller (IO/EX).
dating submissions for the U.S. Goals, Objectives, and Resource Management (GORM)
thereto.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Application of recommendations of the President’s Commission
on World Hunger and of related legislation on food aid and foreign
assistance.

III. Goals and objectives:
A. FAO
—Limitation of real dollar growth in assessed budgets for the
1980/81 biennium budget to as close to zero as possible;
—Closer consultation and coordination with Western members
and with selected developing countries, as appropriate, on program
and budget issues;
—Support FAO efforts to orient its program toward field activities
and to limit headquarters staff and expenditures;
—Encourage FAO to give greater emphasis, by savings in other
areas, to food consumption, nutrition and other US priorities;
—Endeavor to negotiate mutually acceptable limitations on FAO’s
technical cooperation program;
—Seek to identify additional geographic and program areas in
which the FAO and AID can cooperate;
—Seek to coordinate FAO/AID activities and contributions with
overall US policies;
—Increase the representation of Americans in the secretariats and
the use of Americans as consultants in FAO and the other Rome-based
organizations;
—Play an appropriately active role in the World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development and develop a policy on im-
plementation of the resolutions of the conference;
—Encourage FAO to cooperate in efforts aimed at restructuring
the UN system consistent with FAO’s responsibilities with respect to its
own field personnel and financial resources;
—Report more fully on the substantive aspects of FAO’s work and
urge FAO to issue better documentation describing its programs.
B. IFAD
—Encourage IFAD to concentrate on projects targeted at aiding
the rural poor in the food priority countries;
—Evaluate IFAD performance and the likely future participation
of OPEC governments with a view to deciding whether to replenish the
US contribution in 1980;
—Continue to support a lean IFAD staff with maximum reliance
on the work of other lending institutions; but encourage IFAD to direct
some of its efforts to support of new and innovative approaches to the
programs of small farmer development.

World Hunger and Food Policy
C. World Food Program
—Encourage closer integration of WFP projects with the develop-
ment projects of other international organizations;
—Assist WFP in defending its program responsibilities vis-a`-vis
FAO;
—Take an active role in development of food aid guidelines and
policies.

D. World Food Council
—Election of an effective president for the 1980/81 term;
—Encourage the WFC secretariat to continue its analysis of con-
straints on increasing flows of resources to the food and agricultural
sectors within food deficit countries and to them from international or-
ganizations and donor countries;
—Encourage the WFC to proceed with its efforts on implementa-
tion of the resolutions of the World Food Conference and to facilitate
more effective donor coordination in the agricultural sector.
E. Explanation of changes from last goals and objectives statement:
—The US has taken a position advocating zero net real program
growth for the UN system;
—The Helms Amendment was passed in Congress;
—IFAD has been in operation since November 1977;
—The President’s Commission on World Hunger was established.
Vance

257.

Paper Prepared by the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger
Washington, June 8, 1979
RECOMMENDATIONS CONCERNING HUNGER FOR THE
PRESIDENT’S USE AT THE TOKYO SUMMIT
I. Introduction
The countries meeting at the Tokyo Summit2 have the ability to do
something about world hunger. Despite impressive increases in world
food production, the total number of people who are chronically mal-
nourished is greater today than a decade ago. Most of the world’s hun-
griest people live near the site of the Summit and in sub-Saharan Africa.
Severe hunger also exists in Latin America and the Middle East, and
even our own country is not immune to malnutrition.

The Commission believes that by placing issues of food and agri-
culture high on the Summit agenda, the participating nations have cor-
rectly accorded priority to what is perhaps the single most important
task now facing mankind. Of all the challenges facing the world today,
agreement on the joint actions of all countries necessary to eliminate
world hunger may be the most important, and may also provide the
most solid basis for other international actions to assure world peace.
After extensive study and review, the Commission’s major
findings with regard to world hunger and malnutrition are:
• that the world food problem is less a matter of periodic famine
than of chronic and increasing malnutrition;
• that hunger is primarily a problem of poverty rather than of food
supply, at present;
classification marking. Transmitted under cover of a June 15 memorandum from
Linowitz to Vance and a June 8 memorandum from Linowitz to Carter. (Ibid.) Another
copy is in the Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Subject
the conclusion of the Summit reads in part: “We will place more emphasis on cooperation
with developing countries in overcoming hunger and malnutrition. We will urge multi-
lateral organizations to help these countries to develop effective food sector strategies
and to build up the storage capacity needed for strong national food reserves. Increased
bilateral and multilateral aid for agricultural research will be particularly important. In
these and other ways we will step up our efforts to help these countries develop their
human resources, through technical cooperation adapted to local conditions.” The full
text of the Tokyo Declaration is printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 1979, pp.
III, Foreign Economic Policy.

World Hunger and Food Policy
• that massive increases in food production will be required in
coming years, as incomes rise and the world population continues to
grow;
• that hunger is a political problem as much as a scientific and
technical problem;
• that hunger has extremely complex and interrelated global
causes and consequences but that its elimination is not beyond the
available technical and financial resources of the world community;
• that the attainment of long-term solutions will depend on firm
commitments by the countries attending the Summit, by other donor
countries, by international agencies, and by the food-deficit countries
themselves.

The Commission believes it is particularly fitting that issues
dealing with hunger are now being addressed at the Summit by those
nations whose own resources enable them to offer assistance to others.
II. The Major Focus: Strengthening the Commitment of the United States
and Others to Overcome Hunger
The U.S. commitment to overcoming hunger is based upon the be-
lief that this problem represents the most fundamental issue of human
rights and that it also represents one of the greatest potential threats to
international peace and stability. This commitment includes the fol-
lowing elements:
• Current U.S. foreign assistance programs and other relationships
with developing countries have a number of important—but some-
times conflicting—objectives, emphases and motivations. The Com-
mission recommends that the President announce that he is prepared
to make the elimination of world hunger the first priority of America’s
interactions with developing countries for the decade of the 1980s. The
Commission considers such an approach to be a major investment in
national and international security and recommends that the other
Summit nations also give first priority to this same goal. In particular,
this priority can be reflected both in design and funding of foreign
assistance programs as well as in the broad range of political and
commercial relationships between the developed and developing
countries.
• The establishment of the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger is evidence of this government’s resolve to strengthen and ac-
celerate its own efforts to assure an adequate diet for all. The Commis-
sion is examining U.S. policies and actions to determine which of those
activities enhance efforts to overcome hunger, and which may, in fact,
inhibit the progress of such efforts. The U.S. believes that global en-
deavors to combat hunger would be significantly enhanced if other

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
countries
attending the
Summit were to
conduct similar
self-
evaluations of their own policies, domestic and international.
III. Actions for Summit Attention: Food Security and Increased Production
The Commission believes that the President should call the fol-
lowing issues to the attention of other countries attending the Tokyo
Summit:
A. World Food Security
An effective program of global food security must be put into
place. The Commission believes this goal will involve the following ac-
tions on the part of the Summit nations:
1. An International Wheat Agreement. Although negotiations to es-
tablish a new agreement were broken off in February, these negotia-
tions should be resumed and, this time, with greater attention to the
needs of the food-deficit countries. The abundant harvests of the past
several years, and correspondingly low prices for wheat and other
grains, provide an unusual opportunity for the international commu-
nity to establish a truly effective system of reserves at this time. With re-
duced food production and reserves projected for the next crop year, fi-
nalizing a revised and effective Wheat Agreement is of utmost urgency.
The negotiation of a new agreement will require additional flexibility
by all participating governments, but the objective is well worth the
effort.
2. A New Food Aid Convention. While it is important that negotia-
tions on an international system of food reserves be resumed, a more
immediately attainable goal is to conclude a new Food Aid Conven-
tion. The U.S. has already taken the lead on this issue, by stating that it
would be prepared to make available at least 5 million tons out of a 10
million ton target for the Food Aid Convention. While previous at-
tempts to negotiate the FAC have been tied to an overall reserve negoti-
ation, this link is not intrinsically necessary. The Commission believes
that a separate Food Aid Convention can be agreed upon relatively
quickly, given the cooperation of the Summit nations.

B. Assistance to Increased Food Production
1. Research. One of the most effective uses of the resources of the
Summit countries and other donors is in research activity directly re-
lated to food production problems, particularly those problems of spe-
cial importance for the Indian Subcontinent and sub-Saharan Africa. At
present, both the international research system and the national adap-
tive research networks need reaffirmed support and additional re-
sources. The payoff on such investments has so far been very impres-

World Hunger and Food Policy
sive; however, past success should not diminish further efforts to press
still harder in the direction of scientific and technical advances.
Two ways to increase resources for research on the food needs of
developing countries are: a) to double present levels of funding for the
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, and b) to
reorient the current priorities which now prevail within the major re-
search institutions of the Summit nations.
2. Water Resources. Water resource development and management
is a particularly central issue in those regions of the world where
hunger is most severe. Better water management will involve several
related needs: extensive, long-term capital investments (as a recent Tri-
lateral Report has pointed out); increased emphasis on developing
new water management techniques at the local level; and international
cooperation and agreement on water resource problems that affect
more than one country.
3. Fertilizer. An international commitment to assure the availability
of fertilizer—beginning with the Summit nations and eventually in-
cluding the OPEC countries—would represent a major contribution to
the food needs of developing countries. As with the case of food, fertil-
izer is presently available for those nations that can afford it. However,
the shortage of foreign exchange constitutes a major constraint on fer-
tilizer purchases for developing countries, particularly because fertil-
izer has been subject to extreme price fluctuations since 1973. Summit
nations can facilitate fertilizer purchases by making substantially more
concessional aid or soft money available for this purpose.
4. Developing Country Institutional Capabilities and Program Coordina-
tion. Frequent complaints are raised by donor countries and interna-
tional agencies regarding the lack of institutional capabilities within
developing countries to design and implement food production
projects. Therefore, expanded international efforts are required—
drawing upon private as well as public resources for management,
coordination, marketing and project design—to increase local capabil-
ities to prepare and implement projects in the agriculture sector.
Donors and recipients can then design together (in countries where this
has not already been done) a series of careful plans and targets for
using their combined resources to most efficiently produce more food
of the sorts most needed to meet nutritional deficiencies. The World
Food Council at its upcoming meetings in July and September should
be asked to coordinate such programs, and to provide the staff required
for this plan of action.

258.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to the Under Secretary
of State for Economic Affairs (Cooper)
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
U.S. Food Policy Objectives and Activities
Policy Objectives
Since the 1974 World Food Conference, U.S. food initiatives have
been directed toward the broad goal of world food security. The world
food crisis of the early 1970’s demonstrated the need for actions to en-
sure adequate food supplies in the event of major crop shortfalls, either
locally or globally. In 1975 the FAO estimated a food deficit of more
than 20 million tons in the developing countries and that 455 million
people suffered from malnutrition. For the 1990’s LDC food deficits
have been projected at over 100 million tons and the number of people
affected by hunger and malnutrition at one billion.

U.S. efforts to enhance world food security have three objectives:
1. improving food production in the developing countries;
2. introducing stability in wheat supplies through nationally-held
reserves in developed and developing countries;
3. providing food aid to meet immediate food needs of developing
countries.

U.S. Activities and Programs
1. Food Production
The U.S. has accepted the World Food Conference target of 4%
growth of food output in those countries with the highest incidence of
hunger and malnutrition. U.S. activities directed at that end include:
a) Bilateral assistance. Roughly half (about $600 million in FY 79)
of AID’s development assistance budget is allocated to food and agri-
culture projects emphasizing the rural poor.
b) Food losses. AID-supported programs to help eliminate food
losses from inefficient harvesting practices and poorly maintained
World Hunger and Food Policy
tributed $3 million to the FAO’s Fund for Prevention of Food Losses.
c) Agricultural Research. The U.S. provides about 25% of the re-
sources of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Re-
search (CGIAR). It is a network of 11 agricultural research centers lo-
cated in developing countries that work on basic LDC food crop
production problems. The Summit countries have endorsed greater ef-
forts in agricultural research.
d) Multilateral assistance. With U.S. encouragement, the multi-
lateral development banks (MDBs) are increasing financing for rural
development projects. About 35% of the lending by the MDBs is now
dedicated to agricultural development. In FY 79 the U.S. will contribute
approximately $1. billion to the MDBs. In addition, the U.S. con-
tributes $450 million to the UN development organizations involved in
food and agriculture. We funded 20% of the billion dollar International
Fund for Agricultural Development.
2. Food Reserves
Until the February adjournment, international efforts to stabilize
wheat supplies were tied to the UNCTAD-sponsored negotiations for a
new International Wheat Agreement (IWA). The proposed agreement
would have established an internationally coordinated system of
nationally-held wheat reserves. The International Wheat Council
(IWC) agreed in June that in addition to the unresolved issues which
prevented conclusion of negotiations, more recent market develop-
ments (increased production costs, transportation problems in Aus-
tralia and Canada, and anticipated crop shortfalls) have introduced
new objective conditions which require careful study. At their No-
vember 1979 meeting IWC members will review whether the negotia-
tions to achieve a new IWA should be resumed.

While it remains our objective to enhance world food security
through an international system of wheat reserves, it may require an-
other cycle of short supplies and relatively high prices to persuade
other developed and developing countries that the costs of establishing
a meaningful system would be worthwhile in terms of their own in-
terest. In the meantime the U.S. will continue to support other interna-
tional activities aimed at creation of food reserves including:
a) FAO Five Point Plan. The plan, developed in response to ad-
journment of the IWA negotiations, calls for best efforts by nations to:
(1) adopt foodgrain stock policies;
(2) establish criteria for management and release of national
stocks;
(3) assist low-income food deficit countries to meet current import
requirements and emergency needs;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
(4) make special arrangements for food security assistance to the
developing countries;
(5) promote collective self-reliance among developing countries.
Implementation of the plan can be furthered by national food
sector strategy studies which the Summit countries have encouraged
the IBRD and World Food Council to undertake.
b) IBRD Program for Storage Facilities. The IBRD is considering fi-
nancial and technical assistance to developing countries for construc-
tion and management of a 7–8 million ton reserve storage system. The
Tokyo Summit communique´ encouraged such an effort. These facilities
could make an important contribution to food security in LDCs and, if
negotiations are concluded, could be integrated into the IWA
framework.
3. Food Aid
Food aid provides relief in emergency situations and helps poor
countries and vulnerable groups meet basic food requirements which
they are unable to provide for themselves. Food aid is a large compo-
nent of U.S. food security efforts:
While a large portion is devoted to emergency and supplemental
feeding programs, U.S. food assistance under PL 480 is increasingly de-
velopmentally oriented. Title III (Food for Development) is pro-
grammed on a multi-year basis to support agricultural development
programs in the recipient country.
b) World Food Program. The U.S. annually pledges 23% of the
target of the World Food Program (WFP). The WFP provides about
15% of the world’s food assistance, mostly to support agricultural pro-
duction projects and programs for increasing the nutritional status of
vulnerable groups. The U.S. meets its pledge through PL 480 Title II
assistance.
c) International Emergency Food Reserve (IEFR). Established
under the auspices of the WFP, the resources of the IEFR are used only
for emergency relief. The U.S. contribution has been 25% of the annual
500,000 ton target and is carried out through PL 480 Title II assistance.
d) Food Aid Convention (FAC). The U.S. pledged 4. of the total
7. million metric tons of minimum annual cereals aid pledged at ne-
gotiations for a new FAC. The pledges were conditional upon achieve-
ment of a new IWA and are not yet in force. The U.S. pledge would be
met through PL 480 assistance, which currently delivers over 6 million
tons of food aid annually.

The U.S. has launched an effort to persuade other donors to com-
plete the text of a new Food Aid Convention regardless of the status of
negotiations for the Wheat Trade Convention—in essence “delinking”

259.

Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre) and the Special
Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to
President Carter
Washington, September 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
This would require a $346 million increase in the budgeted $1,399 mil-
lion program level and an equal increase in outlays (Tab A).
2) Secretary Vance seeks an additional $41 million for Egypt added
to any supplemental request to offset price increases. State indicates
support for a total increase of $273 million including Egypt (Tab B).
3) IDCA Director Ehrlich favors a $206 million increase, but op-
poses the Egyptian add-on (Tab C).

Each proposal would call for an immediate supplemental. A Jan-
uary transmittal would be too late, because by the time Congress acted
on it, probably next June, logistical constraints would not allow ship-
ment of the full amount requested. Action now could also take into ac-
count that the House has added $59 million to the 1980 Title I appropri-
ation request; there is no Senate PL 480 add-on. The appropriation bill
will probably be in conference next week. By supporting the House po-
sition then, the Administration might avoid formally seeking a supple-
mental for the amount of the House increment.

There are strong arguments in favor of the proposals. Many devel-
oping countries, particularly the poorest, have been hard hit by rising
food and oil prices this year. (USDA has provided the analysis of devel-
oping country food needs at Tab A). It will appear particularly insensi-
tive for the United States, with good harvests and record food export
to 5. million tons caused by higher prices. There will be strong criti-
cism of significant tonnage cuts from both the farm bloc and from hu-
manitarian groups, particularly those voluntary agencies imple-
menting Title II food donations. Finally USDA points out that
reductions in PL 480 will create pressure for a supplemental to finance
higher CCC short-term export loans.

Nevertheless, we remain concerned about the impact of such large
increases on budget restraint. Approving a PL 480 supplemental to
allow for price inflation can only intensify pressures for similar
add-ons to domestic programs where we have been trying to hold the
line. We note that while LDC harvests overall appear down from last
year, there seem to be few extraordinary shortfalls. The planned 6.
shipped in 1979 when most major needs have been met. Finally, there is
a risk that a supplemental now for the popular food aid program may
lead to partial offsetting reductions in regular appropriations for AID
and the multilateral development banks (sharply cut by the House)
during Senate committee mark-up late this month. These points lead us
to conclude that some reduction in the agencies’ requests would be
both feasible and desirable.

World Hunger and Food Policy
Key Issues
We believe that there are three key issues related to the proposal.
1. Title II—The donation program is the most purely humanitarian
element of PL 480 and the main source of U.S. response to natural dis-
asters. It has strong public support centered around the voluntary
agencies and is normally backed by large majorities in Congress. As a
result, a 1. million ton minimum annual volume for Title II is specified
in authorizing legislation (subject to appropriations override). If the
Administration does not propose a budget increase to maintain the
minimum, Congress may well provide it. All agencies agree on an in-
crease of $103 million to offset price increases.
2. Additional PL 480 Aid to Egypt—State proposes two increases for
Egypt: (a) a $60 million increase in the dollar amount of the program to
maintain it at the promised 1. million tons of wheat despite price infla-
tion; this would be funded by either a supplemental or reduction of
other country programs; and (b) $41 million for an additional 230,000
tons of wheat (about half of Prime Minister Khalil’s request last May),
wide Title I concessional sales program. The issue is whether both of
these increases are essential to evidence U.S. reliability in the peace
process and to provide tangible reassurance to Sadat. The case for more
aid is not strong on economic grounds; Egypt’s balance of payments is
improving despite Arab sanctions, and it has a $550 million pipeline of
AID commodity import funds.
3. Title I Tonnage—For the remainder of the Title I program, all
agencies (State, IDCA, OMB, NSC and Owen) believe that the USDA
request can be substantially reduced. The question is how much to cut
back. The options are presented below. Our flexibility is limited by the
facts that deeper cuts could a) limit our ability to meet pressing needs
in Africa and Nicaragua not included in the original budget, b) unac-
ceptably reduce the unallocated reserve for contingencies, $142 million
at current prices, and c) create pressures for substantial reductions in
the large scale programs for Indonesia, Korea and Portugal which will
probably have enough foreign exchange to do without PL 480 next
year.

Reductions in the latter programs could create problems because
i) Indonesia believes that it has a firm $101 million PL 480 commitment
based on statements made by the Vice President last year, which have
been further defined by our Ambassador; ii) Korea receives PL 480 as a
quid pro quo for voluntary textile export restraints; and iii) Portugal sees
our aid as an earnest of U.S. support for its moderate democracy.
USDA believes, moreover, that cuts in Korea and Indonesia shipments
could endanger U.S. commercial exports for wheat and rice.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Options
PL 480 Food Aid Shipments
(in $ millions and millions of metric tons)
Option Option Option
Option
Option
(USDA) (State) (IDCA)
(OMB, Owen)
(1980 Budget)
Title I
Tonnage
Title II
Tonnage
Total Program 1381
Tonnage
Outlays
(All options above except V include the $60 million inflation increase for
Egypt. None except Option II includes the $41 million Egypt add-on. If the
$41 million increment were added to other options, totals would be as
shown below.)

(USDA) (State) (IDCA) (OMB/Owen)
Total Program
Tonnage
In the options described below, we do not seek specific decisions
on individual country levels except for Egypt. State requests that the
$41 million for Egypt be added to any supplemental amount proposed
by other agencies. If you approve this $41 million, we believe it should
be additive to the IDCA and OMB/Owen options, rather than absorbed
within them by cutting back other countries.
Option I (USDA)—Request a $346 million supplemental main-
taining volume at the planned 6. million tons. While no firm country
breakdown is available, some of the tonnage under the country plans in
the budget would be reallocated to the neediest countries based on cur-
rent crop estimates. This option would be welcomed by farm and hu-
manitarian groups and by developing countries.
Option II (State and USDA as a second choice)—Request a $273
million supplemental maintaining the 1. million ton minimum for
Title II, reducing Title I volume but including both requests for Egypt.

World Hunger and Food Policy
year. State believes that all major diplomatic and other program objec-
tives can be accomplished with a budget increase 20 percent below
USDA, but would go no lower. Tonnage cutbacks would fall on the
middle income countries and on the reserve which State would reduce
by one-third. State would add $35 million for Africa programs not in
the January budget and strongly urges approval of the Egypt add-on.
Option III (IDCA)—Request a $206 million supplemental main-
taining the Title II tonnage, holding most middle income Title I recip-
ients to the original dollar levels, and excluding the Egypt add-on.
IDCA Director Ehrlich believes this is the maximum needed to achieve
humanitarian and developmental objectives in light of budget strin-
gencies. IDCA would cut back Korea slightly, thus extending further
the past practice of stretching out the textile payments. IDCA would
maintain a higher reserve than State, which would leave room for some
but possibly not all of the new Africa initiatives. Ehrlich questions the
need to increase the Egypt program by $60 million to maintain tonnage
and opposes the $41 million add-on as turning the program away from
the greater emphasis on development objectives that you previously
have encouraged.

Option IV (OMB, Henry Owen)—Add $161 million to the budget
by seeking a $103 million supplemental to maintain Title II tonnage and
supporting the House’s $59 million add-on for Title I in the upcoming
appropriations conference. Thus, the supplemental request would be
limited to Title II, defensible on humanitarian grounds and meeting the
statutory minimum tonnage. Total volume would be about 5. million
tons, about 5 percent below last year. Programmatically, we would
maintain Indonesia at the level that the Indonesians believe was
pledged by the Vice President, accept most of the cuts proposed by
IDCA, but would reduce the reserve IDCA seeks from $110 million to
$80 million, taking smaller cuts in a few other countries. This would be
a tight reserve for a year of rising prices. Although there would be little
room for the new Africa initiatives, we believe that small cuts in a few
countries, possibly including Portugal, plus a further reduction in the
reserve could accommodate most of them at this total Title I level. We
doubt that reductions of this magnitude would cause major diplomatic
problems. This option includes $60 million to maintain the Egypt pro-
We believe that the political objectives stressed by Vance can be met by
having Ambassador Atherton announce publicly that the U.S. is in-
creasing food aid to Egypt by $60 million, reducing other countries in
order to do so. This would give Sadat visible evidence of U.S. support.
Bob Strauss states that although he is not familiar with the eco-
nomic considerations, if the $60 million would clearly establish that the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
U.S. is doing something unique for Egypt that is not being done for
other countries, he would be satisfied and would not insist on the addi-
tional $41 million. This is essentially the case, since no other recipient of
Title I aid (including Israel and Jordan) would be given significant in-
creases to offset rising prices.

NSC staff supports this option except for preferring to provide the
additional $41 million for Egypt.

Option V (original January budget dollar level)—Request no in-
crease for the program reducing volume to 5. million tons. This option
would contribute most to holding the budgetary line not only in for-
eign aid but also, by example, for all other programs. It would still
leave open the possibility of a January supplemental (though much less
than the USDA request), which could be decided on in light of the
overall 1980 budget situation. Because of the diplomatic costs, the nec-
essary reductions in developmentally sound activities and the do-
mestic political furor it would raise among farm and humanitarian
groups, no agency favors this option.

Decision
Option I Accept the USDA proposal, a $346 million supplemental.
Option II Accept the State Department recommendation, a $273 million
supplemental including the $41 million add-on and $60 million infla-
tion adjustment for Egypt.

Option III Accept the IDCA position, a $206 supplemental excluding the
$41 million Egypt add-on.

Option IV
(a) Accept the OMB/Owen recommendation, a $103 million sup-
plemental for Title II and support of the House on $59 million more for
Title I but excluding the $41 million Egypt add-on.

(b) Add the $41 million for Egypt raising the supplemental to $144
million.

Option V No supplemental.

World Hunger and Food Policy
260.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to Secretary of
State Vance
Washington, September 11, 1979
SUBJECT
Food Security Act of 1979
Issue
Status of the Food Security Act of 1979.

Background:
would authorize the establishment of a wheat reserve of up to 4 million
metric tons. It would be used to meet our food aid commitments to de-
veloping countries during periods of tight supplies and high prices,
while avoiding disruption to normal commercial markets. It would
also allow release of a small portion of the reserve (up to 300,000 metric
tons) to provide urgent humanitarian relief in a developing country
suffering from a major disaster.

This bill is nearly identical to the International Emergency Wheat
Reserve Act (H.R. 13835) which last year cleared the House Com-
mittees on Agriculture and International Affairs. Despite the Adminis-
tration’s strong support, it did not clear the Senate Agriculture Com-
mittee largely because of the concern by farmer groups that release of
such a reserve would undermine wheat prices. Senator Dole proposed
alternative legislation to establish a $500 million food reserve fund.
The Administration opposed the Dole bill because it might be unfeas-
ible politically and unwise to use such an emergency fund, which could
drive prices higher in a tight market situation.

Progress to Date:
On July 10, 1979, the House Agriculture and Foreign Affairs Com-
mittees held joint hearings. Secretary Bergland testified in favor of the
bill. Although State was not asked to testify, we support passage of this
classification marking. Drafted by John Pitts (EB/OFP/FPG) on September 10; cleared by
Calingaert, Hart, and Alvin Adams (EB/IFD/BP). Adams did not initial the memo-
randum. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates that Vance saw it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
bill as a useful means to guarantee normal food aid flows in times of
scarcity and to ensure compliance with our pledge to provide at least
4. million tons of food aid annually.

A number of Congressmen oppose the bill questioning the pos-
sible market disrupting effects of organizing and disposing of such a
reserve. There is also concern over the overall costs of establishing and
maintaining the reserve.

No committee mark-up sessions have been held on the Security
Act because of opposition to the measure itself and the desire of some
to link this bill with measures opposed by the Administration to raise
1979 and 1980 target prices for wheat and feedgrains. Some members
believe organizing and dispensing of the reserve could disrupt the
market and that the costs would be high. In addition, some non-
government experts believe the bill has drafting defects which could
seriously limit the usefulness of the reserve.

Possible Action:
It is unlikely that the House Agriculture Committee will take fur-
ther action on the Food Security Act this year unless the Administration
gives concessions on the domestic price support program. USDA is
now working on a set of price proposals which it plans to circulate
among concerned agencies within a week or two before taking the
matter to the Hill. Until USDA is ready to make its move, no action on
your part is necessary.

261.

Letter From President Carter to the Chairman of the
Presidential Commission on World Hunger (Linowitz)
Washington, November 16, 1979
To Sol Linowitz
I know that the members of the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger share my deep concern about the tragic conditions in Cam-
World Hunger and Food Policy
bodia. I also know you are trying to complete your report on the larger
problem of world hunger.

However, I need the assistance of the Commission regarding Cam-
bodia. I would like to have you periodically report to me on the status
of major activities being carried out by government agencies and pri-
vate and international organizations to deal with the hunger situation
in Cambodia.

I want to be assured that required actions are being expeditiously
carried out and that we identify any possible delays or other problems
which might hinder relief efforts.

262.

Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of
State
33459. Subj: Twentieth Session of the FAO Conference: Summary
1. Summary. Despite existence at outset of several contentious, and
at least one potentially explosive issue, the Conference successfully
dealt with its business in an efficient and business-like fashion; all
issues were seemingly resolved to the satisfaction of all concerned. The
budget was approved by an overwhelming majority of countries, de-
spite abstentions from a group of five major countries representing 56
percent of assessed budget contribution. The Near East Regional Office,
by agreement of all countries in the region, was temporarily closed
without abrogation of FAO’s agreement with Egypt. Wording was
agreed on for numerous resolutions on topics from protectionism to
designation of a World Food Day requiring the appending of a minimal
number of reservations and interpretive statements. The Conference
concluded in a spirit of amicability and essential unanimity of purpose.
End summary.
2. Opening statements. As reported reftel (C), business of Confer-
ence preceded by inspirational speeches of Pope John Paul II and
McDougall Speaker Kaunda, President of Zambia. U.S. Secretary of
Agriculture Bergland (reftel A), speaking early in list of ministerial
statements stressed consistency of U.S. domestic agricultural policy
with critical problem of world hunger and reaffirmed commitment of
U.S. to that problem and to supporting the FAO in that effort.
3. State of Food and Agriculture. (See reftel B for detail).
classified. Repeated to USUN and the Mission in Geneva.
Hathaway headed the U.S. delegation, comprised of Gardner, Brewin, Kriesberg, and
Sorenson. For the text of the conference proceedings and other documentation, see Report
REP (Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization, 1979).

Bergland’s opening statement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
days of debate in Commission I, focusing on reaction to the Director-General’s paper en-
titled The State of Food and Agriculture 1979. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790538–1146)
statements made during the plenary session. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790538–1278)

World Hunger and Food Policy
—Secretariat characterized situation as not offering room for com-
placency, particularly since per capita production in the least devel-
oped countries continues to fall, and overall, the developing countries
were increasingly dependent on food imports. Many developing coun-
tries argued for more external assistance to help attain food self-
sufficiency, and for a larger share in international trade so they could
better afford the food imports they needed. A trade resolution with em-
phasis on protectionism was adopted with U.S. and other Western
countries expressing reservations. Improvements in share of trade and
terms of trade, were urged by many developing countries as essential
elements in the New International Economic Order (NIEO). Most de-
veloped countries cited actions, mostly through MTN that could help
the LDCs in their aspirations for more trade.
—Concerning fertilizer situation, many developing countries cited
rising costs and argued that FAO program essential to help them get
fertilizers they needed at prices they could afford. Secretariat noted that
while voluntary contributions to the IFS lagging, they had received
contributions to begin their “options system” which would also help
low income countries to get fertilizer at less cost.
—Forestry discussion highlighted need for greater understanding
of the role of forests as contributing to food and fuel and to conserva-
tion of croplands. Djakarta Declaration received unconditional sup-
port. Most speakers of developing countries urged strengthened FAO
program in forestry.
4. Agriculture: Toward 2000. This exercise by FAO designed to
provide agricultural basis for new international development strategy
under preparation for the General Assembly, to meet aspirations of
New International Economic Order. Assumptions and conclusions in
draft document were thought by many delegates to be optimistic. Revi-
sions planned, including a scenario with lower economic growth rates
and considerations of energy costs. U.S. also questioned assumption of
constant weather and constant prices in devising model.
5. Fisheries—Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ). Discussion re-
flected relative priority of aquaculture vis-a`-vis new FAO program for
development and management of fisheries in EEZ, and the relative pri-
ority of small scale fisheries within EEZ program. A U.S. co-sponsored
resolution was approved on FAO’s program of assistance for develop-
ment and management of fisheries in Exclusive Economic Zones.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
cated virtual unanimity of support for the programs, policies and prior-
ities reflected in the proposed PWB. Developing countries supported
the budget at a minimum level. Ninety-six (96) countries voted in favor;
5 major contributors accounting for 56 percent of the assessed budgets
(UK, U.S., Canada, FRG, and Japan) abstained, reflecting difficulty with
the magnitude of the budget—dols. 278. million for the biennium.
Mexico also abstained, but on a technicality.
7. Review of field programs. Principal thrust of Secretariat was to
criticize UNDP, explicitly charging it with mal-administration in
choosing non-FAO sources to execute UNDP-financed projects. Most
speakers highly complimentary of Secretariat document. U.S. remarks
concerned with need for more stress on needs of rural poor; small, dis-
advantaged farmers; and landless workers; in the design, implementa-
tion and evaluation of programs/projects. Resolution on development
assistance adopted. U.S. reserved on paragraph requesting increased
contributions for special action programs.
8. Medium term objectives. U.S. critique of document, while gener-
ally favorable, argued that programs should reflect deliberate shift to
assisting low-income food deficit countries; comprehensive approach
to nutrition, rather than stressing data collection; and added emphasis
to rural employment and increasing level of participation of women in
development activities and the number of rural programs benefiting
women.
9. Action from World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development (WCARRD).
—DG indicated steps FAO has taken in implementation of
WCARRD Action Program (AP). FAO actively helping develop a
number of regional development centers to assist countries in the im-
plementation of the AP. FAO staff actively engaged in reviewing cur-
rent and projected field programs to make them more responsive to AP
goals.
—DG presented FAO estimate that dols 20 million needed, on a
voluntary basis, over next five years to finance these activities. Resolu-
tion, including target, approved by Conference. U.S. presentation
strongly supportive of AP as means of reaching higher levels of equity
and income.
10. Near East Regional Office. Director-General engaged in intense
and prolonged discussions with both sides until eleventh hour in effort
to reach compromise which would preclude a divisive vote on floor.
Position of U.S. delegation throughout was completely supportive of
Egypt. Compromise finally reached called for regional office in Cairo to
be closed quote until decided otherwise by Conference unquote.
Director-General authorized to determine which regional activities to

World Hunger and Food Policy
terminate and which to carry on from Rome or elsewhere in region.
Egypt’s 1952 agreement with FAO establishing the regional office in
Cairo however, was not abrogated and Egypt continues as member of
Near East Region with full rights to participate in activities of region.
11. Independent Chairman of the Council. Incumbent Chairman,
Dr. Bukar Shaib (Nigeria) re-elected. In acceptance speech he expressed
concern for improving efficiency of Conference and proposed possible
alternative format. This will be matter for future Council consideration.
12. Comment.
—In general, Conference can be characterized as success in terms
of U.S. objectives. While new budget somewhat exceeds U.S. ceiling,
we are in substantial accord with direction and effectiveness of FAO
programs. DG’s performance in defusing Cairo office issue, while, no
doubt, further strengthening his hold on the organization, must also be
recognized as an important element in the positive tendencies of the or-
ganization in recent years, e.g., avoiding politicization and gradually
building a reputation as an effective technical organization.
—Despite protracted friction between U.S. and FAO over budget
during past year, hopefully relative accord and good will which char-
acterized outcome of Conference can be furthered in coming months.
—U.S. delegation comprised of strong people, working effectively
as a team. Particular effort should be made to continue their involve-
ment in FAO matters and utilize the experience derived.

Gardner

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
263.

Preliminary Report of the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger
Washington, December 1979
[Omitted here are the table of contents, introduction, and preface.]
SECTION I
THE ROLE OF THE UNITED STATES:
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
A. Why Should the United States Be Concerned?

The major recommendation of the Presidential Commission on
World Hunger is that the United States make the elimination of hunger
the primary focus of its relations with the developing world—with all
that implies for U.S. policy toward development assistance, trade, for-
eign investment and foreign affairs. In the Commission’s view, there
are significant reasons for the United States to place the elimination of
hunger at the top of its list of global concerns.
1. Moral Obligation and Responsibility
Moral obligation alone would justify giving highest priority to the
task of overcoming hunger. Even now, millions of human beings live
on the edge of starvation—in conditions of subhuman poverty that, if
we think about them at all, must fill us with shame and horror. We see
this now most poignantly in Cambodia, but it is a fact of life every day
for half a billion people. At least one out of every eight men, women
World Hunger and Food Policy
and children on earth suffers malnutrition severe enough to shorten
life, stunt physical growth, and dull mental ability.

Whether one speaks of human rights or basic human needs, the
right to food is the most basic of all. Unless that right is first fulfilled,
the protection of other human rights becomes a mockery for those who
must spend all their energy merely to maintain life itself. The correct
moral and ethical position on hunger is beyond debate. The major
world’s religions and philosophical systems share two universal
values: respect for human dignity and a sense of social justice. Hunger
is the ultimate affront to both. Unless all governments begin now to act
upon their rhetorical commitments to ending hunger, the principle that
human life is sacred, which forms the very underpinnings of human so-
ciety, will gradually but relentlessly erode. By concentrating its interna-
tional efforts on the elimination of hunger, the United States would
provide the strongest possible demonstration of its renewed dedication
to the cause of human rights.

Moral obligation includes responsibility. In the Commission’s
view, the United States has a special capability and hence a special re-
sponsibility to lead the campaign against world hunger. The United
States is by far the most powerful member of the world’s increasingly
interdependent food system. It harvests more than half the grain that
crosses international borders. Its corporations dominate world grain
trade. Its grain reserves are the largest on earth. Because of its agricul-
tural productivity, its advanced food technology, and its market
power, the United States inevitably exerts a major influence on all as-
pects of the international food system.

Global interdependence in food means that two straight years of
bad harvests in any of the major grain-producing nations of the world
could precipitate another food crisis like the one that occurred in
1972–74. Recurrent crises of this nature could bring widespread famine
and political disorder to the developing countries and would severely
disrupt a fragile world economy already weakened by energy
shortages and rampant inflation. U.S. policies will have a major role in
determining whether or not this scenario will be played out.
American policies and resources also hold the key to solving that
continuing world food crisis embodied in the swelling ranks of the
chronically malnourished. To these hungry millions, it makes no differ-
ence whether such policies are made by choice or inertia, by acts of
commission or acts of omission. In view of the undeniable influence
that this nation’s actions will have on world hunger, the Commission
urges immediate yet careful long-range planning to assure that U.S.
policy truly helps rather than harms the world’s hungry people. Delay
will only make the same ends more difficult and expensive to accom-
plish, and will not lift responsibility from the United States.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The Commission does not mean to imply that the United States
alone can solve the world hunger problem. All nations, including those
of the developing world, must make the conquest of hunger a common
cause. However, the Commission is persuaded that unless the United
States plays a major role by increasing its own commitment and action
toward this goal, no effective and comprehensive global program to
combat hunger is likely to be undertaken in the foreseeable future.
Moreover, once its own commitment is clear, the United States will be
in a particularly strong position to encourage others to do more. The
Commission believes that the United States is uniquely situated to in-
fluence the fate of millions who do not get enough to eat.
2. National Security
The Commission believes that promoting economic development
in general, and overcoming hunger in particular, are tasks far more crit-
ical to the U.S. national security than most policymakers acknowledge
or even believe. Since the advent of nuclear weapons most Americans
have been conditioned to equate national security with the strength of
strategic military forces. The Commission considers this prevailing be-
lief to be a simplistic illusion. Armed might represents merely the phys-
ical aspect of national security. Military force is ultimately useless in
the absence of the global security that only coordinated international
progress toward social justice can bring.

Progress with stability has always been the basic goal of U.S. for-
eign policy. As relations between the industrialized and developing na-
tions deteriorate and as political, economic, resource and environ-
mental challenges to the present order steadily mount, the Commission
is firmly convinced that a major worldwide effort to conquer hunger
and poverty, far from being a gesture of charity to be offered or with-
held according to temporary political whims, holds the key to both
global and national security.

The most potentially explosive force in the world today is the frus-
trated desire of poor people to attain a decent standard of living. The
anger, despair and often hatred that result represent real and persistent
threats to international order. The developing nations now actively in-
volved in international affairs are resolutely determined to move into
the modern world and secure its benefits for themselves. But as the as-
pirations and expectations of the developing world grow, poverty
within it remains prevalent and conspicuous—with hunger as its quin-
tessential symptom. As a result, hunger has been internationalized and
turned into a continuing global political issue, transformed from a
low-profile moral imperative into a divisive and disruptive factor in in-
ternational relations. Mutual suspicion and hostility between the
“North” and the “South” have been visible, corrosive and counter-

World Hunger and Food Policy
productive in international conferences or negotiations convened
during the 1970s to address global problems.

Neither the cost to national security of allowing malnutrition to
spread nor the gain to be derived by a genuine effort to resolve the
problem can be predicted or measured in any precise, mathematical
way. Nor can monetary value be placed on avoiding the chaos that will
ensue unless the United States and the rest of the world begin to de-
velop a common institutional framework for meeting such other critical
global threats as the growing scarcity of fossil fuels and other non-
renewable resources, environmental hazards, pollution of the seas, and
international terrorism. Calculable or not, however, this combination of
problems now threatens the national security of all countries just as
surely as advancing armies or nuclear arsenals.

The Commission believes that stimulating an effective, coopera-
tive campaign against world hunger would help the United States to
break the impasse in “North-South” relations. For the foreseeable fu-
ture, the United States is less likely than most other countries to suffer
directly from a world food crisis. Despite—or perhaps because of—this
fact, a concerted effort to eliminate hunger would enable the American
people to demonstrate their solidarity with “the poorest of the poor,”
and, at the same time, to contribute significantly toward raising living
standards for poor people throughout the world.

It is the Commission’s view that hunger constitutes the central
strand in the web of underdevelopment—poverty, powerlessness, low
productivity, lack of education, unemployment, disease, and high rates
of population growth. Malnutrition cripples the abilities of disadvan-
taged populations to help themselves, by preventing large numbers of
citizens from working to capacity or performing effectively in school.
But the reverse is also true: helping people acquire the means and skills
for producing or purchasing their own food will necessarily require
progress along the entire spectrum of development needs: creating
more jobs in both rural and urban areas, improving basic health,
and evolving higher degrees of social organization and political
participation.

As both symptom and source of underdevelopment, then, hunger
presents an appropriate and badly needed focus for America’s rela-
tions with the developing nations. The Commission believes that ef-
forts stemming from this new focus would engender increasing coop-
eration by the developing nations in addressing the rest of the global
agenda.
3. Economic Interest
The Commission also finds compelling economic reasons for the
United States to focus on the elimination of hunger. The United States

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
can maintain its own economic vitality only within a healthy interna-
tional economy whose overall strength will increase as each of its com-
ponent parts becomes more productive, more equitable and more inter-
nationally competitive. To sustain a healthy global economy, the
purchasing power of today’s poor people must rise substantially, in
order to set in motion that mutually-reinforcing exchange of goods,
services and commodities which provides the foundation for viable
economic partnership and growth.

The international food system is one important component of the
international economic order. The United States depends on world
markets to maintain its own strong farm economy: American farmers
export two-thirds of their wheat, about half their rice and soybeans,
and about a quarter of their corn and other coarse grains. Although
farm output makes up only three percent of the nation’s Gross National
1979) that are so essential to the U.S. balance of payments position.
Paradoxical though it may seem, the United States will continue to
reap these benefits as the developing nations step up their own food
production. Rising agricultural productivity will form the foundation
for Third World economic growth—and for the continually rising de-
mand for American farm products this growth is bound to create. Even
assuming the most ambitious increases in local production of cereals,
fats and oils, the food import needs of the developing nations will con-
tinue to rise dramatically. Higher economic growth in the developing
nations has already spurred enormous increases in the consumption of
both imported and locally produced food. Third World imports of food
from the United States rose from $2 billion to almost $10 billion during
the past decade.

However, there are also limits to how much food the U.S. itself can
produce. Since World War II, the world has become accustomed to re-
lying on the United States to serve as a cushion when food was needed
anywhere around the globe. The United States had two kinds of excess
capacity: grain surpluses, and arable land deliberately taken out of pro-
duction to stabilize domestic farm prices. Both forms of excess capacity
are now sharply reduced. Consequently, although the United States is
still “the breadbasket of the world,” providing over half of all the grain
imported by other nations, North America can no longer be expected to
keep on generating agricultural surpluses for the world.

Some dislocations will no doubt occur within the U.S. economy as
Third World nations accelerate the development of their own agricul-
ture and industry, since by actively promoting the process of economic
development abroad, the United States is helping other nations to be-
come more competitive with domestic manufacturers and producers.
Most affected will be those industries which depend on skills that can

World Hunger and Food Policy
be duplicated more cheaply elsewhere in the world, or U.S. export
markets for goods which can be made or produced by former cus-
tomers. The U.S. Government must anticipate and cushion these
changes through trade adjustment and other programs on both the
local and national level.

In long-range terms, significant efforts to improve the interna-
tional economy as a whole, and measures to increase food production
within the developing nations in particular, will benefit American con-
sumers and producers alike. If higher productivity is not achieved in
the developing nations, both they and the United States will pay the
price in rising food costs and uncertain supplies. Recurrent disruptions
in global food supply, on the scale of the 1972–74 food crisis, would
cause further havoc within the international economy. Consequently
all nations, including the United States, share a strong economic in-
terest in assuring larger and more stable world food supplies.
B. How Should the United States Act in Light of Its Concern?
1. Overcoming World Hunger By Helping to Promote Self-Reliant
Development
In the most immediate sense, of course, hunger can be eliminated
by providing the needy with food. The Commission is convinced, how-
ever, that the long-term hope of eliminating hunger lies with preven-
tion rather than with cure. Emergency relief programs, for example, are
no substitute for the less dramatic, longer-term efforts required to make
developing nations less vulnerable to catastrophe in the first place by
transforming their agricultural production. Nutrition intervention and
targeted feeding programs are no substitute for policies and actions
that help people provide fully for their own nutritional needs.
In practice, the attainment of this goal for most countries would
mean the optimal degree of domestic food production supplemented
by adequate imports from other nations. Total self-sufficiency in food is
seldom feasible, sensible or necessary. Few nations, developed or de-
veloping, are so favorably endowed that they can choose to remain out-
side the international food system. Each nation can, however, develop
the political, economic and agricultural foundations to meet the basic
needs of its own population. In asking the United States to make the
elimination of hunger the primary focus if its dealings with the devel-
oping world, the Commission is not advocating that the United States
should feed the world, but rather that the United States should help the
world feed itself.
2. Broadening the United States Government’s Response to World
Hunger
Current
United
States
Government
policies
do
not
reflect
America’s moral, economic and national security interests in ending

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
world hunger nor this country’s genuine concern for hungry people.
Although one can argue that the United States gave more than its fair
share of Official Development Assistance (ODA) from the end of World
War II through the late 1950s, U.S. contributions have fallen off sharply
since then as a percentage of GNP. The United States now ranks behind
12 other donor nations in this respect and would rank even lower if se-
curity supporting assistance, which is only incidentally for develop-
ment, were not included in the U.S. totals. Moreover, compared to most
other donors, the United States gives a lower percentage of its aid in the
form of outright grants, and more in the form of debt-bearing loans.
The low priority accorded to the hunger problem is even more evi-
dent in U.S. policies and programs other than development assistance,
which influence the possibilities for overcoming world hunger through
self-reliant development. Development assistance flows will never
amount to more than a tiny fraction of all U.S. economic interactions
with Third World nations. In the long run, patterns of U.S. trade and
private foreign investment, U.S. participation in international organiza-
tions, U.S. foreign policy, and domestic agricultural policies and pro-
grams are likely to have a much greater impact on hungry people than
development assistance.
3. Mobilizing Public Support
The broad-based plan of action recommended in this Report
cannot be carried out without a major reordering of this country’s na-
tional priorities. American concern for the hungry must spread to all
spheres of Government activity if it is to obtain major results.
For such a marked shift in established practices and premises to
occur, public support must be mobilized. The American public now is
only dimly aware of what this country as well as others would stand to
gain if people in countries which today receive foreign aid, could feed
themselves, within dynamic, equitable and self-reliant domestic econ-
omies. Such a world would be characterized by a far greater degree of
equity among and within nations than is apparent today. While few
would oppose improving the lives of impoverished human beings, the
benefits for those who are already affluent are less evident; indeed, at
first sight the well-off may seem more apt to lose than to gain.
The costs and benefits of overcoming poverty and hunger are diffi-
cult to compare in conventional ways. The costs tend to be felt sooner
than benefits are received. The Commission affirms its view that the
long-term self-interest of the United States is linked to the fate of poor
and hungry people throughout the world, that the very spirit of
America is its national commitment to justice, equity and human dig-
nity. Only in a world freed from hunger will the human community
achieve the state of equality and brotherhood it dreams of now. A cam-

World Hunger and Food Policy
paign to overcome world hunger in which the United States plays a
major role would serve as a focus for the idealism and generosity of
those millions of Americans who seek a national purpose that tran-
scends material success.

It is doubtful, however, that moral factors alone can hold popular
attention, or command the long-term economic and political support
required to sustain such a campaign. A major reordering of this na-
tion’s priorities is necessarily involved, and that process itself must
begin with nationwide efforts to educate the public about the realities
of world hunger. Despite high food prices the average American still
takes food abundance for granted. The majority of Americans have
never known hunger. Only a small fraction of the population is now en-
gaged in agriculture; urban, middle-class Americans associate their
food supplies with supermarkets rather than with seeds and soil. More-
over, an opinion poll conducted by the Commission reveals wide-
spread public overestimation of the level of U.S. participation in
current efforts to combat world hunger and promote economic devel-
opment.

The governments of Canada, Great Britain, Denmark, Norway,
Sweden and the Netherlands all support public education programs on
Third World problems; and these education programs get results. The
U.S. Executive Branch, however, is forbidden to use public funds to
promote its programs among the public but it has been encouraged and
funded to involve the public in deliberations of major issues like public
safety and environmental protection.

Private voluntary organizations experienced in hunger issues and
programs devote most of their limited budgets to urgently needed
direct-service, development and feeding programs. They are con-
stantly engaged in raising the money to develop or conduct these oper-
November–December 1979. A subsequent press release reported: “Allowing for the im-
mediacy of the intrusion of Iran into the world problem agenda, the problem of world
hunger ranks behind only inflation and energy as a ‘top of the mind’ concern, a poll taken
for the Presidential Commission on World Hunger reveals.” The release continued: “As
supportive as they are of development assistance, Americans substantially overestimate
the amount of money which the U.S. is actually spending in this area. They also strongly
prefer to have ‘strings attached’ to development assistance funds. Almost everyone de-
mands that those countries receiving aid guarantee that aid will get to the people who
need it and that the recipient countries have friendly diplomatic relations with the U.S.
Americans also express a preference for assistance funds to be administered by volunteer
organizations rather than the U.S. Government or international organizations.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects—Hazel Denton, Box 56,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ational programs, and can allocate little of it to educational efforts not
connected to fund-raising.

The Commission believes that the Federal Government must now
initiate a nationwide, long-term educational effort, if the requisite
public understanding and support are to be marshalled to conquer
world hunger. Such an effort should include resources sufficient to im-
plement continuing and effective public education concerning the role
of the United States in a hungry world.

C. Conclusion
There are compelling moral, economic and national security
reasons for the United States Government to make the elimination of
hunger the central focus of its relations with the developing world.
However, neither current U.S. policies nor prevailing public attitudes
demonstrate an accurate understanding of the problem’s scope, ur-
gency, or relevance to America’s own national well-being.
Cast as the dominant actor within the world’s food system, the
United States has a unique opportunity and responsibility to exercise
its power for the common good. Such purposeful use of U.S. power
would also focus and shape the idealism and generosity that is so in-
digenous to the American spirit.

What is needed to assure that the United States plays its proper
major role in the worldwide campaign against hunger is a major reor-
dering of national priorities. Additional resources must be mobilized,
public understanding and support must be marshalled, and the gov-
ernment must organize itself in ways that will enhance the U.S. ability
to address this critical issue.

The Commission is convinced that the best hope of eliminating
hunger lies in persuading other nations as well to make that objective a
top national priority, and in promoting a substantial increase in re-
sources that flow from the affluent nations to the developing world.
Social justice is not simply an abstract ideal. It is a sensible
way of making life more livable for everyone. Thus, for
the developed nations to do more to assist the developing
countries is not merely the right thing to do, it is also in-
creasingly the economically advantageous to do.

Robert McNamara
President, World Bank

World Hunger and Food Policy
[Omitted here is Section II: The Problem of World Hunger.]
SECTION III
CONCLUSIONS AND PRELIMINARY RECOMMENDATIONS
I–203. The Commission shall develop recommendations
designed to significantly reduce world hunger and
malnutrition; and shall develop various options for
harnessing
available
resources
to
carry
out
those
recommendations,
including
policy
options
for
improving the capacity of the United States to reduce the
problems of world hunger and malnutrition.

A. Introduction
The Presidential Commission on World Hunger believes that the
1980s must be a decade of concern for human life and wider participa-
tion in development. The Commission is also convinced that the most
effective demonstration of that concern will be the intensification of
worldwide efforts to overcome hunger and malnutrition and to stimu-
late self-reliant development. Of all the challenges facing the world
today, agreement by the nations of the world on the actions required of
all countries to eliminate hunger may be the most important, and may
also provide the most promising basis for other international actions to
assure world peace. By placing the elimination of hunger high on its
national agenda, the United States will demonstrate a major commit-
ment to undertaking one of the most important tasks facing mankind.
The establishment of the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger is, in itself, evidence of this Government’s resolve to strengthen
and accelerate its own efforts to assure an adequate diet for all. The
Commission has carefully considered the reasons why the United
States should be concerned about hunger. It has also analyzed the di-
mensions of world hunger, its causes and future implications, and the
lessons learned from previous development and relief activities aimed
at alleviating hunger at home and abroad. It has thoroughly reviewed
other major policies and activities, such as international trade, debt,
and food security. In this process, the Commission has also drawn a
wide range of insights from various studies and strategies, national and
international, to improve its understanding about world hunger and
what is necessary to resolve the problem.

As a result of this analysis, the Commission concludes that the
United States must make the elimination of hunger the primary focus

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of its relationships with the developing world beginning with the
decade of the 1980s and that as a step toward this new focus, a major
reordering of national and international priorities is essential. This
focus can be most easily demonstrated in U.S. assistance programs and
policies, but to be a reality, it must include all interaction with the de-
veloping world, particularly as a major component in the continuing
“North-South” dialogue and as part of our contribution to the United
Nations Third Development Decade.

The U.S. commitment to overcoming hunger is based upon the be-
lief that solutions to the problem of hunger represent the most funda-
mental assurance of human rights, and that through actions designed
to help others feed themselves, the United States can make a major con-
tribution to justice for all people.

B. Conclusions of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger
The Commission’s conviction, that the United States must devote
immediate attention to the problem of world hunger and the goal of
self-reliant growth, is reinforced by the following major conclusions:
• The major world hunger problem today is the prevalence of chronic
undernutrition—which calls for a political as well as a technical solution. It
is qualitatively distinct from the historically familiar story of recurrent
famines—the local, transient and visible tragedies brought about by
drought, flood, pestilence, and other calamities. The extent of chronic
undernutrition is global; it is an integral part of the overriding issue of
world order in the decades ahead.
• This world hunger problem is getting worse rather than better. There
are more hungry people than ever before. Despite some encouraging signs of
progress following the World Food Conference, at least one out of every eight
people on earth is still afflicted by some form of malnutrition. Even after three
successive years of good harvests, the world food situation is still precarious.
• World hunger has many interrelated causes, some of which re-
sult from scientific, technical and logistical problems. However, the cen-
tral and most intransigent cause is poverty. Hunger, therefore, is primarily a
political, economic, and social problem. The Commission concurs with the
National Academy of Sciences that “in most countries social, economic
and political measures not directly related to food are necessary to re-
duce malnutrition and improve health.” U.S. action has direct and in-
direct impact on many of the decisions about such measures.
• A major crisis of global food supply—of even more serious dimensions
than the present energy crisis—appears likely within the next 20 years, unless
Preparatory Committee for the New International Development Strategy.
World Hunger and Food Policy
steps are taken now to facilitate a significant increase in food production in the
developing nations. Such a crisis would have grave implications for all
nations, including the United States; but those nations with the largest
numbers of hungry people would suffer the most. Increased food produc-
tion will not occur, however, without a market and will not benefit hungry
people unless they acquire the purchasing power to enter that market.
• Rising global demand for food must be met within resource limits—of
land, water, energy, and agricultural inputs—which are at present little un-
derstood by most Americans. There can be no lasting solution to the world
hunger problem if the world persists in current practices which have al-
ready led to increasingly serious degradation of soils, grasslands, water
resources, forests and fisheries.
• The task of overcoming hunger is long-term and will require special at-
tention, year in and year out, on the part of the developing countries them-
selves, as well as the international community. Neither rapid increases in
food production of developing countries, nor rapid increases in eco-
nomic growth rates, nor the stabilization of world grain markets will, in
themselves, cure widespread undernutrition.
• The challenge of overcoming hunger requires increasing the pro-
duction of food on a self-reliant basis in the developing countries. More
than increase in supply is required, however. While gains in productivity
will become increasingly critical in the years ahead, they must neither be mis-
taken for nor subordinated to the goal of assuring more equitable access to food
for all. To attain this goal will involve a continuing attack on the interrelated
issues of poverty, population growth, food production and distribution, em-
ployment and income, in order to generate the effective demand that will
spur production.
• The containment of world hunger will require specific responses
to problems that arise within diverse countries, cultures and political
systems. There is no ideal food, no perfect diet, no universally acceptable agri-
cultural system waiting to be transplanted from one geographic, climatic, and
cultural setting to another. Assistance programs from developed countries and
international agencies must focus on self-reliant growth and respond to the
needs of each country, and not be based upon a predetermined strategy which
attempts to generalize needs and requirements.
• In addition to action by the industrialized nations, decisive steps to
build more effective national food systems must be taken by the developing
countries, which produce most of the food they presently consume. Es-
sential support from external donors will also be required to help attain
this goal.
• As the world’s largest producer, consumer, and trader of food, the
United States has a key role and responsibility in this endeavor. No significant
progress is likely to be made without the active and wholehearted participation

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of the United States. However, the United States cannot—and should not—
try to shape the international effort unilaterally.
• Efforts to eliminate hunger can succeed. The substantial progress
achieved within the United States itself, as well as other countries since World
War II, indicates that public awareness, appropriate government programs
and increased income and productivity do reduce poverty and hunger. The
techniques, methods and lessons learned from these examples are often
replicable in other countries.
• U.S. domestic and foreign economic policies, as well as private activ-
ities, sometimes hinder rather than help efforts to overcome world hunger. U.S.
actions with implications for hunger overseas go far beyond the rela-
tively small role that U.S. foreign assistance plays in the overall com-
plex of U.S. economic interactions with the developing world. They in-
clude domestic agricultural policies and consumer practices, trade, and foreign
investment, as well as arms sales to poor countries. While it would be un-
realistic to assume that economic conflicts of interest can be eliminated
entirely from international economic relations, the United States can
take steps to reduce existing conflicts between its national goals and the
needs of hungry people.
• Much progress has been made in reducing the prevalence of
hunger and malnutrition in the United States over the past decade.
However, some segments of the U.S. population, notably Native Americans
and migrant workers, remain vulnerable to malnutrition and related diseases.
Further, there is a clear and immediate need for the establishment of a perma-
nent authority to collect, analyze and disseminate essential information re-
lating to the nutritional status of the American population. Despite Congres-
sional directives to Federal agencies to submit proposals for a
comprehensive system for monitoring the nation’s nutritional status,
little progress has been made to date.
• Federal feeding programs such as the School Lunch; Women, Infants
and Children; and Food Stamp Programs have been very successful in ad-
dressing the problems of hunger and malnutrition in the United States. How-
ever, inflation and fiscal austerity policies threaten the advances that have been
made to treat the symptom of hunger. Despite the successes of Federal
feeding programs, modifications to improve their availability to the
poor, better mechanisms for reaching such groups as the elderly and
rural poor and closer monitoring of local administrative practices could
lead to increased participation by those Americans in need.
• The pervasive existence of chronic undernutrition throughout
the world is still exacerbated by conditions of outright starvation and
food scarcity, often man-made. While improvements have been
achieved in the coordination and operation of relief activities, further
effort is required. However, the major impediment to effective famine and
emergency relief is often the unwillingness of the governments of affected

World Hunger and Food Policy
countries to acknowledge the problem. Of critical importance is the prevention
of relief assistance for political or military reasons, thereby using hunger and
famine as a weapon of armed conflict or political repression.
• The outcome of the war on hunger, by the year 2000 and beyond, will be
determined not by forces beyond human control, but by decisions and actions
well within the capability of nations and people working individually and
together.

C. Preliminary Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger
In formulating its recommendations, the Commission has quite
deliberately not restricted itself to those which are the most politically
attractive and feasible. We have recommended actions which flow
from an analysis that is by no means new, but which—though accepted
in the context of international conferences and pronouncements—has
not yet emerged in the decisions and actions of governments.
These recommendations are broad in scope and will require many
implementing actions. In presenting its recommendations, the Com-
mission has avoided a listing of detailed actions; rather, it has focused
on the need for major decisions and policy changes. In this preliminary
Report, the Commission presents only recommendations affecting the
organization of our own Government, levels of development assist-
ance, alleviation of famine caused by war, and domestic feeding pro-
grams. However, the Commission emphasizes that the focus of these
initial recommendations is only a beginning. Later recommendations
dealing with world food security, trade and corporate relationships,
and other U.S. policies and approaches are equally essential to a strong
and balanced effort to eliminate hunger.

In this context, the Commission’s major recommendation bears
repetition, particularly in a world where the self-reliance goals of the
“South” continue to challenge the policies of the “North” and as the
United Nations embarks upon its Third Decade of Development. The
United States is an integral part of these processes; accordingly:
The Commission recommends that the United States make the elimina-
tion of hunger the primary focus of its relationships with the developing coun-
tries, beginning with the decade of the 1980s.

The Commission believes that the 1980s, the United Nations Third
Development Decade, can be a time of unparalleled opportunity for
more constructive cooperation between the industrialized nations of
the “North” and the developing countries of the “South.” A world part-
nership is essential to solve such global problems as hunger, energy
needs and environmental concerns, whose ramifications span national
boundaries and in which the entire world has an interest.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Focusing on the elimination of hunger as a priority objective will
make possible that progress towards creating a just and prosperous
world economy, supportive of the self-reliant aspirations of both the
developed and the developing world. The elimination of hunger is fun-
damental to the achievement of a just economic and social order. The
United States and other prosperous nations must address the problem
of world hunger through all available means, including development
assistance, trade, investment and domestic economic policy. Pros-
perous nations must also address the problem of hunger within their
own borders and act to assure their citizens adequate incomes by pro-
viding jobs or by making assistance available for those unable to work.
The developing countries, for their part, will have to make long
overdue changes in deeply rooted social and economic structures.
1. Organization of United States Development Assistance
Since chronic hunger is a symptom of poverty, in the Commis-
sion’s judgment, development assistance can be most effective as a cat-
alyst for overcoming hunger in the poorest developing nations through
focused efforts to increase local food production, to stimulate balanced
and equitable economic growth, and to support local institutional
means of increasing the purchasing power of the poor. While the major
responsibility to use available development assistance resources is
properly that of the recipient country, which must ensure that its own
policies and infrastructure allow effective use of development aid, the
organization and focus of donor activities are very important.
The Commission finds that current U.S. development assistance
legislation is properly focused on areas of basic human needs by the
“New Directions” approach. However, the effective implementation
of Congress’ goals is seriously compromised by important institu-
tional, financial and political constraints, either levied by Congress or
complicated through administrative shortcomings.

U.S. foreign policymakers have frequently viewed “foreign aid” as
an instrument for advancing short-term political interests. However,
the countries most in need of development assistance seldom pose a di-
rect military threat to national security. Consequently, the economic
development of Third World societies is still not considered a priority
goal of U.S. foreign policy.

Authority for the major development assistance programs—bilat-
eral, multilateral, and food aid—is dispersed among diverse Federal
bureaucracies, many of which do not have development as their pri-
mary concern. There is no voice within the U.S. Government inde-

World Hunger and Food Policy
pendent or powerful enough to defend long-term economic devel-
opment goals against competing short-term political or military
objectives. Hence, the relatively low priority accorded to the elimina-
tion of hunger and poverty overseas not only reflects, but also is per-
petuated by the existing institutional governing structure.
The Commission is convinced, however, that raising living stand-
ards in developing countries is central to long-range U.S. political and
economic interests as well as to a just world order, and that develop-
ment assistance can play a more powerful role than military assistance
in meeting the requirements of U.S. national security. In order to make
credible the United States Government’s commitment to long-term eco-
nomic development and to facilitate the full implementation of that
commitment, clear authority will be required to uphold the goals of de-
velopment assistance within the foreign policymaking process.
The Commission recommends that the Director of the International De-
velopment Cooperation Agency be accorded Cabinet-level status, so that the
objectives of equitable economic development can be more effectively integrated
into U.S. national security policy and planning.

The establishment of the International Development Cooperation
Agency (IDCA) in October 19798 with authority only over the Agency
for International Development (AID), the Institute for Scientific and
Technological Cooperation, and the Overseas Private Investment Cor-
poration (governed by its own Board), represents a step in the right di-
rection but does not, in the Commission’s judgment, go far enough.
The IDCA Director should have Cabinet rank and should have di-
rect access to the President. The Director should also have direct re-
sponsibility for U.S. participation in the multilateral development
banks (still largely under Treasury Department control), U.S. voluntary
contributions to those U.N. agencies still under Department of State
aegis, and P.L. 480 (which at present is only partially within the juris-
diction of IDCA). Moreover, the IDCA Director should also have re-
sponsibility for formulating policy guidelines affecting the conces-
sional lending programs of the International Monetary Fund, as well as
U.S. trade, commodity and investment policies which affect the ability
of Third World nations to carry out their share of the measures recom-
mended in this Report.
2. Levels of United States Development Assistance
As another reflection of the low priority accorded to economic de-
velopment overseas, inadequate funding for official U.S. development
assistance and competing claims upon those funds further undermine

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
this nation’s ability to maximize its potential contribution to elimi-
nating hunger and poverty.

Although the United States is still the world’s largest aid donor in
absolute terms (and is the world’s largest donor of private assistance),
it ranks twelfth behind other Western donors of Official Development
Assistance (ODA) in percentage of Gross National Product (GNP). The
United States defines ODA as including the bilateral programs (AID
development assistance and economic support funds, food aid, and the
work of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and Peace
Corps), U.S. contributions to international financial institutions, and
U.S. contributions to international organizations. At the peak of the
Marshall Plan to rehabilitate post-war Europe, America’s ODA came to
to 0. percent of GNP, or less than a tenth of its earlier level.
These reductions have the most adverse impacts on the very
poorest (“food priority”) developing countries, which depend on
grants or highly concessional aid for 80 percent of their development
capital.

U.S. educational, scientific and technical institutions constitute a
unique resource for global development efforts. However, budget cuts
prevent AID from taking full advantage of these facilities. AID’s insti-
tutional capacity to deliver high quality technical assistance has been
allowed to deteriorate dramatically, due to a shift to outside contractors
and because the Agency has not dramatically shifted the composition
of its personnel to implement the New Directions strategy. Although 60
percent of its development assistance program funds are for rural de-
velopment, food and nutrition, only a small percentage of the Agency’s
own staff is expert in these fields.

Moreover, research in the physical, biological and social sciences
as related to development is seriously underfunded. While the realloca-
tion of existing research funds would help to accelerate the production
of basic food crops in tropical zones, the long-term need is to direct a far
larger share of America’s research capabilities and research budget to
the task of overcoming hunger and poverty in developing nations.
In addition, U.S. development assistance legislation is burdened
with requirements that prohibit assistance to particular nations, or in-
hibit the development of certain industries in developing countries,
even though these restrictions seldom have a development rationale.
These restrictive legislative provisions have especially negative effects
on U.S. participation in the multilateral banks and other international
organizations. In the Commission’s view, measures that allow narrow
domestic economic or political interests to interfere with development
assistance objectives are ultimately counterproductive to the process of
development and an obstacle to the elimination of hunger.

World Hunger and Food Policy
In short, despite ringing rhetoric, legislative mandates and good
intentions among development advocates, too small a percentage of
U.S. resources potentially available in the war against hunger—
whether in the form of capital, knowledge or food itself—actually
serves to increase food consumption among the poor. Therefore, to as-
sure that the United States accepts its fair share of the development
effort:
The Commission recommends that the United States move as rapidly as
possible toward the United Nations’ goal of 0. percent of Gross National
Product as this nation’s net disbursement of concessional economic assistance.
The Commission further recommends that this increase be limited to develop-
ment (not security or military) assistance, targeted selectively at poor nations
strongly committed to meeting basic human needs and rights through self-
reliant development, and that appropriations for this purpose be funded on a
multi-year basis, and “untied” from domestic economic or political interests.
In order to reach the target of 0. percent GNP as quickly as pos-
sible, the Administration must propose a substantial increase in its next
fiscal year submission, with the intent of doubling economic develop-
ment assistance within a few years. The Congress must be prepared to
approve the request for increased funding. The Commission empha-
sizes that the increase must focus on the economic and technical aspects
of development assistance and not on security assistance. Further, the
increased funds must be targeted toward those nations willing to
commit themselves to ending hunger through self-reliant develop-
ment. The Commission believes that U.S. resources should be com-
mitted by using the broad intent of effectiveness criteria—the advance-
ment of human rights and the meeting of basic needs—as overall
guidelines for allocating foreign assistance, and that the bulk of U.S.
funds should be specifically allocated for programs and projects de-
signed to alleviate hunger. Such efforts should reinforce local initia-
tives that promote land reform, wider participation in decision-
making, reduction in population growth rates, and control of damage
to the natural environment.

U.S. assistance should also maximize benefits for development, in-
cluding “untying” U.S. development aid from domestic interests.
Moreover, as long as self-reliant development criteria are used, U.S.
legislation should refrain from imposing limits on the countries or
types of projects for which development assistance funds can be used.
This applies not only to bilateral programs, but also to U.S. develop-
ment funds allocated for international financial institutions and inter-
national organizations. In this context, continued support of such orga-
nizations as the World Bank, the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization and the International Fund for Agricultural Development
is essential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
As the National Academy of Sciences has noted, increased U.S. de-
velopment assistance is badly needed to improve and expand Third
World research and training programs in the physical, biological and
social sciences. Particular attention should be directed at methods of in-
ducing poor farmers to increase production, improving the manage-
ment of water resources, reducing post-harvest losses in the field and
in storage, and developing appropriate technology for small farmers.
Further, the United States should make better use of its wealth of expe-
rience to help developing nations establish effective agricultural exten-
sion services and farmer cooperatives. In this regard, the Commission
is highly supportive of the intent of the Title XII amendment to the For-
eign Assistance Act of 1961, calling on U.S. institutions to devote
greater effort to solving the food and nutrition problems of the devel-
oping countries.
3. Famine Relief and Starvation as an Instrument of War
The Commission recognizes that famines will occur in the years to
come, despite efforts to alleviate world hunger. The international com-
munity must, therefore, maintain mechanisms to deal with unpredict-
able, short-term famine caused by weather, war or human error.
The Commission lauds international efforts in recent years aimed
at improving the mobilization and coordination of international famine
relief. However, the Commission is concerned over the lack of re-
sources available to help disaster-prone nations develop the infrastruc-
ture and contingency plans necessary to mitigate the worst effects of
famine before it occurs. The Commission believes that it is more
cost-effective to invest in pre-disaster planning and prevention assist-
ance than simply to give emergency relief.

The Commission also is concerned that large numbers of indi-
viduals face starvation as the result of war and political decisions, as in
the case of Cambodia. The recent International Conference on Humani-
tarian Law in Armed Conflict adopted two Additional Protocols to the

World Hunger and Food Policy
require parties to the conflict to take various measures to facilitate relief
actions designed to deal with shortages of food and other essential
items among the civilian population. The Commission strongly be-
lieves that the starvation of civilians should be outlawed as a method of
warfare, and that a method should be devised to deal with famine
brought on by armed conflict. Therefore:
The Commission recommends that the United States Senate ratify the
Additional Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Convention, adopted by the Interna-
tional Conference on Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflict.
4. Overcoming Domestic Hunger and Malnutrition Through Federal
Programs
Recent findings indicate that there have been dramatic improve-
ments in the nutrition of low-income citizens since the introduction of
the Food Stamp; School Lunch; School Breakfast; Women, Infants and
Children (WIC); Elderly Feeding; and Expanded Food and Nutrition
Education Programs. Yet, lack of consistent nutritional information,
inflation, and the rising real cost of food threaten these advances and
others expected from wider access to these nutrition-support pro-
grams. Further, information on the nutritional status of American cit-
izens is surprisingly sparse for all economic brackets, especially
high-risk populations. Because the Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey is a national effort, it does not disclose the full magnitude of the
malnutrition problems for the elderly, the poor, migrant workers, or
Native Americans. Although various Federal agencies gather supple-
mentary data, there is no single coordination point in the United States
Government to compile and analyze this information. Accordingly:
The Commission recommends that increased resources be provided to
those domestic hunger programs which have a demonstrated record of success,
and that a systematic effort to assess the nutritional status of Americans be
undertaken.

Congress and the Department of Agriculture will have to take
steps to assure that food assistance programs, particularly food stamps,
respond to increases in inflation and unemployment. When food prices
rise, food stamp allotments diminish in value. The Food Stamp Act cur-
rently requires that allotments be adjusted semi-annually in accordance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
with changes in food prices. Even this provision is not entirely ade-
quate, as allotments are always 4–10 months out of date. Since food
prices are subject to especially volatile shifts (as in 1973 when prices
rose 22 percent in one year) a method to ensure prompt adjustment of
food stamp allotments is essential. This will require Congressional ac-
tion to assure necessary funding when required and flexible adminis-
trative arrangements to facilitate such adjustments promptly.
The WIC program reaches only a small percentage of those eli-
gible. The major problem is inadequate funding for expansion to reach
all potential participants. Those who have participated have shown sig-
nificant nutritional improvement; however, WIC is not an open-ended
entitlement program. It can serve only as many people as its funding
permits. The Commission urges the Congress to assure that the legisla-
tive and financial support needed is available.

Finally, the Commission notes that existing Federal programs,
however successful, do not address the primary causes of domestic un-
dernutrition which, like its parallel in developing countries, is poverty.
More far-ranging efforts will be necessary to assure adequate income
and equity so that the basic human needs of all American citizens can
be met.

D. Conclusion
By presenting its conclusions and initial recommendations in this
preliminary report, the Commission wishes to emphasize the urgency
of the world hunger problem and the necessity to begin actions di-
rected towards the solution of that problem. Later recommendations
and analysis will reinforce this view. However, action is required now
and the Commission believes these findings can help to start that
process.
into law on August 31, 1964, authorized a food stamp program (FSP) to provide eligible
households with nutritious foods. Recipients received a coupon allotment and used the
coupons to purchase foodstuffs from retail food establishments approved for participa-
adjustment of allotments to reflect the changes in food prices published by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics in the Department of Labor, beginning with allotments issued from Jan-
uary 1, 1974.

264.

Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of
State
1129. FODAG. For Secretary Vance. From Ambassador Gardner.
Subject: Possible Food Initiative in Conjunction With Economic
Summit.
1. (C—Entire text).
2. The juxtaposition of the recent suspension of grain sales to the
Soviet Union3 and release of the preliminary [report] presents a special
opportunity for action. In the report, the Commission calls for the U.S.
to increase substantially our resource commitment to the world food
problem; the sudden availability of grain could provide the “capital”
for such action. My impression is that, from the wheat being purchased
by the government and other grain already in government hands, as
much as two million tons of wheat could be made available for some
sort of food aid initiative—potentially a $340 million additional finan-
cial commitment to the world hunger problem.
3. Thus, the time seems propitious for a U.S. initiative which
would give impetus to world food security through sponsorship of na-
tional food reserves in key developing countries. Such a proposal
would:
—Demonstrate that the U.S. can use food constructively to help
those of our friends who are needy, rather than just withholding it from
our adversaries who are not; (A food reserve package for Pakistan, for
Confidential; Immediate.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
example, if it could be pulled together, would seem to have particular
appeal at this time.)
—Lay the basis for the President to take a major food initiative on
which international attention could be focused at the Venice Summit,
thus reinforcing his role as a world leader.
—Constitute a political statement that U.S. is committed to doing
more about world hunger.
—Help diminish resistance in our domestic farm community to
continued restrictions on our grain sales to the USSR.
4. In order to get maximum impact from an initiative along the
foregoing lines, I recommend that:
(A) The President announce that use of U.S. grain to improve
world food reserves is under intensive study.

(B) Staff work be undertaken in Washington to ascertain the extent
of resources which could be committed, emergency legislative action
and/or Congressional consultation which might be necessary, and the
mechanics of making grain available. Simultaneously, soundings be
taken both bilaterally and also through international organizations,
particularly through the FAO and World Food Council as to (A) devel-
oping countries’ receptivity, and willingness to take necessary sup-
portive policy action and (B) other donor countries’ willingness to
make financial commitments for necessary associated expenditures,
i.e., infrastructure, shipping, etc.

(C) FAO Committee on Food Security meeting in late March to be
utilized, with consent of FAO Director-General, as forum for further
coalescing national food reserve packages.

(D) If all goes well, President Carter to announce a proposal either
at, or on the eve of the Venice Summit, of a food reserve initiative, to
which the U.S. would make an initial pledge of at least 2 million tons of
grain.
5. I have some further thoughts on how such an initiative could be
orchestrated for maximum effect, and look forward to the opportunity
to explore this idea in greater depth with you during my visit to Wash-
ington, January 20 through 25.

Gardner

265.

Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter
Washington, January 17, 1980
SUBJECT
International Program Uses of Excess Grain
1. Introduction. In your speech announcing the cutback in Soviet
grain purchases, you said that “we will also increase amounts of grain
devoted to the alleviation of hunger in poor countries”. To fulfill this
pledge Cy Vance, Jim Williams, and Tom Ehrlich recommend, as do I,
an increase in PL–480. OMB is opposed.

They also recommend, as do all your advisers, pressing ahead
with our existing proposal to establish the Food Security Reserve, an
earmarked four million ton portion of CCC holdings of wheat, for re-
stricted use in meeting severe food supply shortages under our PL–480
food aid program.

Agriculture recommends, in addition, increasing commercial term
export sales under the CCC credit program.

Memoranda from Vance, Williams, and Ehrlich on the PL–480 pro-
posals and from Williams on the Food Security Reserve and CCC credit
sales proposals are at Tabs A, B, and C, respectively. Jim McIntyre is
submitting an analysis of the budget implications.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
If you approve any of these recommendations, we would like to
announce on Saturday.
2. Food Security Reserve. All of your advisers believe that we should
try to use the present situation to reinforce our previous request to the
Congress to establish the Food Security Reserve. It would not increase
the federal budget. It is a long-sought assurance of US readiness to re-
spond to food crises and to maintain our food aid to needy countries
when there is a short US grain crop. The Reserve will not work to de-
press US wheat prices because releases from it are restricted to situa-
tions of severe shortages.

Establishment of this reserve will not generally be seen as fulfilling
your pledge to “increase amounts of grain devoted to alleviation of
hunger in poor countries”; it would simply assure that we will be able
to meet our minimum food aid commitments, whatever may be agri-
cultural conditions.
3. PL–480. All of the agencies concerned, except OMB, agree that
increased PL–480 food aid should be part of our disposition of the
excess grain. It is important that this not be seen as reversion to the dis-
carded policies of using PL–480 as a dumping ground; therefore the in-
crement should be limited to clear cases of need, especially humani-
tarian programs and food imports that will not displace domestic
production in developing countries. In order to avoid displacing grain
exports by other countries whose cooperation we need in imple-
menting the Soviet embargo, the increase in PL–480 should not radi-
crease should be largely in food other than wheat, because wheat is the
primary grain export of these other countries.

I believe that the 800,000 ton add-on proposed by the agencies,
which would get us back to the recent level of 6. million tons, meets
these criteria. Most of it is corn. Such an expanded program can be
managed without sacrificing the PL–480 emphasis on development
that you have directed. It is true that sizeable PL–480 reserves already
are planned, but these reserves are for unforeseen emergencies, not for
programmed needs such as proposed by the agencies.

The agencies illustrate the possible uses of this additional 800,000
specific possible Title I and II FY 1980 and 1981 programs; they also
suggest an FY 1981 effort to help LDCs build up national stocks, which
I believe makes good sense.

The agencies’ attached memorandum lists two other options
which none of them recommends: PL–480 aid for Israel, which would
table oil for Pakistan. Shipments for overseas food stocks in FY 1981
would also meet the additionality test. Thus, the real cost of 800,000 ad-
ditional tons would be very small—perhaps $50–$75 million annually;
the rest of the nominal cost would be offset by reduced CCC outlays.
Unfortunately, OMB concludes that it cannot show an offsetting reduc-
tion in the CCC outlays and therefore must score 100% of any PL–480
increase as an additional overall budget outlay. This means that the
course recommended by the agencies would add nominally $150 mil-
These budgetary constraints, plus the desirability of minimizing
use of wheat, suggest an additional option below the agencies’ recom-
mendation, that is, an increase of $100 million in FY 1980 and the same
tons). Another reason for this more modest option is to avoid over-
loading the international affairs account, thus prejudicing rapid Con-
gressional action on foreign aid, including Pakistan. This is my recom-
mendation and Bob Beckel’s.
4. CCC Export Credits. Some of the same international consider-
ations apply to expanding CCC credit sales as to PL–480. Budget
analysis of USDA’s options here is more complex. From a foreign
policy perspective, the USDA proposal contains assurances that avoid
serious disadvantages. Your decision on this can be based on other
considerations.

Recommendations
1. Food Security Reserve
That you reiterate your strong support for this long-standing Ad-
ministration proposal and seek its early enactment. Suggested by all
the agencies concerned.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2. PL–480. OMB disapproves of the recommendations below.
a. That you approve an increase of approximately 450,000 tons,
indicated in the State–IDCA–USDA memorandum, with priority
for programs likely to increase US grain exports. (This is my
recommendation.)

Alternative: That you approve the State–USDA–IDCA proposal to
This, too, would use commodities other than wheat, where possible.
b. That you approve an increase of approximately 450,000 tons,
those indicated in the State-USDA-IDCA memorandum, with priority
for the emergency feeding program and the building of stocks in devel-
oping nations if feasible stocking programs can be arranged. (This is
my recommendation.)

Alternative: That you increase the FY 1981 program by 800,000 tons,
$200 million, as proposed by State–USDA–IDCA.
c. That you not now pass on the allocation of PL–480 among spe-
cific countries, but require that all such proposed allocations be re-
viewed by the Executive Office (OMB, NSC, and me), with any differ-
ences of view being brought to you, if necessary, for resolution then.
3. CCC Credit Sales
a. Continue with current CCC credit program for FY 1980 as
planned. (Recommended by OMB.
b. Provide additional direct CCC financing for additional exports
to Korea and selected other countries: $150 million. (Recommended by
Agriculture and opposed by OMB.)
c. Be prepared to offer additional direct credit for financing of ad-
ditional corn exports to China if this turns out to be necessary to con-
summate additional sales: $240 million. (Recommended by Agriculture
and opposed by OMB.)

266.

Report Prepared by the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger
Washington, undated
[Omitted here are a title page and an introductory note.]
Recommendations for U.S. Actions to Help Alleviate Starvation and
Malnutrition among Victims of the Kampuchean Famine
Long-term Arrangements and U.S. Organization
Most experts agree that substantial international relief will be
needed in Kampuchea at least through 1981, if hundreds of thousands
of people are not to die. Such a long-term effort must be authorized,
funded, and organized as quickly as possible. Current U.S. Govern-
ment funding for the relief effort will suffice only until Spring of 1980.
Also, should further military action occur on a major scale, the diffi-
culties of dealing with famine and refugees will greatly increase, both
in Kampuchea and Thailand.

Even at the present time, international relief organizations are
finding great difficulty in maintaining cash flow. Any steps taken by
the United States to make funds available quickly and to convince other
classification marking. Mayer, serving as acting Chairman, transmitted the report to the
President under a January 25 covering letter, indicating that the Commission “shall con-
tinue to monitor this situation on your behalf and we hope that our recommendations at
this time are helpful.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
nations to “cash in” their pledges would be of critical assistance to the
relief effort. Also, plans for a new pledging conference5 to continue the
effort into 1981 must be finalized quickly, and any attempt by the
United Nations to call such a conference should be supported by the
United States.

The Commission cautions the international community that the re-
lief effort itself can have a destabilizing effect on Kampuchea. As the
feeding system along the Thailand border becomes more efficient, it
tends to draw people within Kampuchea toward the border and may
even encourage them to cross the border as refugees. Certainly the
preference is to reach the hungry within Kampuchea and not add to the
refugee problem.

With regard to current efforts in Thailand and Kampuchea to help
refugees and other victims, it appears that the arrangements for de-
livery of relief as assistance are adequate, but the implementation of ac-
tual distribution of food has been ineffective in some cases. The con-
cept of reliance on international agencies7 to operate the bulk of the
programs and to facilitate and coordinate the efforts of non-
Government agencies seems the best approach. Logistical arrange-
ments, while periodically exhibiting great difficulties, particularly in
Kampuchea, seem adequate. The food supply pipeline is in good order
for the short run, and substantial quantities of food are being delivered
into Kampuchea or to nearby points along the border from which they
can be moved readily, once the distribution bottlenecks within Kampu-
chea have been resolved.

To date, food distribution within Kampuchea has not been effec-
tive, and the World Food Programme has slowed down shipments for
that reason. Infrastructure requirements, including transportation and
handling facilities, must be improved and augmented. Coordination of
the international relief effort is difficult almost by definition because of
the large number of organizations involved and the movement of ref-
ugees. The arrangements for international coordination seem appro-
priate, however, and are working well under the circumstances.
Arrangements for internal coordination within the U.S. Govern-
ment and among private agencies, however, are only partially suc-
cessful and the clear designation of a single individual as the primary

World Hunger and Food Policy
focal point for coordination of U.S. Government actions would be
helpful.

Therefore, the Commission recommends that the President designate one
individual as the primary focal point for coordination of all Kampuchean
assistance flowing from the United States.

While the Commission considers the designation of one individual
to coordinate relief efforts as crucial, it is also mindful of the need for
efforts to facilitate funding and organizational arrangements through
international agencies at least through 1981, for continuing sensitivity
to the cash flow problems of international agencies, for efforts to facili-
tate coordination arrangements between the United States and the in-
ternational groups, and for advocating even-handed treatment of the
victims of famine, regardless of the political faction they represent.
Public Perception Issues
The willingness of the American people to help the Kampucheans
is evident at the present time. But the assistance effort will be a long
one, and there is real concern that public interest in the Kampuchean
famine will wane. Public funds could then cease to flow as needed.
News stories outlining alleged misuse of funds in the relief effort
further erode public support for Kampuchean assistance. There is hard
evidence that bad publicity about the international effort reduces
public giving through private voluntary agencies. It is likely that there
will be little support for Government spending as well, if news stories
from Thailand and Kampuchea reflect only mismanagement and a
sense of hopelessness in dealing with the problem.

A major criticism of the Thailand operation has been that many of
the hungry along the border and in the refugee camps are Pol Pot sup-
porters. Critics claim, therefore, that the relief effort favors one faction
over another, and that the favored faction is led by a ruthless dictator.
The Commission is convinced that in this case, the facts of geography
and movement of military forces, and not the design of international
agencies or the U.S. Government, have determined who has access to
food supplies. The international agencies feed hungry people, re-
gardless of their political persuasion, and are distributing food to any

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and all they can reach. When food can be distributed within Kampu-
chea, there too it will go to hungry people, regardless of their political
affiliation.

The Commission cautions that statements by the U.S. Government
can also have the effect of reducing public interest in helping Kampu-
cheans. For example, statements alleging a lack of support from other
governments tend to divert public attention from the crucial need of
famine victims and from the success stories of food distribution.
The seizure of American hostages in Iran has also diverted atten-
tion away from the famine in Kampuchea, but more importantly, it
could dampen the public willingness to provide assistance for any de-
veloping nation for some time to come. The public tends to lump devel-
oping nations together and see the antagonistic actions of one as indica-
tive of all. Many Americans are now questioning whether the United
States should bother to help poorer nations, when they may respond by
capturing U.S. citizens and denouncing the U.S. Government. The U.S.
mood to turn inward has certainly been expressed to Members of
Congress during the Congressional recess, and may be reflected in
Congressional action, or inaction, during the coming session.
On these and other issues, the Commission recommends that the Presi-
dent assure that the American public is frequently informed about what is hap-
pening in Kampuchea and Thailand, and that the information include the good
being accomplished as well as the problems involved in a relief effort of this
size.

Congressional action
The Commission believes that the U.S. Congress should take sev-
eral immediate actions relevant to the Kampuchean assistance effort
and that the Administration should support those Congressional
actions.

The Commission recommends that the Congress immediately undertake
joint oversight hearings by both the House and Senate on the Kampuchean re-
lief effort.

World Hunger and Food Policy
With the changing conditions in Indochina, the Commission be-
lieves that it is essential to clarify U.S. policy toward Kampuchea and
neighboring states. This information, as well as details of the relief ef-
fort, should be requested in Congressional hearings. The Commission
also stands ready to provide information or witnesses for such
hearings.

The Commission recommends that the Congress draw out of the Foreign
Assistance bill the $30 million appropriation for relief of victims of the Kampu-
chean famine and immediately appropriate those funds.

The Foreign Assistance bill appears to be stalled at the present
time, for reasons unrelated to Kampuchea. Yet, time is of the essence
and the lives of thousands depend on the availability of the $30 million
for relief assistance. Some of these crucial funds have already been
spent from authorized borrowings from other programs. Continued
delay could also cause serious problems for those programs from
which borrowings have been made.

Currently, estimates of U.S. contributions to the international relief
effort for Kampuchea total approximately $106 million, or about
one-third the United Nations appeal for $311 million. Of the U.N. total,
about $251 million is intended for ICRC/UNICEF relief of hungry
Kampucheans, primarily located in Kampuchea, and about $60 million
for UNHCR activities with refugees in Thailand. The U.S. share of the
relief funds is intended to be divided between the two areas, in approx-
imately the same proportion. In practice, of course, the distinction be-
tween relief areas is not that clear. ICRC/UNICEF is financing some ac-
tivities in Thailand. Imported food aid is being distributed on both
sides of the Thai-Kampuchean border, although most of the food being
distributed in Thailand is purchased in that country. The Commission
recognizes the difficulties involved in the relief effort but strongly
urges that every effort be made to distribute the food where the
greatest need for it exists.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The $106 million pledged by the United States includes the
following:
$25 million P.L. 480, Title II food commodities
5 million cash grant to ICRC/UNICEF for start-up costs
15 million UNHRC
30 million new funds, not yet appropriated
30 million reprogramming authority in Foreign Assistance bill
In addition, another $925,000 has been granted to ICRC and Cath-
olic Relief Services from fiscal year 1979 funds.

It is important to restate that the funds now available are not new
money made available for relief. The funds will have to come out of
other assistance programs, unless new appropriations are enacted.
Similarly, one should note that even with the recent supplemental
appropriation of $50 million for the Food for Peace program, Title II is
still underfunded in terms of the 1. million tons mandated by the
Congress. If the Kampuchean assistance must come from the regular
Title II program, then another $46 million are needed to meet the man-
date. If the Kampuchean assistance is a special additional program,
then another $73 million are needed.

The Commission therefore recommends that the Congress enact the re-
maining supplemental appropriation for Title II of P.L. 480.
P.L. 480 is not tied to the Foreign Assistance bill, but rather is com-
plicated by its relation to domestic farm legislation. That legislation sets
a budget cap for Title I and Title II of P.L. 480. The cap has been calcu-
lated to be about $98 million short of sufficient funds at present prices
to provide the 1. million tons of food mandated in legislation. The
dollar shortage totals $123 million if the Kampuchean effort is a special
program instead of part of the general program. The recent supple-
mental appropriation bill provided $50 million of the needed funds.
The remaining funds could be provided through the additional supple-
mental appropriation and by removing the caps from Title I and Title
II and allowing the Administration to shift funds between programs.
As has been stated, the Kampuchean relief assistance taken from
present programs means that other deserving Title II programs will
have to be drastically reduced. It also places a strain on funds that
may be needed for other purposes, such as aiding refugees from
Afghanistan.
above), also encouraged the Commission members to lobby Congress to enact the re-
maining P.L. 480 Title II supplemental. (Ibid.)

World Hunger and Food Policy
The reprogramming authority for $30 million may or may not
become a matter for Congressional action, depending on the deter-
mination within the Administration as to whether funds can be made
available from the general Foreign Assistance appropriation. If such
funds cannot be made available from the general appropriation,
then the issue of additional money must be considered along with
other aspects of the long-term Kampuchean relief effort discussed
earlier.

Time is of the essence in dealing with these Congressional con-
cerns, and yet, from the Congress’ point of view, this may not seem a
good time for action. Committee chairmen are reluctant to report any
more supplemental appropriation bills until they examine the Presi-
dent’s budget proposal for 1981. Although sufficient borrowing au-
thority exists to permit the Kampuchean effort to proceed through Jan-
uary, each day’s delay in authorizing funds specifically for Kampuchea
limits the programs from which borrowings must be made.
Finally it should be noted that the international pledging confer-
ence for Kampuchean aid was based on eight months’ funding for
UNHCR and one year for ICRC/UNICEF. There is now considerable
question as to whether the $311 million in pledged funds, even if fully
subscribed, will last that long. The present U.S. arrangements for Kam-
puchean food relief were based only on six months of operation, or
through April 1980. The time for planning, funding, and implementing
programs to be needed after April is becoming short.

Political and Diplomatic Actions
The crux of the solution to the famine in Kampuchea appears to be
Vietnam, in both the short and long-term perspective. It seems unlikely
that the Kampuchean issue can be resolved satisfactorily until Vietnam
is accepted into the community of nations and persuaded to act as a re-
sponsible member of the world community. Given the history of South-
east Asia and the fact that a war is in progress, this may be difficult to
achieve in time to avert starvation for hundreds of thousands of
Kampucheans.

Increased U.S. unilateral arrangements with the Vietnamese
should be explored as one method to reach a solution to the famine. If
better understanding could develop, a short-term benefit would be to
facilitate the entire Kampuchean relief effort. In the long term, a return
to formal diplomatic relations could allow the United States to exert
more influence in Indochina, and would provide the United States with
a better listening post for local conditions.

For these reasons, the Commission recommends that the President ac-
tively explore improved official relationships with the Vietnamese Govern-
ment, particularly through those countries which now have a more effective re-

267.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Special Representative for Economic Summits
(Owen)
Washington, January 28, 1980
Subject
Presidential Push on War on Hunger
I like your idea of proposing to the President a meeting with reli-
gious leaders on a campaign against hunger.

World Hunger and Food Policy
Such a meeting might be linked to a Presidential signing ceremony
of a new Food Aid Convention. If, as we hope, final negotiations are
concluded around March 6, the “window” for signing now under dis-
be to schedule the meeting to coincide with the formal presentation of
the Hunger Commission’s final report, now expected at the end of Feb-
ruary. However, the report’s recommendations will be considerably
more ambitious than our current program planning. We will not want
to give the impression that the President is making a commitment to
these religious leaders to support all the report’s proposals.
One reason for scheduling such a meeting for late in April would
be the hope that by then the hostage situation will be resolved. It is dif-
ficult at this time to gain much public interest in non-Iran/Afghanistan
issues.

I would add one cautionary note. We must be careful not to imply
that current augmented PL 480 levels necessarily indicate a new “floor”
for US food assistance. Until the suspension of grain sales to the Soviet
Union, we had intended to hold our PL 480 export volume to the 1979
level in FY 80 and 81. Should commercial grain sales return to normal,
and the refugee situation not improve, we might find ourselves in the
position by FY 82 of cutting back current PL 480 Title I assistance to
keep Title II programs at the new levels.

Anthony Lake

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

268.

Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter
Washington, February 8, 1980
SUBJECT
War on Hunger
Here is an idea for a presidential initiative in the war on hunger
that would appeal to several important constituencies, cost no new
money, fulfill your promise to the Hunger Commission, and give sup-
port to the aid bill and food security reserve bill on their way through
the Congress:
You could use the occasion of your signing the new International

269.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Italy
50382. Subject: Possible Food Initiative for Economic Summit. Ref:
1. Your proposal for a food security initiative at the Venice Summit
has been received with great interest. Current administration initiatives
capture the essence although not the details of your suggestion that the
US direct a portion of the grain freed by the suspension of sales to the
Soviet Union to food aid and food security purposes.

Confidential; Priority. Sent for Gardner from Cooper. Drafted by Kolar; cleared by
Hinton, Hathaway, Bronheim, Joel Johnson, Maynes, Poats, Raymond Hill, and Seitz; ap-
proved by Cooper.

“dramatic food security initiative.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800089–0764)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2. The administration is pressing for enactment of legislation
creating a 4 million ton food security reserve. The reserve would back-
stop our 4. million ton annual food assistance pledge under the new
Food Aid Convention5 and would be stocked almost entirely by the
wheat intended for sale to the Soviet Union. To be used solely for food
aid purposes, the reserve would be drawn upon when existing supply
does not allow us to honor our food aid commitments. The existence of
this reserve will prevent the recurrence of situations such as the early
1970s when crop shortfalls reduced our food aid programs. The pas-
sage of this legislation is by no means assured and prospects for its pas-
sage would be diminished by discussion at this time about future uses
for the food security reserve other than that in the proposed bill.
3. In addition, the President has approved a dollar 100 million sup-
aid amounting to about 450,000 tons equivalent in each year, will
largely be programmed for humanitarian and refugee purposes and
will be composed of grain made available by the suspension of agricul-
tural trade with the USSR. Some of the FY 81 supplemental food aid
may be available as incremental stocks for soundly conceived food
storage projects in LDCs.
4. While the Venice Summit agenda is pending future discussion
with our Summit partners, internal preparations include measures
bearing on world food security which contain elements of your sug-
gested initiative. Under consideration are an expression of intention by
the Summit members to establish food aid reserves and an affirmation
of support for proposed World Bank investment of dollars 1 billion in
the 1980’s to expand the food storage and distribution capacity of the
poorest developing countries.
5. Donor held food aid reserves would isolate internationally com-
mitted food aid stocks from the market and assure the ability of donors
to meet their food aid commitments even during global crop shortfalls.
The IBRD-financed LDC storage program would alleviate a funda-
mental food security problem of lack of indigenous food storage ca-
pacity that was identified by the developing countries during the nego-
tiations for a new International Wheat Agreement. Donor held food aid
reserves and enhanced LDC storage capacity may create a basis for
overcoming some of the obstacles to a viable international food reserve
system.
260.

270.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
Food and Agriculture
Events of the past year have heightened international awareness of
the precarious food situation faced by some of the poorest countries.
Growing food shortages and attendant malnutrition will threaten
many of these countries in the 1980s unless actions are taken to enhance
their capacity to supply and distribute adequate food.

In Tokyo, the Summit countries called for increased emphasis on
measures to overcome hunger and malnutrition in the developing
countries. Summit participants at Venice should reiterate their concern
about the continued existence of hunger in the world and pledge their
support for concrete initiatives to realize the objectives of the Tokyo
Summit.

Initiatives
LDC Food Storage and Distribution
The problem of providing continuous and adequate nutrition
within developing countries is affected more by seasonal and annual
variations in national food production than by fluctuations in interna-
tional food prices. Adequate storage is essential to provide an uninter-
rupted flow of food to consumers. Storage facilities enable farmers to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
hold stocks for local marketing and protect perishable crop production
inputs such as feed and fertilizer. Storage in isolated rural areas pro-
vides a measure of security when local harvests fail. National storage
capacity allows countries that rely on the international market to im-
port basic foodstuffs when prices are low.

The types of facilities for which there is a growing need as people
in developing countries move out of subsistence farming and begin to
rely on purchased food include: village market facilities, financial ar-
rangements for holding stocks, grain drying, cleaning and processing
centers, transport systems, central storage and milling facilities, outlets
for consumers and port facilities for export or import. The amount of
food which developing countries’ food distribution systems will have
to carry is projected to increase from 250 million tons in 1978 to roughly
400 million tons by 1990.

Between 1980–85 the World Bank proposes a substantial invest-
ment program to assist the poorest developing countries meet their
growing food distribution infrastructure requirements. This program
will increase by 20–25 million tons the capacity of these governments to
assure access to food by the neediest.

The Summit members should endorse the proposed IBRD invest-
ment program to enhance the ability of the low-income developing
countries to distribute a continuing flow of food to their poorest con-
sumers. To accelerate the rate of investment, the Summit countries
should commit their bilateral aid agencies to give priority consider-
ation to specific IBRD requests for co-financing and technical assistance
in projects designed to improve the food storage and distribution ca-
pacity of low-income countries. The Summit should urge other bilateral
and multilateral donors to extend similar co-financing support to this
significant investment in LDC food security.

Food Aid
Enhanced national food supply and distribution systems are es-
sential to providing food security for the poorest developing countries,
but many of these countries will continue to face rising food import
needs beyond their capacity to pay. The Summit countries recognize
this problem and have completed the new Food Aid Convention (FAC)
to establish a higher floor for cereal food aid commitments. While
pledges of 7. million tons under the new FAC are significantly higher
than the previous Convention, they fall short of the international com-
munity’s target of 10 million tons. The Venice Summit should strongly
urge new donors, particularly the OPEC countries, to join the new FAC
in order to achieve the international goal.

The Summit countries could announce their intention to ensure
their ability to meet their food aid commitments under the new FAC by

World Hunger and Food Policy
establishing food aid reserves. These reserves would approach the
magnitude of their FAC pledges and would insulate minimum food
assistance commitments from the commercial market. The food re-
serves would be released for use in non-commercial markets when in-
ternational grain market supplies are short and prices are high. The ex-
istence of these reserves would guard against the recurrence of
situations such as the early 1970s when food aid levels were reduced
because of short supply.

Food Production
Given finite land and water resources, significant production in-
creases in the poor, food deficit countries will depend on the applica-
tion of usable technology by small farmers.

The Summit countries should note that donors have agreed to
double the resources of the agricultural research centers supported by
the Consultative Group on Agricultural Research (CGIAR). However
the transferral of the technology developed by the CGIAR centers to
small farmers requires strong national research institutions. These in-
stitutions must have the capability to adapt technology to local
growing conditions and disseminate it to agricultural producers. The
Summit countries should endorse a special meeting of donors of the
CGIAR to explore the requirements for enhancing LDC indigenous re-
search institutions.

To assist the organization of food production and consumption ef-
forts, the Summit countries have supported the development of food
sector strategies by developing countries. The Summit members
should reemphasize their commitment to effective food sector strat-
egies and urge the multilateral development banks to take the lead in
providing and organizing external assistance efforts to support the
elaboration of food strategies.
eign Economic Policy.

271.

Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter
Washington, March 10, 1980
SUBJECT
Leadership in the War on Hunger
1. Sol Linowitz advised (Tab B) that the Hunger Commission’s
final report will be ready in late March. I suggest that you reply (Tab
A) stating your desire to receive the report at an East Room meeting
designed to energize international efforts to free the poorest nations
from the threat of mass hunger. Congressional, civic, and religious
leaders would attend the meeting, where you would demonstrate to
several important constituencies that your interest in relieving human
suffering has not been submerged by current budgetary and security
crises.
2. You could, at this convocation:
—sign the new international Food Aid Convention, putting a floor
under food aid programs (at no additional cost to the US budget); the
Convention should be completed at final negotiations in London next
week;
—ask the Congress to speed enactment of your Food Security Re-
serve and PL–480 bills, (at no increase in our budgetary outlays);
—call on other countries to parallel this US contribution toward
creating nationally held grain resources dedicated to meeting food
needs of the low income countries in emergencies;
—endorse, in general terms, the food policy recommendations of
the Hunger Commission report—that is, champion a strategy of con-
centrating international development aid on measures to free poor
World Hunger and Food Policy
people of the lowest income nations from the scourge of malnutrition
(we will refine this strategy while assuring that it can be achieved
within reduced FY 1981 US budgets for development aid);
—cite the steps we are already taking or supporting to increase
food production in developing nations, i.e., our contributions to the
multilateral agricultural research centers and to development bank
lending for agriculture; innovative AID food and nutrition programs;
launching ISTC with priority on agricultural research; and reservation
of some PL–480 food for emergency stocks in vulnerable poor coun-
tries; and
—ask the assembled Hunger Commission members, religious and
civil leaders and members of Congress to support this campaign; and
appeal to the voluntary agencies for increased efforts in the poorest
countries.
3. Such a meeting would lay a basis for our seeking international
action along these lines at the Venice Economic Summit, if you wished
to do so.
4. If you approve of the meeting described in paragraph 1, I will
propose a list of attendees and alternative dates about the end of
March.
5. OMB, State, Agriculture, and IDCA concur in the above.
Recommendations:
1. That you sign the letter to Sol Linowitz at Tab A.
2. That you authorize preparation for the meeting, including sub-
mission to you of alternative dates and a proposed list of attendees.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

272.

Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter
Washington, April 24, 1980
SUBJECT
Your Response to the Report of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger
You received with my memorandum of March 26 an advance copy
of the Hunger Commission’s final report. It was not possible to
schedule the meeting with you that I mentioned in that memorandum,
so Sol has decided to release the report on Saturday, April 26, for publi-
cation Sunday. This release should be accompanied by a presidential
statement of appreciation, coupled with your issuance of instructions
for Executive Branch review of the Commission’s proposals and sub-
mission of recommendations and other views for your decision.

273.

Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter

274.

Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter
Washington, June 19, 1980
SUBJECT
Rome-Venice Initiative and Statement on World Hunger
Here is a late entry agenda suggestion for your meeting with the
Pope.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

275.

Memorandum From Secretary of Agriculture Bergland to
President Carter
Washington, July 16, 1980
SUBJECT
East African Food Shortages
Emerging drought problems and growing numbers of refugees are
adding to already serious food shortage problems in East Africa. The
purpose of this memorandum is to alert you to this problem since it is
becoming a serious international concern.

I am enclosing a brief USDA assessment of the East Africa food sit-
uation. Given the limited amount and poor quality of data on these
countries our current assessment is very tentative. However, there are
several conclusions and implications that can be drawn at this time.
During the July 1980–June 1981 period, the eight countries in the
East African area (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Mozambique, Somalia,
lion metric tons of cereal imports over and above the relatively high im-
port levels of approximately 1. million metric tons for the previous
twelve months. A substantial portion of these increased imports will be
concentrated in Ethiopia and Somalia to primarily meet refugee needs.
These two countries account for about two-thirds of the increased im-
port requirements to the region.

Out of the 1. million metric tons imported by these eight countries
during the last twelve months, approximately half was made available
as food aid. The U.S. has supplied over one-third of the total—most of it
as P.L. 480 on either concessional terms under Title I or as food dona-
tions under Title II totaling 588,000 metric tons (excluding the recent
supplemental).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The recent appropriation of the P.L. 480 budget supplemental3 has
greatly enhanced our ability to meet emergency needs as well as pro-
gram commitments worldwide and in Africa in particular. Current
projections indicate that the U.S. will be able to provide an additional
150,000 metric tons of food to most of the eight East African countries.
If Congress takes favorable action on the amended FY 1981 P.L.
480 budget you submitted earlier this year, the U.S. would be in a posi-
tion next fiscal year to provide approximately 200–300,000 metric tons
of P.L. 480 assistance beyond the FY 1980 level (excluding the supple-
mental). Thus, together with the 150,000 metric tons provided by the
FY 1980 supplemental, the U.S. would be able to commit a total of
350–450,000 metric tons of additional food towards meeting the pro-
next twelve months.

276.

Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to Secretary of State Muskie
Washington, August 4, 1980
SUBJECT
US Initiative to Relieve African Famine
An extraordinary international effort is needed to avert extensive
starvation in drought-afflicted parts of Africa and to continue aid to
East African refugees. This memorandum proposes a US initiative to
this end, which has been cleared in State, IDCA, AID, USDA, OMB and
NSC. The announcement of this initiative could be made by the Presi-
dent or you; Jack Watson, Al McDonald and Phil Wise recommend that
you should be the spokesman. If you agree, I hope that you will autho-
rize State to issue the announcement at Tab A2 and to take necessary
follow-up action.

Background
Drought is threatening to ruin a second successive growing season
in almost all of Eastern Africa and in parts of Western Africa. The pros-
pect is for widespread famine among millions of Africans whose
normal lot is malnutrition. This tragedy is likely to dominate the news
from Africa this Fall and to induce popular concern by religious and
charitable organizations and friends of Africa in the United States.
USDA now estimates that the East African countries face an ab-
can cope with only part of this estimated need: about 150,000 tons from
pending FY 81 appropriation, in addition to previously planned food
aid to these countries. Other donors, including rich OPEC countries as
well as Europe, Japan and Canada, must be enlisted to provide the
balance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
We have explored with Director General Saouma of the UN Food
and Agriculture Organization and other food aid donors the idea of
Saouma’s calling an emergency conference to start organizing a coordi-
nated aid program. Their responses encourage us to proceed. The
emergency conference would also help to broaden international partic-
ipation in relief for Eastern African refugees next year. International aid
pledges have met their minimum food needs this calendar year, but
continuing drought will strain both local and global resources for ref-
ugee feeding next year.

Your announcement that the US is asking Saouma to call this con-
ference would serve to give it wide public notice and would foreclose
possible domestic criticism of indifference to a serious humanitarian
problem.

Recommendation
That you announce that the US Government is asking the FAO to
convene an emergency meeting of countries and international agencies
interested in jointly providing food and other relief to millions of Af-
ricans facing famine in drought-afflicted countries, and authorize nec-
essary follow-up action by the appropriate State Department staff.
(State, Agriculture, IDCA, AID, OMB and NSC concur.)

(Sari Gilbert, “U.S., 8 Others Pledge Emergency Food Aid to Africa, The Washington Post,

277.

Memorandum From the Acting Director of the International
Development Cooperation Agency (Erb) to President Carter
Washington, August 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Hunger Commission Report
As you directed, IDCA has led an interagency review of interna-
tional actions recommended by the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger. A preliminary report3 on this review was submitted to you be-
fore the Venice Summit. The attached memorandum summarizes the
interagency conclusions.

Based on the review, Tom Ehrlich and I believe that the two most
important steps to further the Commission’s work are these:
1. Development Assistance—We will propose in our 1982 budget
submission a strategy to focus increased attention and resources, not
only on meeting world hunger as the first priority, but also on targeting
agricultural development assistance where it can be used with max-
imum effectiveness and efficiency, as the Hunger Commission
proposes.

This strategy will be consistent with the Hunger Commission’s
finding that to relieve world hunger and malnutrition we must attack
world poverty and build effective demand for food as well as in-
creasing food production and supply. A key element of this strategy
will be assisting developing countries to increase food production. It
will also include complementary efforts in energy and health/family
planning which will permit us to address the broader poverty issue.
2. Public Education—As the Commission recommends, increased
public attention must be focused on the importance of the United
States’ cooperation with developing nations generally and on hunger
particularly. We are involved in a number of efforts on this front. We
hope you will assign that matter a high priority. Your personal leader-
ship will be essential.

Tom Ehrlich has met with Ambassador Linowitz and other
members of the Commission and we will work with them in the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
months ahead to assure that maximum advantage is taken of the Com-
mission’s Report.

Guy F. Erb
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the International Development
Cooperation Agency
Washington, April 15, 1980
INTER-AGENCY REVIEW
OF
THE HUNGER COMMISSION REPORT
REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT
The central recommendation of the Commission is that “the
United States make the elimination of hunger the primary focus of its
relationships with the developing countries, beginning with the decade
of the 1980s.” The Commission concludes that the problem of world
hunger is not limited to intermittent or particular geographic crises. It
is, instead, a problem of chronic under-nutrition. The Report finds that
the solution lies in attacking world poverty and in raising the incomes
of poor people throughout the Third World. Thus the Commission
finds a hunger strategy must address, not only food production and se-
curity, but also increased purchasing power for food through employ-
ment and higher income for the world’s poor and more equitable in-
come distribution policies in the Third World. In the Commission’s
words, “a nation’s nutritional needs cannot be effectively addressed in
isolation from broader social and economic programs that increase
overall productivity and the incomes of the poor.”
The interagency review found strong support for the Commis-
sion’s view that world hunger is an integral part of the broader
problem of Third World development and for focusing on the eradica-
tion of hunger through an attack on world poverty as the first priority
concern in terms of United States development cooperation. You have
endorsed those positions on numerous occasions. Under your Admin-
istration, the elimination of hunger is a primary focus of the United
States’ relations with many (though certainly not all) developing coun-
World Hunger and Food Policy
tries, and our partnership efforts with those countries to combat
hunger should expand during your second term.

Public Education—The Commissioners also conclude that a strong
and concerted program to address world hunger requires broadly
based public support in the United States and that a major public edu-
cation effort is needed to gain that support. They recommend, in addi-
tion, that federal laws should be changed in order to permit the use of
federal funds in world hunger-related public education.
We have already taken a number of steps, in association with Anne
Wexler and in coordination with other agencies, to increase our efforts
to educate the public in general, and key private organizations in par-
ticular, of the importance of our economic relations with developing
nations. These steps include establishment of the high level private
sector working group on foreign assistance that you have directed be
formed, an increased emphasis on foreign assistance in public state-
ments by key officials in your Administration, and specific steps to at-
tract the interest of potential new constituencies, such as labor,
business, and the financial community. We hope you will assign the ef-
fort to gain public support a high priority. Your personal leadership
will be essential.

General Analysis—The Commission’s charter was to: define the
causes and scope of the hunger and malnutrition problems domesti-
cally and internationally; evaluate United States programs and policies
affecting domestic hunger and malnutrition; focus public attention on
the problems; recommend actions to reduce hunger and malnutrition;
publicize and assist in implementation of its recommendations. The
Commission did not achieve full consensus in its report. Seven Com-
missioners filed additional statements; four of these expressed disap-
pointment with the Commission’s evaluation of existing U.S. policies
and in the progress made by the Report toward a specific plan for a na-
tional food policy.

Our review found the major strength of the report to be the
analysis of the causes of hunger and malnutrition and the focus on the
urgency of addressing the problem. The recent Global 2000 Report7 is-
sued by the Council on Environmental Quality and the Department of
State provides evidence of the urgency of taking action now if we hope
to reduce the prevalence of malnutrition by the year 2000.
The Commission undertook a difficult task. Having concluded
that the elimination of hunger and malnutrition lies in the eradication
of world poverty, the Commission made recommendations across a
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
broad array of issues—ranging from how to distribute foreign assist-
ance to changes recommended in trade and investment policies. We be-
lieve some areas, which the Commission did not emphasize, should be
stressed in such an effort. For example, the Commission mentions, but
we would stress, the need for health and family planning programs to
accompany food production lest population outstrip gains made by in-
creasing food supply. We also believe attention to energy use and
supply is vital—both to reducing world poverty generally and to food
production. Some agencies believe the Commission should have
stressed more the importance of developing countries’ own domestic
policies on food production and income distribution and the limits to
U.S. ability to affect such policies.

The Development Coordination Committee’s review of the Brandt
Commission Report, on which you will be receiving a memorandum
shortly, reviews the work of your Administration on a range of efforts
to address world poverty. IDCA, in consultation with other agencies, is
preparing a broad strategy for U.S. economic relations with Third
World Countries—one designed to effectively reassert U.S. leadership
in responding to the development needs of Third World countries.
The following is brief summary of: key Hunger Commission rec-
ommendations; interagency reactions to those recommendations; and
information on Administration action thus far.

Development Assistance—One set of recommendations urges in-
creasing development assistance and targeting it to those poor nations
strongly committed to meeting basic human needs and human rights.
These are, we know, your own goals, though budget constraints have
limited your ability to urge the substantial increases in development
assistance that you might otherwise have endorsed. We will propose in
our 1982 budget submission a strategy to focus increased attention and
resources, not only on meeting world hunger as the first priority, but
also on targeting agricultural development assistance where it can be
used with maximum effectiveness and efficiency, as the Hunger Com-
mission proposed. This strategy will be consistent with the Hunger
Commission’s finding that to relieve world hunger and malnutrition
we must attack world poverty and build effective demand for food as
well as increasing food production and supply. A key element of this
strategy will be assisting developing countries to increase food produc-
tion. It will also include complementary efforts in energy and health/
family planning which will permit us to address the broader poverty
issue.

Currently, we are taking a number of actions in the development
assistance program that accord with Commission recommendations.

World Hunger and Food Policy
Some of these were mentioned in the Venice communique´. IDCA and
AID are now working on an agricultural development plan for your
next term aimed at achieving important increases in food production in
key countries, and significantly reducing chronic malnutrition in a
wider group of nations. AID has just completed an analysis of its agri-
culture staffing and is now considering ways to reverse the five year
decline in these skills.

We hope to increase support for international scientific and tech-
nological research on food and nutrition, using the particular compara-
tive advantage the United States has in this area. We have been sup-
porting efforts for land tenure reform in some countries through AID
and through our participation in the multilateral development banks.
As the Commission recommends, IDCA has given explicit atten-
tion to the importance of development and dissemination of capital
saving technology. AID has launched a new program initiative fo-
cusing on small-scale enterprises. IDCA is urging the multilateral de-
velopment banks and the UN agencies to give higher priority to in-
creasing productive employment opportunities—with capital saving
technology at low cost per job—in their development assistance
projects.

The Commission recommends—and you have supported—ex-
tending the statutory authority that permits the least developed coun-
tries to place amounts owed to the United States into local currency ac-
counts for development purposes to all non-oil developing nations.
The U.S. Congress has thus far not appropriated funding for this pur-
pose, even for the poorest countries.

With regard to the multilateral development banks (MDBs), the
Report urges U.S. support for: Bank activities that address basic needs;
restraint from restrictive amendments on types of loans and recipient
countries in Bank authorizing and appropriation legislation; and in-
creased contributions to the MDB concessional windows. These recom-
mendations are consistent with the policies of your Administration. In
congressional consideration of MDB legislation, we have not always
been successful in avoiding restrictive amendments or in gaining sup-
port for the full funding needed to meet negotiated replenishments. In
your next term, we will be negotiating the seventh replenishment of
IDA, the World Bank concessional window, as well as presenting to the
Congress a proposal for a general capital increase for the World Bank,
and we will be negotiating replenishments for the regional banks.
Trade—The Report emphasizes the importance of trade to the
world economy, and developing country growth in particular, and
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
makes a series of recommendations on trade and commodities. Its
major recommendations are: an early reopening of the Multilateral
Trade Negotiation (MTN) with a view of reducing tariffs on labor in-
tensive products from developing countries; extension of the General-
ized System of Preferences (GSP), which allows developing countries
to ship many products to the U.S. duty free, on a fixed term, multi-year
basis with an expanded list of products; an active U.S. role in the con-
tinuing General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations
on limiting quantitative restrictions on imports; and Administration
support for H.R. 1543, which would make certain changes in the cur-
rent trade adjustment assistance program. These recommendations are
aimed toward additional liberalization of the existing international
trading system that would allow developing countries to increase their
exports.

It is premature to suggest reopening MTN at this time. Much was
accomplished in the MTN to benefit developing countries; for the
present, we need to concentrate on effective implementation of these
gains, especially the terms under which developing countries can be
encouraged to join and benefit from its non-tariff codes. We should,
however, attempt to use the very limited tariff reduction authority you
have to negotiate bilateral tariff agreements with the developing coun-
tries by the end of 1981. In your next term, we should investigate the
feasibility of seeking broader authority to negotiate tariff-reducing
agreements with developing countries.

We are not yet ready for a full consideration of the GSP exten-
sion—the program does not expire until 1985. During your next admin-
istration, however, we should develop a strategy for extending GSP
benefits and for further improving the program’s benefits for devel-
oping countries. For the present, we need to implement your pledge to
Congress to use your existing authority to improve GSP benefits for the
lesser developed beneficiaries.

As the Commission recommended, the U.S. is taking an active role
in multilateral efforts to negotiate a safeguards code strengthening in-
ternational discipline over actions to restrict imports. The U.S. position
on safeguards is closer to that of developing countries than are the posi-
tions of the European Community (EC). Differences between the EC
and developing countries continue to be the major obstacles to progress
on this issue.

The Administration has not actively promoted the adjustment
assistance reform bill because of budget limitations. This is an issue to
be considered in your next term.
of adjustment assistance programs for workers and firms under the Trade Act of 1974.

World Hunger and Food Policy
The Commission Report supports international efforts to create
price stabilizing agreements for products of particular interest to devel-
oping countries. As you know, negotiations on the Common Fund
have just been completed, and we expect implementing legislation will
be prepared and submitted to the Congress in your next term. At-
tempts to renegotiate the International Tin Agreement have begun, and
the U.S. Senate recently ratified U.S. participation in the International
Rubber Agreement. The U.S. is also a member of the International
Coffee and the International Sugar Agreements and is participating in
efforts to negotiate a new international cocoa agreement. A reaffirma-
tion of our willingness to negotiate economically sound and mutually
beneficial commodity agreements would also be appropriate at the
outset of your next term.

The Food for Peace Program and Food Reserves—Another set of recom-
mendations focuses on the PL 480 program and making that program
developmentally more effective. You have endorsed that objective and
the Departments of Agriculture and State are working with us to
achieve it. The Commission calls for a complete revision of the pro-
gram. At this point, we are not convinced that such a revision is either
needed or politically feasible. We do have underway, however, a
number of steps to strengthen the program without legislation and will
be reviewing the range of more extensive changes that might be under-
taken. We are also taking steps to strengthen our substantive involve-
ment in the operations of the United Nations programs and agencies
working in the hunger field—particularly the FAO and its World Food
Program.

Many of the Commission’s specific recommendations on measures
to improve world food security are being implemented or negotiated.
The United States has, for example, pledged 4. million tons of grain
to the new Food Aid Convention and has encouraged new and in-
creased contributions from other donor governments. Under the aus-
pices of the International Wheat Council, the United States is working
to develop a basis for a new international wheat agreement. We have
actively supported efforts by the World Food Council to promote food
sector strategies in developing countries. More than thirty food priority
countries have indicated an interest in developing these strategies and
have approached donor countries, including the United States, for tech-
III, Foreign Economic Policy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
nical assistance in preparing them. We are also playing an active role in
negotiations to replenish the International Fund for Agricultural Devel-
opment. Further, Congressional approval of the Food Security Act,
which will establish a food security reserve of up to four million tons to
backstop our food aid commitments, is expected before the end of the
year.

Other Recommendations—The Commission recommends U.S. sup-
port for the U.N. negotiations on a code of conduct for transnational
corporations and for adding appropriate sections to U.S. law. The U.S.
has actively participated in the U.N. negotiations for four years. From
the current state of negotiations, it is doubtful that code provisions will
lend themselves to being incorporated in U.S. law, but the final code
will give a basis for that determination.

Several recommendations in the Report are aimed at domestic
issues. The Department of Agriculture has commented directly to the
Domestic Council on these matters.

Several other recommendations include increased involvement by
the private sector in assisting developing countries to alleviate world
hunger. We know this is a matter you endorse strongly, and we have
efforts underway to meet this recommendation. The recently com-
pleted private sector agricultural mission to the Caribbean Basin is one
important example.
6635), which contained a provision directing the President to develop the wheat security
reserve. The House Committee on Agriculture reported an amended H.R. 6635 to the
House on June 25, but the legislation did not go to the floor for a vote. McGovern subse-
quently incorporated the wheat security reserve language in S.2675, the Child Nutrition
Amendments of 1980; however, McGovern’s bill stalled in the Senate, and the House ver-
sion of the legislation passed in lieu, whereupon it languished in committee. H.R. 3765,
Coelho (D–California) on April 26, 1979, and signed into law by the President on De-
cember 3, 1980, ultimately contained the measure. Title III of the Act—the Food Security
Wheat Reserve Act of 1980—directed the President to establish and maintain, through
metric tons could be released in any year but only when the need was exceptional. Carter

International Health, Population Growth, and
Women’s Issues
278.

Action Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of
State for International Organization Affairs (Toussaint), the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Nuclear Energy and
Technology Affairs (Kratzer), and the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, February 4, 1977
United Nations Water Conference
Issues for Decision
A decision must be made on the U.S. posture and level of partici-
pation in the United Nations Water Conference scheduled for March
14–25 in Mar del Plata, Argentina. The last Administration planned for
the U.S. to adopt a relatively low profile at the Conference, and not to
announce any major initiatives which would cast us in a leadership
role.

The fact that this will be the first global forum for the new Admin-
istration requires that the strategy for our participation be re-examined.
Third World countries will view the U.S. posture at the Conference (i.e.,
statements, commitments, level of delegation) as an early indication of
how the new Administration intends to approach North-South
problems. However, time is short in which to select meaningful initia-
tives that would enable the U.S. to assume a high profile leadership
role. A decision to upgrade the nature of our substantive participation
will require launching immediately an intensified interagency effort to
reach agreement on U.S. initiatives; it will also require an expanded
in-house staff effort.

Unusual urgency in the selection of the head of our delegation is
also involved because of unique administrative and security problems
connected with the Mar del Plata venue. We have been alerted to the
terrorist threat in Argentina and will provide protective security for all
participants. Security must be more elaborate if Cabinet-level repre-
sentation is involved.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Background/Analysis
In six weeks the U.S. will participate with some 135 other nations
in the UN Water Conference, the first world economic conference to
take place in this Administration. The Conference will address the fun-
damental policy question of how the global fixed stock of water can
best be managed to satisfy mounting requirements for agriculture, do-
mestic and industrial uses. As the next in a series of world conferences
under UN sponsorship, it is expected to act on water-related recom-
mendations which emerged from the earlier World Food Conference
and the Habitat Conference and will impact on the later Desertification
Conference.

The U.S. initially opposed the convening of a UN Conference on
Water. After it was approved by the UNGA, however, Secretary Kissin-
ger, in his speech to the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of the UN Confer-
ence on Trade and Development on May 6, 1976 declared . . . “We will
play an active role at the United Nations Water Conference—putting
forward practical measures to share our knowledge and experience.”
Preparations have been carried out with the support of the Water Re-
sources Council, with the participation of a broad spectrum of U.S.
Governmental and non-Governmental organizations with water re-
sources interests and programs. We have participated actively in the
international preparatory phase of the Conference, focusing on
developing and presenting U.S. experiences and ideas relevant to
priority water management problems confronting the international
community.

Preparatory efforts under the former Administration were based
on an interagency consensus that the U.S. should adopt a relatively low
profile at the Conference. Unlike previous UN conferences (on Environ-
ment, Population, Food and Human Settlements), we have not planned
to announce any new U.S. funding or program commitments or other initia-
tives. Rather, the strategy selected was one which would draw on and
highlight the extensive U.S. water resources activities already un-
derway and planned which have international relevance.

Recognizing that the new Administration may desire a more forthcoming
U.S. role, we are now attempting to identify major U.S. initiatives—par-
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
ticularly those which would directly address developing country needs.
Without a clear signal that such initiatives are desired, the technical
agencies have been very conservative in their approach. A letter from
the IO and OES Assistant Secretaries on December 24 requested AID to
help develop one or two possible initiatives for consideration by the
new Administration (Tab 1). The reply was non-committal (Tab 2), al-
though subsequently an initiative in the area of community water supply has
been developed by AID at the staff level and endorsed by the U.S. Preparatory
Committee. It is now being submitted to the Acting AID Administrator,
but it is of relatively modest proportions, costing approximately $15
million over the next five years.

We have identified the following as areas in which significant new
initiatives might be constructed: food production; community water supply;
and technology transfer. Examples of the types of initiatives which could
be developed include:
—New bilateral program of loans and technical assistance to LDCs
to improve irrigation system operation and related infrastructure
development.
—Increased support for international research on improvement of
erosion control, drainage, flood control and watershed protection in
tropical areas.
—Regional demonstration program on the application of remote
sensing to water management as an extension of the AIDSAT satellite
program.
—Bilateral and multilateral technical support to LDCs for develop-
ment of plans and institutions to accelerate provision of safe drink-
ing water to rural populations (this will require pinning down and
possibly strengthening AID initiative described in the previous
paragraph).

If you desire the U.S. to try to develop a higher profile role in the
short time available, it will be necessary to enlist AID support. Further,
such a decision would require short-term reprogramming of State per-
sonnel resources to support the necessary effort, with the possible re-
quirement for an outside consultant.

There is an outside possibility that the Conference could become a
forum to debate highly politicized North-South issues (such as those
involved in the New International Economic Order) or such strictly
political issues as the Panama Canal. A constructive posture by the de-
veloped nations might limit or avoid this possibility. At present, how-
ever, our reading suggests that no other developed nation intends to make any
commitment to new water programs at the Conference. With the exception
of Sweden, and Canada to a limited extent, both the Western and
Eastern nations have given the Water Conference relatively low pri-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ority compared to other UN conferences. We expect that posture to
continue.

There has been scattered Congressional interest in the Conference
thus far. On the other hand, various U.S. non-governmental organiza-
tions are pressing for the U.S. to play a leadership role.
It appears that most country delegations will be headed at the min-
isterial level. The U.S. Delegation might be headed by the Secretary of
the Interior (who is also chairman of the interagency Water Resources
Council). This would emphasize our interest in maintaining a focus on
water issues and intention to avoid extraneous political matters.
The Options
1. Strong Leadership Position—U.S. would use Water Conference to
set forth new directions in U.S. philosophy and intentions regarding
overall relations with the Third World, and would demonstrate its
commitment by announcing several significant new initiatives in the
water area. A Presidential statement could be read by the Secretary of
the Interior as head of Delegation.

Advantages
—LDCs would react favorably to early, positive attention by Ad-
ministration (which would be especially visible if other developed na-
tions do not intend to be forthcoming).
—Chances would be enhanced to avoid politicization of confer-
ence by LDCs, who otherwise may feel that there are no other tangible
benefits to be gained.
—Initiatives would offer positive proof of U.S. willingness to help
solve specific LDC problems in businesslike approach.

Disadvantages
—Very difficult to shape meaningful and supportable U.S. policy
statements and major initiatives in short time available.
—This level of participation may be excessive in relation to modest
expectations and intentions of other countries which will participate,
and in relation to realistic overall conference results.
—Meaningful initiatives could be quite costly, and there would be
insufficient time to examine and have approved budgetary proposals.
2. Medium Posture—U.S. would focus exclusively on water re-
sources subject matter of Conference, but adopt more forthcoming
stance than previously planned. This would require support by the Ad-
ministration for several water-oriented initiatives. From our conversa-
tions with AID officials we gather that initiatives of this kind could be
developed whose implementation would be possible within the appro-
priations which AID expects to obtain.

The Secretary of the Interior could head the Delegation and be
backed by an alternate with extensive and recent experience in
North-South meetings, and ability to advise and lead in this context.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Advantages
—Enable U.S. to play constructive, highly visible role while fo-
cusing on the specific subject matter of the agenda.
—Would ensure significant substantive role for U.S. in helping to
solve LDC water problems.
—Would undercut any criticism that U.S. is not interested in
solving practical LDC problems.

Disadvantages
—Initiatives would have future funding implications and will re-
quire an immediate intensified interagency effort to identify and de-
velop them.
—Could raise expectations that the U.S. will step forward with
new commitments every time a UN conference is called.
3. Low Profile—Continue the strategy developed under the last Ad-
ministration, limiting U.S. role to exchanging experiences, views and
ideas on global water problems. Several modest initiatives may well
emerge from the ongoing preparatory efforts and lend additional sup-
port to our role. The Secretary of the Interior might still head the Dele-
gation; however, in the absence of an ability to present anything new at
the Conference, an Assistant Secretary of Interior could serve as head,
backed by a combined team of experts on water and those skilled in in-
ternational diplomacy.

Advantages
—It is consistent with original strategy.
—It will at least match the expected posture of other developed na-
tions (since our preparations, though modest by previous U.S. confer-
ence standards, have been significantly ahead of other nations).
—Demonstrates U.S. intentions to be selective, rather than auto-
matically responding with new funds and programs every time the UN
calls a conference.

Disadvantages
—Administration might be subject to criticism at home and abroad
for “not caring.”
—Conference could be politicized by LDCs in absence of any se-
rious developed country proposal.
—Gives initial impression of negative Administration approach to
North-South problems.

Bureau Views
IO and S/P recommend that Option 2 be followed given the facts
that: the Water Conference will be the new Administration’s first expo-
sure in an international forum on a subject with North-South over-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tones; and a viable, constructive U.S. role could have significant ben-
efits in that regard.

OES concurs in upgrading the U.S. role beyond present planning
to the Option 2 level, given the above assessment that the U.S. posture
is important to North-South relationships and coupled with the impor-
tance of global water problems in their own right. It is recognized, how-
ever, that the new initiatives selected to support this option will not—in
the limited time available—have the benefit of being thoroughly
weighed against the spectrum of development assistance needs beyond
the water field, and also potential Administration initiatives in other
areas.

Recommendations
1. That we go forward in accordance with the second “Medium
Posture” option and, accordingly, select a delegation headed by the
Secretary of the Interior.

Approve
Disapprove
Prefer Option 1
Prefer Option 37
2. That you or Mr. Christopher orally inform Governor Gilligan of
the political importance you attach to the Water Conference and re-
quest that AID promptly submit suggestions to the Department for sig-
nificant water resource initiatives which the U.S. can propose at that
conference.
determination to obtain, through this exchange of technical experience and ideas, the
basis for developing new or expanded programs of U.S. assistance. Major U.S. aid initia-
tives would logically follow the Conference, which is, after all, a technical one, rather
than an aid-pledging session.” (Ibid.) The March 29 NSC Global Issues Cluster Evening
Report to Brzezinski, which references the conclusion of the water conference notes: “The
U.S. Chairman reports that: A spirit of ‘harmony, accomplishment and optimism’ pre-
vailed, and that all nations worked extremely hard to avoid confrontation on shared
water resources.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues

279.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, February 18, 1977
SUBJECT
North-South Strategy
The President recently signed off on the World Health Initiative
that we discussed and I anticipate spending a major part of my time
during the next several months on this issue. While in Geneva last week

280.

Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the Acting Staff Secretary of
the National Security Council (Hornblow)
Washington, April 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Retention of Interagency Task Force on International Population Policy
The Department of State suggests the retention of the existing In-
teragency Task Force on International Population Policy. The reason
for retaining the Task Force is that there is work to be done on the pop-
ulation issue, work that requires organized interagency cooperation.
Background
For over ten years, the Agency for International Development has
run a program of technical assistance to developing countries seeking
to cope with their population problems. AID is now working to inte-
grate its population activities into other aspects of its assistance pro-
grams. The Department of State has given increasing diplomatic atten-
tion to population issues, bilaterally and multilaterally, including the
convening of the World Population Conference in Bucharest in 1974.
State is now considering the inclusion of the population issue as an ele-
ment of the North-South dialogue. The Department of Defense, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the CIA are concerned with the security impli-
cations which population growth has for our country. The Depart-
ments of Agriculture, Treasury, and the Council of Economic Advisers
have interests in the economic and food supply issues, and more re-
cently, the Council on Environmental Quality has had an active interest
because of the environmental implications involved. There is a contin-
uing requirement for coordinating and meshing these interests and
programs.
classified. Transmitted to Tarnoff under an April 15 covering memorandum from Froebe,
in which she outlined the disposition of outstanding Under Secretaries Committee items,
commenting: “I’m sure you didn’t realize when you accepted your new job that one of
your duties would be that of father to the Under Secretaries Committee orphans!” Froebe
recommended that Tarnoff approve and sign the memorandum to Hornblow. Tarnoff
added the following handwritten comment on the April 15 memorandum: “Louise:
Thanks. I’m glad that most of the orphans are finding homes . . . elsewhere. Peter.” (Na-
Bucharest World Population Conference.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Agenda
The agenda we envision if the Task Force is retained includes four
basic areas:
1. Greater attention to the interaction of population and develop-
ment, focusing on those aspects of economic development (income
generation for lower income groups), social policy (greater opportu-
nities for women), and political organization (grass-roots participation)
that tend to reduce desired family size and improve living standards.
2. Improvement in evaluating the impact and cost-effectiveness of
our present population assistance program (a requirement stemming
from NSDM 314).
3. Continuation of monitoring activities in the key large popula-
tion growth countries as indicated by NSDM 314, and development of a
strategy for each of those countries, engaging our diplomatic and
assistance efforts.
4. Enlistment of greater support for population programs on
the part of other industrial nations and international organizations
(e.g., World Bank, Regional Development Banks, UN Development
Programme).

Finally, a coordinated and on-going effort is needed to adjust our
overall development policy in order to place appropriate emphasis on
LDC self-help measures, and to improve the scope and effectiveness of
population programs.

Peter Tarnoff
population policy issues. See ibid., Document 122.

281.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to the Secretary of the Cabinet
(Watson)
Washington, April 25, 1977
SUBJECT
Cabinet-Level Task Force on International Health
Following up on our recent phone conversation, here are the basic
reasons for establishing such a group:
1. Enables the President to mobilize government-wide support on a
cross-cutting issue which involves 18 federal agencies and departments. The
far flung nature of this area means there are various competing in-
terests, especially between State, AID and HEW. Any study or plan
conducted within or among these agencies without executive office in-
volvement in balancing competing interests during the phase when
policies are being formulated merely perpetuates and may even further
polarize and diffuse interests and responsibility.
2. Improves prospects for enactment of legislative reforms and fostering
balanced policies within the Cabinet thus reducing resistance in Congress.
The Congressional committee jurisdictional makeup encourages
that HEW advocates will be pitted against State/AID advocates and
any legislation or program proposals which do not take this into ac-
count enhances a confrontation between committees. I am interested in
results and action, especially so that the President is in the position of
leading and not reacting on this issue to Congressional initiatives
which could emerge from four different committees representing dis-
tinct special interest constituencies, eg, those advocating a lead agency
for HEW and those advocating a lead agency role for State. This is of
particular significance in view of the effort by Senator Kennedy to seize
the initiative of this issue from the President.
3. Helps to establish and strengthen the Cabinet structure concept in the
Carter Presidency as a useful planning and decision making tool for the
President.

If this Administration is to achieve a reduction in the number of
special purpose entities institutionalized within EOP, and demonstrate
to Congress that the Cabinet can carry out planning and analysis func-
tions of a cross-cutting nature, then we must begin now to use the Cab-
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
inet for precisely that purpose. If we don’t, then Congress, acting in re-
sponse to special purpose constituencies or visceral public outcry
concerning Executive branch failure to develop comprehensive pro-
grams involving a number of agencies will again begin to enact legisla-
tion designed to circumvent the bureaucratic structures they originally
created. Conceivably four years from now we may be little better off
than we are now in strengthening the Presidency or the Cabinet over
the long run notwithstanding temporary success in eliminating EOP
functions.

In summary, what I have proposed to the President is to bring to-
gether a cabinet-level group which represents the agencies and Depart-
ments who impact on international health, study the issues (a great
deal has already been completed in the past 8 weeks), identify
problems, and opportunities, and estimate the costs of new initiatives.
Upon completion of a report and submission to the President the Cab-
inet structure will be disbanded, and in its stead will likely be a number
of ad hoc clusters who will implement the proposals accepted by the
President. A government-wide report on this subject is unprecedented
and has strong potential to be a major ingredient of the President’s per-
sonal diplomacy strategy for the remainder of this Administration.
Attached for your review is a scenario to initiate this effort, a draft
memo which the President would eventually sign announcing and di-
recting the report on international health be implemented, and the cab-
inet organizational structure.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

282.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, May 17, 1977
MEMORANDUM FOR
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Director, Agency for International Development
The Director, United States Information Agency
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisors
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Council of Environmental Quality
The Director, National Science Foundation
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
SUBJECT
Implications of Worldwide Population Growth for United States Security and
Overseas Interests
been reviewed and will remain in effect. That portion of NSDM 314 as-
signing responsibility to the Under Secretaries Committee is hereby su-
perseded. That responsibility is transferred to the NSC Ad Hoc Group on
Population Policy which is hereby established. This Group should be
composed of representatives of the addressees and will be chaired by
the Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans, International Environ-
mental and Scientific Affairs.

This Group should report as appropriate to the Policy Review

283.

Memorandum From the Secretary of the Cabinet (Watson) to
President Carter
Washington, May 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Formation of a Cabinet Level Task Force on International Health
I have been working with Peter Bourne regarding formation of a
Cabinet level task force on international health. As in so many areas of
interagency concern, the principal problem is the lack of coordination
and focus among multiple departments and agencies (in this case, at
least 16), with a consequent failure to maximize the beneficial effects of
the dollars we have to spend.

As outlined in the attached memorandum, we propose formation
of an executive overview committee consisting of State, acting as
Chairman, Defense, Commerce, Treasury, HEW and AID. I will coordi-
nate the activities of that group. Peter will chair a coordinating com-
mittee of all the affected agencies and will divide them into working
groups to address the administrative and legislative policy options out-
lined on page 2 of the proposed memorandum. In doing the work, we
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
will involve many private sector groups, including business, labor,
foundations, universities and church groups.

In reviewing the situation, we believe that an outline of initiatives
can be presented to you on or before August 15th.

Attachment
Draft Memorandum From President Carter to the Cabinet
and Other Affected Agencies
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
U.S. International Health Policy
Approximately two billion human beings in Third World nations
face premature death due to preventable parasitic and infectious dis-
eases, malnutrition and lack of sanitary water supply. Similarly, in the
industrialized nations of the world, many crippling and debilitating
diseases continue to cut short productive and happy lives. This state of
affairs has continued in the face of unprecedented advances in medical
science and technology.

A preliminary assessment conducted at my request by Peter G.
Bourne, M.D., found that the United States government is not building
adequately on the mutual self interest of all nations to use readily avail-
able medical scientific knowledge to improve the health and well being
of people everywhere. I believe that the United States government
needs to take steps to improve its capacity to fight disease in partner-
ship with other nations.

I have asked Jack Watson to organize a Cabinet-level Task Force on
International Health. The work of the Task Force will be overseen by an
Executive Committee consisting of the following agencies: State
(Chmn.), Defense, Commerce, Treasury, HEW, AID. The White House
Office of the Special Assistant for Health Issues will also be a member.
Jack will serve as Executive Secretary of the Executive Committee and
Peter Bourne will chair a coordinating committee which will be sup-
ported by working groups. The charge of the Task Force will be to pre-
pare a report for me recommending government action to strengthen
the U.S. government’s capacity to cooperate in health with the devel-
oping and developed nations of the world.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Specifically, the Task Force shall recommend administrative and/
or legislative policy options on the following by August 15:
—More effective ways in which to facilitate greater private sector
involvement in international health, including international voluntary
agencies, industry, labor, foundations and universities.
—More effective measures to improve the quality and ensure an
appropriate supply of health manpower in developing countries.
—Measures to improve the effectiveness of international health re-
search in the United States, and to improve cooperation with other na-
tions and international organizations.
—Measures to improve the organization and management of in-
ternational health programs.
—A long-range strategy for United States international health
policy.

I ask all affected Department and Agency heads to assist in com-
pleting this assessment.

284.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
128220. For Chiefs of Mission from the Secretary; inform Consuls.
Subject: Reaffirmation of U.S. International Population Policy. Ref: 75
State 297241.
1. In my first message to the Department and the Foreign Service, I
mentioned population as one of those global issues of increasing con-
cern to the nations of the world and to our diplomacy. In that connec-
tion, basic U.S. policy on international population issues, as reported
in reftel, has been reapproved at the highest levels of the new
administration.
2. Most recently and most importantly, President Carter included
the following statement on world population in the course of his state-
ment of May 23 to the Congress of the United States:
“Rapid population growth is a major environmental problem of
world dimensions. World population increased from three to four bil-
lion in the last 15 years, substantially cancelling out expansion in world
food production and economic growth for the same period.

“Without controlling the growth of population, the prospects for
enough food, shelter, and other basic needs for all the world’s people
are dim. Where existence is already poor and precarious, efforts to ob-
tain the necessities of life often degrade the environment for genera-
tions to come.

Confidential. Drafted by Green; cleared by Mink, Blaney, Levin (AID), Tarnoff, and in
substance by Tuchman; approved by Vance. Mink sent Vance a draft of the telegram
under a May 24 action memorandum requesting his approval, noting: “It is important
that our officials be informed of the new Administration’s policy and concerns in this
field, and that they, especially our Ambassadors, give this matter their personal concern.”
Tarnoff initialed Vance’s approval on the memorandum on June 3. (National Archives,
vided background material and a rationale for current U.S. population policy in light of
marks, Vance commented: “We face some exciting and I am sure strenuous days to-
gether. We are all conscious of the press of events in the world—changing economic rela-
tionships which are increasingly intertwined with foreign policy, alterations in the nature
of national power, the growing importance of global issues such as nuclear proliferation,
energy, food, population growth, and the environment. We must also be aware of the
hopes and concerns within our own country and abroad.”

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
“It is, of course, up to each nation to determine its own policies, but
we are prepared to respond promptly and fully to all requests for
assistance in population and health care programs. At my direction, the
Department of State and the Agency for International Development
stand ready to cooperate through international organizations, through
private voluntary organizations, or through direct contacts with other
governments.”
the President said that he would strive personally to find ways in
which our government and the private sector can better cooperate with
other nations on health, population and nutritional needs.
4. Commendable progress in slowing population growth has been
made in many countries in recent years, but excessive population
growth continues to contribute to high unemployment and underem-
ployment, environmental deterioration, subsistence standards of
living, malnutrition, and, in a few countries, starvation and increased
death rates. Increased vigilance and urgent action are needed if these
trends are to be reversed.
5. Leaders of developing countries should be encouraged in their
efforts to promote sound population programs. Where requested and
justified, the new administration will provide continuing and even ex-
panded support to those programs, along with other donor countries
and organizations.
6. The objective of the United States in this field is to work closely
with others rather than to impose our views. In our efforts we should
stress the economic and social gains for the poorest nations that result
from reduced population growth, maternal and child health. In all
these efforts, we should recognize the basic dignity of the individual
and his or her right freely to choose family goals and to have the infor-
mation and means to do so. These basic rights were specifically ac-

285.

Memorandum From the Assistant to the President’s Special
Assistant for Health Issues (Fill) to the Secretary of the
Cabinet (Watson)
Washington, June 11, 1977
SUBJECT
Agency Comments on the Cabinet-Level Task Force on International Health
Proposal
After reading the comments from AID, HEW, and OMB, I believe
we are still on strong ground, and I disagree with Rick on not going to
the President with this. OMB endorses a coordinating committee made
up of all affected agencies, joining HEW in that regard. HEW also asks
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
to be co-chairman of the Cabinet-level Task Force with State, if one is
formed, thus reaffirming my own judgment concerning the lack of a
lead agency in this field. AID is the more negative, but equally equiv-
ocal as the other agencies, and concedes the need for someone at the Ex-
ecutive Office level to pull together a “composite report” which is pre-
cisely what we suggest. We have no State comments. They may not
have been consulted since Eizenstat’s request went to “State/AID” ac-
cording to OMB, and there is no State response included in the
Hutcheson package.

My assessment has not changed one iota on this classic case of Ex-
ecutive Branch turf protection. HEW sees itself grabbing the interna-
tional health issue and has Kennedy’s backing to grow. AID sees its
prerogatives jeopardized, recognizes the low (8–10 percent of total
budget) priority given to health, but wants to make its own decisions.
OMB sees its reorganization assignment being crowded by a mecha-
nism which bridges both policy and functional reorganization, do-
mestic and international programs, and the potential emergence of an-
other mechanism within the Cabinet to do what it perceives itself as
capable of accomplishing. The Domestic Council position is much less
clear; however, it seems to me that there are two factors possibly dis-
turbing them:
1. The Cabinet structure bridges domestic and international;
2. It offers the possibility that a planning and analysis mechanism
may be created which is not subject to day-to-day legislative and mana-
gerial responsibilities.

This characteristic of institutional separateness from day-to-day
responsibilities would be distinct from all the major Presidential advi-
sory structures: CEA, OMB, NSC, and the Domestic Council. OMB, for
example, had to establish new layers, essentially creating a new entity
outside the day-to-day operations of OMB in order to fulfill their reor-
ganization mandate. They also felt it necessary to hire new outside
staff. Interestingly, Peter has not hired one international health person,
mendations which would then be reviewed by the Task Force. If necessary, the Task
Force could then make further recommendations to the President to insure an integrated
U.S. international health policy.” (Ibid.)

286.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, June 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Joint U.S.–U.S.S.R. Health Cooperation in Selected Third World
Countries
Background
As you know I have been consulting with a number of agencies re-
garding the subject proposal to obtain their views prior to submitting a
recommendation to you. State, AID, HEW, and the Science Advisor
were requested to comment on the concept paper2 and offer their
views. NASA and Transportation (FAA) were also sent copies for their
information in view of their involvement with the Soviet Union in the
medical scientific area.

They have all commented, and what follows is a summary of their
views and my overall analysis. A copy of each agency’s comments is at-
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
tached at Tab A; the recommended transmittal letter to the Soviet
Union is attached at Tab B for your review and approval.
Summary of Department and Agency Views
1. State supports the proposal. They suggest that “the initial approach
to the Soviets should be low key and of sufficient detail to make our in-
tentions clear.” Further they recommend that “first contact be made
through our embassy in Moscow at a high level and privately con-
veying a supporting statement of White House interest.” State also rec-
ommended that before a presentation is made to the Soviets that spe-
cific project outlines be developed and carefully analyzed from the
following perspectives:
—“U.S. political interest in the country or area concerned
—“Interests of U.S. allies and other powers which are pertinent;
and
—“Implications of proposed activities for our involvement in
WHO or other multilateral organizations.”
They also recommend that an ad hoc interagency group be formed
to develop a range of projects in adequate detail to assure technical and
political feasibility. They further recommend that the overall effort be
chaired by State, with my office and the National Security Council rep-
resented in all phases, and a technical sub-group co-chaired by HEW
and AID to outline projects, specify candidate countries, and develop
them for a steering group review.
2. AID supports the proposal. However, they express concern with
respect to the commingling of U.S. AID funds with those of communist
nations; inevitable congressional criticism of joint activities which AID
is involved in that would potentially damage the bilateral assistance
program in general; and also express concern about the emphasis on
joint programs in the field rather than additional cooperative efforts in
the research area. They also point out (as other agencies have) that it is
important that there be technically sound projects that are offered so
that we can assure that the program is successful.
3. DOD supports the proposal. They comment that the proposal may
have the effect of “reducing competition in Third World countries” and
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“can have long term humanitarian and national security benefits to the
United States”. They also recommend that a strategic working group be
formed with representatives from DOD, State, AID, HEW and CIA to
undertake the planning for this joint project.
4. HEW supports the proposal. They suggest that a joint working
group be charged with identifying the best means for conducting spe-
cific cooperative projects. They also pointed out that a new intergov-
ernmental agreement with a new permanent technical working group
may be necessary for some kinds of specific projects. For other projects
amendments to existing bilateral cooperative agreements such as the
current agreement on medical science and public health will provide a
more advantageous mechanism. And finally, they suggest that some
joint or trilateral projects might be best accomplished through specific
agreements with multilateral organizations such as the World Health
Organization.
5. The Science Advisor’s Office fully supports the proposal. They sug-
gest that perhaps the forthcoming meeting of the U.S.–U.S.S.R. Com-
mission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation scheduled for July 6–8
might be used as an opportunity to discuss the health cooperation
agreement concept with Soviet representatives. The leader of the So-
viet delegation will be academician Kirillin, a deputy premier and
Chairman of the State Committee for Science and Technology. It is ex-
pected that Dr. Kirillin will meet with the President and it was sug-
gested that this may be an avenue to present the proposal.
Analysis and Conclusions
The concerns of the State Department with respect to the speci-
ficity of the proposal are valid but only in the context of implementa-
tion and preplanning with respect to a joint working group. Specificity
can be worked out once the proposal is found acceptable.
Two different approaches have been suggested by State and OSTP
in conveying the idea of medical cooperative relationships in the Third
World. State suggests that the traditional diplomatic route be followed

287.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, June 30, 1977
Management of Population Issues within the Department of State
The attached memorandum on global population growth and re-
lated developmental assistance programs suggests the need for a cata-
lyst in the Department. At present, there seems to be a bureaucratic and
jurisdictional issue involved. Ambassador Green has ideas but no
money; AID has money and is not always responsive to Ambassador
Green’s ideas; and there are blurred bureaucratic lines between Am-
bassador Green, Mrs. Mink and Mrs. Benson. Thus, some of the key
players have been inhibited from taking a strong stand and moving
forward.

One effective way to proceed might be for you to call together a
few of the key actors in this field including Gov. Gilligan, Under Secre-
tary Benson, Assistant Secretary Patsy Mink, and Ambassador Green to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
discuss where we ought to go substantively in this area and to set clear
responsibilities for implementing action.

Gov. Gilligan has recently written to you and the Secretary2 about
integrating our population programs with other components of our de-
velopment assistance. Clearly, the responsibilities will have to be de-
fined between AID and Ambassador Green’s office, with appropriate
individuals knowing what areas or initiatives should be developed and
by whom.

In addition, we would need to work with Congress and with the
public to develop a better awareness of the problems of population
growth, of their impact on development and of the need on the part of
the US to support a meaningful and sustained program of develop-
mental assistance aimed at reducing excessive population growth
rates.

You may wish to assert a more direct interest yourself. Naturally, I
and my staff are ready to assist you as you deem appropriate.
Attachment
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)
Washington, undated
Global Population Growth, Development for
Human Needs and U.S. Policy
The following memorandum outlines current global population
problems including implications for our development assistance pro-
grams. It also proposes specific steps toward a more effective strategy
and suggests some North-South initiatives that we can take in the
weeks and months ahead.

By the year 2000 the present world population of about 4 billion
will grow to about 6. billion, with the developing world’s share of the
total population increasing from 62 percent now to 78 percent by the
end of the century, if present trends continue. Mexico, with perhaps the

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
highest growth rate in the world, will double its population to 132 mil-
lion. India will exceed one billion (610 million in 1976). Egypt will have
64 million (38 million today). The United States, by comparison, will
have about 260 million.

Global population growth, more than any other single factor, is
contributing to the lack of significant per capita income growth in the
developing countries.

While per capita GDP in the LDCs grew at an average rate of 2.
percent, the per capita increase in the lower-income countries, where 59
percent of the total LDC population lives, averaged only 0. percent
during the 1971–75 period. Non-communist LDC per capita food pro-
duction between 1961–74 did not increase at all due to population
growth. There could be a doubling of food import requirements by the
LDCs by the late 1980s, placing a major burden on our agricultural
capabilities.

Population growth promises an even more turbulent setting for
the conduct of international affairs. It also entails serious environ-
mental costs for the entire world community, including degradation of
soil, and desertification, as well as massive unemployment, and ap-
palling living conditions for much of the developing world.
Two million people in Mexico City are living today in miserable
shanty towns without sanitation and other services; and yet Mexico
City, now at 11 million people, is projected to become the world’s
largest urban agglomeration—32 million in the year 2000.
The sharpest reductions in birth rates over the past decade took
place in LDCs that have experienced broad-based social and economic
progress during the last three decades. There is ever-widening recogni-
tion that the best strategy for dealing with population growth is
through a combination of family planning and other programs that
tend to reduce birth rates, such as increased literacy, female education
and employment, increasing farm income, community development
and increased life expectancy largely through reduced infant mortality.
Such components of development tend to influence people to want
smaller families.

A “basic human needs” strategy on the part of the United States
and other developed countries will be vitiated by population growth
unless there are more effective efforts and programs to cope with the
issue.

U.S. Policy
The basic U.S. policies to deal with world population are set forth
in the NSSM–200 study and NSDM–314, which has now been reaf-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Study.)

A key element in that policy is to concentrate our bilateral and
multilateral population assistance efforts on 13 key larger and
fast-growing countries of the developing world—India, Bangladesh,
Pakistan, Nigeria, Mexico, Indonesia, Brazil, Philippines, Colombia,
Turkey, Egypt, Thailand, and Ethiopia. The 13 together contribute an
increase.

We now provide more than $140 million annually (FY–77) through
AID for population assistance. This year about $103 million is going for
bilateral programs in 34 countries and about $40 million is being pro-
vided multilaterally, mostly to the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities (UNFPA). But our assistance is still too little, too dispersed and
not as effective as it might be. Moreover, even though we must place
greater focus on supporting the population programs of 13 of the big-
gest LDC population countries (excluding China which has its own
highly effective programs), several of those countries are uninterested
or ineffective in carrying out programs and in several others our aid
must be channeled exclusively through multilateral agencies.
Legislative Branch interest and support in this field is strong.
Congress has also recognized (Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as
amended) that “US assistance should be used in support of, rather than
in substitution for, the self-help efforts that are essential to successful
development programs and shall be concentrated in those countries
that take positive steps to help themselves.” Congress is nevertheless
sensitive about anything smacking of coercion or which relates to
abortions.

An Effective Global Population Strategy
The USG Task Force on Population Policy headed by Ambassador
Marshall Green has concluded that successful population programs re-
quire: (a) leadership commitment; (b) integrating family planning into
community development and village life; (c) training indigenous par-
amedics to provide comprehensive health, nutritional and family plan-
ning services and (d) improving the status of women. Together with a
developmental strategy which influences people to have smaller fam-
mittee to undertake a study on the impact of worldwide population growth. It is pub-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
ilies, this approach can significantly improve the actual conditions of
life of the poorest, especially those in rural areas.

Most importantly, a developmental strategy which is aimed at
strengthening community structures supports a number of important
goals: (a) reducing economic and social inequality, (b) fostering local
democratic processes by involving community institutions in self-help
programs, (c) improved health and productivity as well as (d) popula-
tion growth reduction. Community involvement in such “self-help” ef-
forts also provides peer pressures or values which promote improved
quality of life and smaller families. This approach must, however, be
part of an integrated national developmental plan with strong gov-
ernment support.

A firm commitment by the United States towards the above goals
and accompanying strategy would also contribute towards a sensitive
North-South plan of cooperation focusing on real needs and away from
empty ideological posturing. Such a program also strengthens our
human rights efforts since strong and active local communities are vital
in promoting participation processes at the grass-roots level. Since the
strategy also emphasizes national leadership and the mobilization of
indigenous resources, it ensures that what aid we do provide fully re-
lates to the receiving country’s own program and priorities. It also com-
ports with the above-cited Congressional precepts.

Perhaps the key in our promoting effective population policies in
the developing world is to obtain the support and commitment of their
national leaders for a sustained and effective effort to reduce excessive
population growth. Success in this area is vital for progress. Yet we
have not always used our high-level influence to this end in many key
countries.

Action and Initiatives for the US
We need to pursue a comprehensive and well-coordinated USG
global population strategy which takes into consideration all of these
problems and possible responses. There is particular need for a better
coordination of our diplomatic and developmental assistance efforts.
This is a matter you may wish to discuss with Gov. Gilligan as well as
other key officials, followed by specific instructions to our Ambas-
sadors and AID Directors.

At each suitable occasion, formal and informal, we should raise the
population issue with LDC leaders and relevant heads of international
institutions and donor programs, helping develop an awareness of the
new directions in our assistance strategy. Such talks should embrace
population issues, although the focus would be on all the components
of development that improve conditions of life for the masses.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Special high-level initiatives by the President and Secretary would
be helpful in moving forward the basic population strategy outlined
above. Such initiatives could include:
—Taking advantage of meetings with other leaders to discuss this
issue frankly (and perhaps informally) in order to have the benefits of
their views and to see how we can be most helpful in the context of
their needs, institutions and purposes.
—Pressing, in planning for the UN Third Development Decade,5
goals of basic health, family planning and nutritional services for the
poorest, utilizing indigenous institutions and paramedical personnel.
—Proposing a major expansion of our multilateral funding of
UNFPA with the understanding that the bulk of funds would be pro-
vided to key countries including India, Egypt, and Mexico. (We would,
however, seek major increases in contributions from other donor coun-
tries, especially Japan and the FRG.)
—Sending a high-level Presidential or Secretarial Mission to
discuss developmental and population issues with key leaders of se-
lected LDC countries, including offers of additional long-term assist-
ance for specific programs.
—Develop intensive “model” programs in a few countries uti-
lizing local community structures for delivery of basic services, with
minimum long-term outside help, which could be expanded in other
areas if successful.
—Integrate our food assistance programs into comprehensive
projects with relevance to population growth.
—Make a high-level effort with the IBRD and the regional devel-
opment banks to place more emphasis on population-relevant pro-
grams including family planning.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues

288.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance
(Benson)
Washington, July 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Focus within Department of State to Deal with International Health Issues

289.

Minutes of NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy
Meeting
Washington, July 7, 1977
Minutes of the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy Meeting,
July 7, 1977
I. Attendance
The Chairman called the first meeting of the NSC Ad Hoc Group
on Population Policy to order at the State Department on July 7, 1977,
and the following representatives were present:
Ambassador Marshall Green, Chairman
Dr. Jessica Tuchman, National Security Council
Mr. Lindsey Grant, Department of State
Ms. Liane Atlas, Department of the Treasury
Mr. John H. Rowe, Department of Defense
Mr. Harry Wilhelm, Department of Agriculture
Mr. Meyer Zitter, Department of Commerce
Dr. S. Paul Ehrlich, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
Mr. Sander Levin, Agency for International Development
Dr. Gerry Hawkins, U.S. Information Agency
Mr. Richard Kolsky, Council of Economic Advisors
Major Daniel S. Costello, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Dr. Paul F. Bente, Jr., Council on Environmental Quality
Dr. Warren E. Thompson, National Science Foundation
Mr. Gilbert Omenn, Office of Science and Technology Policy
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
In addition, the following were present:
Mr. Clifford R. Nelson, Department of State, OES/ENP/PO
Mr. Samuel Baum, Department of Commerce, Census
Mr. Elliot Schwartz, Department of the Treasury, OASIA
Mr. William Falkner, Department of State, IO
1. As this was the first meeting of the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Popu-
lation Policy, introductions were made. The Chairman pointed out that
the First Annual Report of the Interagency Task Force on Population
Policy (now renamed the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy)
was accepted by the White House, and the Assistant to the President
for National Security Affairs had recently reaffirmed basic population
policy as set forth in NSDM–314.

II. Procedural Items
2. The Chairman suggested that, given their related interests, the
Immigration and Naturalization Service and the International Health
Office at the White House under Dr. Bourne might be included on the
Task Force. There was no objection to the inclusion of the Immigration
and Naturalization Service, but it was suggested that we wait on the In-
ternational Health Office pending the reorganization of the White
House Staff, now in progress.
3. The Chairman reminded the Ad Hoc Group that it had two basic
requirements contained in the policy papers. One called for the devel-
opment of performance criteria and the other for the presentation of an
annual report on population matters. Given the lapse in meetings of the
Group and its predecessor Task Force, he suggested that the Group set
the end of the year as a deadline for the submission of the second An-
nual Report. The representative of the NSC Staff pointed out that there
were a number of ongoing studies related to foreign assistance as well
as North/South issues which would be due by the middle of Sep-
tember anticipating probable development-related initiatives in the
early fall. At the same time, also on the basis of these studies, OMB
would be making some key decisions in the Budget Cycle, and the an-
nual report should be a vehicle for making sure population issues were
adequately covered in all these efforts.
4. In describing the content of the Annual Report and his feeling
that our embassies in the field should be consulted, the Chairman
pointed out that it would be difficult to telescope the process too much
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and still have a useful report. The State Department representative
pointed out that other ongoing studies such as the Year 2000 study of
population, resources and the environment would not be ready for the
fall initiatives but hopefully would be the basis for longer term
thinking. The representative of the Department of Agriculture felt that
there were resources in the private sector groups such as the Popula-
tion Council which would make useful contributions to the Ad Hoc
Group’s work.
5. The representative of AID suggested that the Chairman of the
Ad Hoc Group should talk with Mr. Van Dyk, who is chairing an inter-
agency development assistance study group to ascertain what role
population will play in their analyses. The Treasury Department repre-
sentative felt that, whatever the time frame of the report, it should be
based on an evaluation of our present population assistance efforts and
indicate what new directions our assistance should take to improve
performance.
6. It was agreed that the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Group would
consult with Mr. Van Dyk and other members of his Study Group and
work with them to ensure proper attention to population issues in the
strategies as they are being developed. The Chairman agreed to get into
Mr. Van Dyk’s hands as soon as possible a paper setting forth key
points for consideration by the Study Group.
7. It was also agreed that, with a somewhat shorter deadline than
previously envisioned, the Chairman would draft an outline for the
next annual report which hopefully could be submitted in October. He
would also prepare as soon as possible a telegram asking key Em-
bassies for responses to questions about progress and prospects in pop-
ulation programs. This would provide useful background for the an-
nual report which he hoped could be more country-specific than the
previous one. Several members pointed out that, if such field replies
could be received in the next several weeks, they might also be of use in
connection with the various interagency development studies and rec-
ommendations referred to by the NSC member. The Chairman said he
would try to get telegraphic replies back as soon as possible, though he
noted the inevitable delays in such matters.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
III. Presidential Study on Population, Resources, and Environment
8. Mr. Lindsey Grant, the State Department representative, made a
presentation on the study requested by the President in his Environ-
mental Message of May 23. The emphasis of the study will be the rela-
tionship of population, resources, and the environment. While a pro-
spectus has not been finalized, there is broad agreement on what
should be involved. The base of the project would be population pro-
jections, changing consumption levels, and technological change.
Those changes will in turn have impacts on resource requirements and
the environment. Under those broad areas a variety of topics will be
covered, along the following lines:
Population and consumption levels
Technological change (which affects resource requirements and
pollution levels)
Consumption requirements:
Food (cultivated, livestock, fisheries)
Fibers (natural and artificial)
Other resources
Resources and inputs:
Farmland
Rangeland (including semi-desert)
Forests
Minerals
Water (quantity and quality)
Energy
Waste disposal (from consumption and production—urban agri-
culture, industrial, energy byproducts, radioactive materials)
Climate (both as a variable in the above inputs and as it may be in-
fluenced by the activities described)
Environmental implications including:
Atmospheric pollution
Ocean contamination
Resource degradation (land, forests, water, and minerals)
Ecosystem degradation (interaction of issues above plus biotic
impoverishment)
Pollution and health
9. The procedure envisioned for the study will be the appointment
of an overall Executive Director reporting to a steering group com-
posed of the principal agencies. Each topic above will be developed by
a “group captain” who will have wide latitude in developing that sec-
tion of the report. While the “group captain” will probably come from a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
government agency most closely involved in the topic, he can seek the
assistance of others as he sees fit who have expertise in these areas.
Many of the agencies represented on this Ad Hoc Group will have to be
involved in various stages of the process. A key step will be the integra-
tion of all these elements and an effort to demonstrate the impact of de-
cisions taken in one sector upon the other sectors. The hoped-for result
would be to develop a regular means of increasing our understanding
of the lateral implications in these important areas of decisions taken in
other sectors.

IV. Performance Criteria
10. The Chairman then briefly introduced the materials on per-
formance criteria which had been circulated to the members. He
asked all the members of the Ad Hoc Group to study the presentation
on performance criteria (which had been painstakingly worked out be-
tween State and AID in consultation with Treasury) and obtain what-
ever internal clearances they felt necessary. If any agency has major dis-
agreements or proposed changes, they should be in contact with
Ambassador Green’s office for a discussion of them. After a period of
three weeks, if there are no major disagreements or changes, the
Chairman will forward the criteria to the NSC in fulfillment of the re-
quirement. The Ad Hoc Group will then be faced with questions con-
cerning the application of the criteria and with what countries it should
be used. At a future session, this issue can be taken up.
11. Having covered the agenda, the Chairman asked if any of the
representatives had any issues to raise. There were no additional issues
but the Chairman urged any members of the Group to contact him with
ideas which they might have on subjects that the Group should take up.
12. It was agreed that, in order to advance the date of the annual
report, there might have to be another meeting of the Ad Hoc Group
later in the summer.

290.

Memorandum From Harry Blaney of the Policy Planning
Staff to the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kreisberg)
Washington, July 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Checklist of our Global Challenges
Per your request you will find below a brief summary of some of
the key global issues we need to face in the next two or three years. I
thought something more than a heading was required but tried to keep
the description brief. Even so, to do justice to any of these subjects
would require a major paper. Wreath and Sandy2 have contributed
their ideas to this paper in areas of their special expertise. I suggest a
meeting sometime to examine these issues with the concerned
members.

Environment
This is a very broad area which has been seriously neglected by
this Department with little or no supervision or oversight by our prin-
cipals. The main areas needing attention and increased leadership
include:
(1) Marine Pollution: Our oceans are becoming more and more pol-
luted with oil, organic matter and toxic wastes to a point in which their
ecological function may be threatened. We are actively working unilat-
erally and multilaterally to reduce pollution (mostly oil) from ships.
There are a number of important initiatives which will require effective
followup, including President Carter’s Marine Pollution Package. Yet
more than 80% of the pollution in the oceans comes from landbased
sources and this is the most difficult area to deal with. The problem is
that we have not even started to focus on this problem or propose amelio-
rative programs. Finally, despite efforts to establish, by UNEP, a global
marine pollution monitoring system, we still have not received any
meaningful data and this important program is languishing. One idea
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
would be to have an international conference focusing on specific ma-
rine pollution problems after LOS.

(2) Upper Atmosphere Pollution: This is an area affecting weather,
climatic changes (and impact on food production) and our ozone layer.
Pollution comes from a variety of sources—most serious is energy. In
addition, the release of fluorocarbons and other chemicals has caused
serious depletion of the ozone layer with possible health consequences.
Again, UNEP is supposed to monitor this problem but little has come
out of this effort and almost nothing has been done about it except
some efforts to exchange information. A comprehensive look at this
problem and a concerted USG global strategy for dealing with it is nec-
essary. Finally, our knowledge of this area is so incomplete, for ex-
ample, that we are not certain whether the globe will become warmer
or colder over the next century or so. There is room for major initiatives
by the US in these fields.

(3) Toxic Substances: There has been a constant stream of new and
old toxic substances into the world environment with little under-
standing or control by governmental bodies, national or international.
The potential of major disaster exists. Among the toxic substances that
are building up are various pesticides, including DDT, arsenic, cad-
mium and lead. There has been some international discussion of this
problem and the nominal establishment of an International Registry of
Potentially Toxic Chemicals under UNEP, but we still do not have a
comprehensive, long-term policy or strategy. Clearly, one start would
be to establish effective export/import regulations for these substances
and another would be to pinpoint major users and producers of these
products and develop better ways to control their release into the open
environment. Since many of these chemicals originate in developed
countries initially, the OECD or ECE might be a forum to start the
process of developing international minimum standards for the release
of these substances.

(4) Urban Problems: Cities everywhere are “problem areas” in one
form or another. New techniques and technology have been developed
to solve many of these problems—some with notable success. How-
ever, this knowledge is not always widely shared. There exist a number
of opportunities to utilize technology better to solve our urban needs.
Establishing more effective mechanisms to do so should be one of our
objectives.

(5) Conservation of Resources: The world is likely to experience se-
rious scarcity of fresh water in a number of regions in the next decade
or two. Further, deserts are expanding worldwide, including in this
country. Generally, the world is experiencing soil degradation and the
destruction of vast natural areas which protect the earth’s plants and
animals and produce food for man. Despite international attention to

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
these problems, little additional resources or strong leadership has
been given to these problems. New long-term initiatives are needed to
improve national capabilities for resource management, to monitor the
problems and to apply new technology towards solving these interre-
lated problems. In particular, these problems have not been seen by our
own decision-makers and assistance program managers in a unified
way. Within State there is no focus for solving these problems. They
also have political significance since conflict is likely between countries
on the division of scarce water rights.

Broad environmental initiatives which the US could take include:
—Agreement on developing an international environmental im-
pact statement for major and long-lasting changes in environmental
quality with opportunity for review by countries affected.
—Upgrading our support for relevant international environmental
bodies, including UNEP, NATO/CCMS, OECD, and IMCO.
—Major new effort to develop a global environmental assessment
system which will report on the quality of the air, water, etc., and assess
possible damages. Upgrading, where possible, should be made of ex-
isting efforts in this area such as the Global Atmospheric Research
Program.
—An assessment of the extent, distribution and impact of contami-
nants in the world’s biological system.
—Worldwide evaluation of the marine environment including es-
tablishment of new or stricter discharge or release standards, including
landbased.

Population
The problem is well known, we shall go from four billion people
now to six billion by 2000, mostly from the Third World. There will be
serious food, environmental and social problems. Most of the problem
focuses on about 10 to 15 key countries. We are not, however, concen-
trating our efforts on these countries. Further, AID and perhaps the
USG, has not approached this major problem with serious high-level
attention. We do not have good leadership. There are a number of ini-
tiatives we can take in this field including better integration of health,
nutrition and family planning programs, greater use of local commu-
nity support, development of new low cost family planning techniques
acceptable to LDCs and a better development assistance program rele-
vant to population growth factors (see our memo to Deputy Secretary
on this topic.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
OES is now undertaking with CEQ a year-long study on world
population, resource and environment factors in response to President
Carter’s initiative. The main problems and key issues are known (in-
numerable such studies have been done.) In some cases, even the tech-
nical or scientific solutions are clear. The problems are leadership, re-
source allocation, economic priorities and managerial innovation. We
should not await the outcome of this study, but proceed now to deal
with these problems.

Natural Disasters
There exists a vast array of scientific knowledge and technology to
deal with a range of natural disasters including earthquakes, floods
and tidal waves. For example, we have considerable knowledge of
earthquake prediction, but this knowledge still is not applied to many
areas of high risk. Also, much more can be done in the fields of
warning, communications, and relief using new technology. AID fo-
cuses on LDCs, IO on the UN Disaster Relief Organization, but no one
is concerned with broad international cooperation, or short and me-
dium term cooperation to develop and deploy new techniques to deal
with the full range of natural disasters. (See draft memo of Sandy Vo-
gelgesang on this subject.)

Energy
There are so many areas for US action and so many problems
it is hard to characterize all that needs to be done. One area certainly
is the “management” of nuclear power around the world for non-
proliferation, economic and environmental reasons. Increasingly, we
will have to look for international “solutions”—i.e., international con-
trol over reprocessing, waste management, transportation and the full
bag that comes under the term “safeguards”. One important initiative
we have to examine is the potential global benefits of acceleration of
solar energy research and development. A major crash program in this
sector can provide a low-cost alternative to nuclear power and to in-
creasingly high-cost imported oil especially for the LDCs. This option
could provide a number of political and security benefits. It will be im-
portant to work with the new Energy Department to encourage em-
phasis on such new sources. But this would require major domestic en-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
ergy decisions to increase our commitment to this energy system.
Obviously revitalization of the International Energy Agency is needed
along with major efforts by oil consumers at conservation.
Oceans
The issues are: the equitable allocation and conservation of re-
sources, the support of marine scientific research and the development
of a “law of the sea” which reflects modern political, economic, and
technological reality. We are failing in most of these areas. Much will
naturally depend on the outcome of the LOS Conference. But this con-
ference will only establish the “bare bones”, in essence it is only the
basic framework. Specific substantive solutions are required to deal
with the exploitation and conservation of living and non-living marine
resources, agreeing on stronger pollution discharge standards for
ships, helping marine scientific research, increasing the protection of
navigation and assisting the mobility of our Navy.

Antarctica
We need to examine closely the medium and long-term future of
this continent. The main issue which should be decided is by whom
and how should control over this continent be exercised. We are now
only in a “holding pattern” but have not resolved the major issues or
problems in this area. The probability of success is greater if we move
swiftly while there appears to be limited desire to exploit than later
when others are likely to perceive profit from unilateral action or im-
plementation of claims.

Science and Technology
The problem is not to “get over” the forthcoming US [UN] Science
and Technology Conference. The issue is how can we effectively mobi-
lize existing relevant knowledge and technology for development pur-
poses. One assessment is true: the world has done, up to now, a very
poor job in applying state-of-the-art technology to the problems of the
poor. There are so many “appropriate technologies” that are not widely
available as to make any sensitive soul cry. Items: use of simplified
water pumps, para-professional medical and nutritional experts, solar
heaters, electricity for food preservation, telecommunications tech-
nology for educational needs, etc. Nor has thoughtful and realistic work
been done in utilizing the private sector. So much “ideology” has been
thrown around by both sides as to make realistic efforts difficult. Yet in-
novative solutions exist: creation of new funding mechanisms to facili-
tate purchase of new technology, manufacture locally of simple items,
subsidies for transfer of private and government-owned technology
and know-how, loan of specialized personnel to LDCs to manage de-
velopment and distribution of new methods and technology. More in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tegration between sectors in utilizing new techniques to lower costs is
another possibility.

Finally, between industrialized countries there are major issues
that need examination and action: opening of trade in “know-how”, de-
creased restrictions on importation of foreign hardware and software,
joint pooling of efforts in “public technology” R&D fields such as en-
ergy, pollution control and mass transit. Also problems in East-West
transfer should be examined.

Space Technology
(1) LANDSAT: A decision will be needed concerning whether and
in what way to move toward an operational LANDSAT system. The re-
lationship between LANDSAT and other systems (such as meteorolog-
ical satellites) for gathering data on various global problems will need
to be considered. The possibility of a “global problems” information
system should be considered. Various approaches to internationalizing
LANDSAT should be considered. Also, ways should be sought to ame-
liorate the “analytical gap” between countries able to analyze and make
their best use of LANDSAT data and those lacking such capabilities.
(2) Space Shuttle: A variety of problems and opportunities related
to the space shuttle will need to be examined. These should include an
examination of opportunities for cooperation and of the potential ef-
fects of the space shuttle on widening access to space.
(3) Communications Satellites: A continuing effort is needed to find
beneficial ways of employing emergency communications satellite
techniques.

Transborder Data Flows
The flow of data between computers across borders has presented
new regulatory and privacy problems. An approach to those problems
should be developed initially in concert with other industrialized
nations.

International Health
This is an obvious area for a more integrated and focused US
policy. The needs are many and there are a number of promising ap-
proaches, including greater use of para-medical personnel, increased
preventive health programs, greater attention to tropical diseases, etc.
The problem is that we do not have the managerial resources and
policy capability in State or elsewhere to carry out an increased effort.
Naturally, a special problem will be to integrate this field with our
other efforts.

General Comments
My final observation is that we are not well organized to deal with
most of these problems. We do not always have the right people. We

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
certainly do not have control over significant relevant resources. A
main USG issue is likely to be whether the domestic concerned
agencies should “go global” or whether there is a leadership, policy
and coordinating role for State in these areas. Only radical surgery will
do the job, not “quick fixes” or placebos.
291.

Action Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, July 22, 1977
SUBJECT
United Nations General Assembly Address
Issue for Decision
Which theme would be most appropriate for the US statement to
the 32nd General Assembly, to be delivered by you or the President.
Discussion
We have two general themes in mind. Whichever is chosen, how-
ever, an important part of the statement should be a discussion of this
Administration’s attitude and intentions toward the UN, both the
major organs and the agencies comprising the whole system. We
should probably be in a position to state a judgment on the various pro-
posals for restructuring the UN, now in preparatory discussion; this
will also provide us with an authoritative occasion to state our argu-
ments about our decision on the ILO3 and its relationship to our overall
attitude toward UN agencies. Our continuing human rights efforts will
also be featured, whichever way the rest of the speech turns.
Building on this basis, we could then focus the address on interna-
tional and US peacemaking efforts, the resolution of regional conflicts,
conveying the foreign policy activism of the Carter Administration.
The Middle East and southern Africa will be major items on the GA
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
agenda, and it would be appropriate for the US to explain its policies
before the Assembly as a whole. Developments between now and Sep-
tember could make it particularly important that these two regional
issues be addressed in some depth. Cyprus is another GA perennial on
which we might have some interesting things to say by September or
October. By making these matters the centerpiece of our presentation,
we would seem to be placing emphasis on the political/security role of
the UN, rather than the economic and North-South function which we
believe is often more effectively dealt with in discrete, functional
forums.

Alternatively, we could go straight to the global issues, such as
food, population, energy and basic human needs, which would signal
our interest in pursuing North-South interdependence issues within
the General Assembly, as well as the functional forums. We might be
ready to come up with some specific initiatives on global issues; de-
pending on the degree of specificity, we might be able to divert General
Assembly energies away from the old New International Economic
Order issues. We could give special pushes to the forthcoming UN
Conference on Science and Technology for Development, as well as
other development issues involved in planning the new international
development strategy which will be one important theme of this GA.
We should begin comparing notes with the NSC staff, as the ques-
tion of President Carter’s participation at the General Assembly could
also influence the type of speech to be delivered.

Options
Stress international peacemaking.

Stress global issues.

Prepare tentative outlines on both themes, for discussion with the NSC
staff.

292.

Memorandum From the Assistant to the President’s Special
Assistant for Health Issues (Fill) to the President’s Special
Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)
Washington, July 25, 1977
SUBJECT
Meeting with the President, Friday, July 29, 1977
In order to begin to map out a strategy for your meeting on
Friday, the following items are suggested for you to think about
raising during the meeting.
1. International Health Strategy.
—Decision memorandum on this subject will be ready by late
September.
—The structure has been agreed to; it has applicability to be used
as a planning and analysis tool on other crosscutting issues which
cover both domestic and international issues such as hunger, family
planning, disaster relief, child health.
—It has been very difficult to gain agreement on structure of all the
agencies involved to procedures to follow on international health be-
cause of the competing and overlapping interests on this issue; the
same problems are relevant to World Food policy which encompasses
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2. World Hunger Initiative.
—The National Security Council proposes that we use the PRM re-
view process to come to grips with this particular issue and develop a
governmentwide world food policy plan, I disagree for the following
reasons:
—Does not involve the private sector early.
—Does not involve the President in interacting with the private
sector before the policy is developed.
—The issue has been extensively studied and a different approach,
which includes a policy review should be followed.
—Does not provide the mechanism by which we develop a polit-
ical constituency for this issue on the Hill.
—NSC and the Domestic Council propose that they jointly chair
this initiative; this is entirely too much Executive Office involve-
ment and detracts from Cabinet-level responsibility (State, AID,
Agriculture).
—Your involvement in this issue may be an important example of
your international human needs initiatives and can have the effect of
mobilizing support for your overall foreign policy objectives. Thus the
necessity of seeking a different format for conducting a policy review
which involves substantial private sector participation.
—The difficult issue of price of food and other difficult agri-
business, farm labor, and consumer group issues may be very difficult
to cope with politically, especially in the West (business and farmers),
and, therefore, early involvement between the government and these
interest groups will have the effect of defining the differences before
the public and Congress, thus enabling you to make tough decisions
which may be more politically acceptable and saleable later on in the
process.
—Some things may be accomplished in this area over the next year
or two like providing a set-aside contingency fund for food assistance
and other visible, tangible initiatives which will have the effect of di-
verting attention from the emotion-charged political rights issues to the
related human needs issue.
—I have been in close touch with people like Jim Grant of the
Overseas Development Council, and through him an Interreligious
Task Force on World Food Policy which includes Father Hesburgh;
they believe your visible involvement early on will be helpful to you
with Congress.
—My image as a physician and an anthropologist and the way I
have been working in a cross-cutting approach, both domestically and
internationally, may be a useful vehicle to mobilize the different in-
terests on this subject.

293.

Memorandum From President Carter to Secretary of State
Vance, Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal, Secretary of
Health, Education and Welfare Califano, and the
Administrator of the Agency for International Development
(Gilligan)
Washington, August 15, 1977
At my request, Peter Bourne is preparing an analysis of interna-
tional health problems; it will be useful in determining how we can best
classification marking.

294.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to His Assistant (Fill)
Washington, August 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Health Policy Review
The commitment to address global human needs has become a
fundamental theme of the Carter Foreign Policy. International Health is
a key element in that policy. In part, because the United States has ex-
ceptional technical capability and expertise in this area to offer the rest
of the world, but also because even among the range of issues relating
to human needs, health is the area that is the least controversial and the
most free from broader political concerns. Our study should be aimed
at determining how the resources of the federal government and of the
United States in general could be mobilized most effectively to make
this aspect of the President’s foreign policy a reality.

Specifically, our goal should be to (1) inventory the resources of
the federal government in the international health area, (2) to look for a
mechanism to integrate international health concerns into the foreign
policy making process, (3) to coordinate the resources of the federal
government in such a way that we maximize our effectiveness and
minimize duplication and overlap, (4) to establish a broad blueprint as
to what the role of the United States should be in the world in carrying
its share of the total effort to alleviate suffering through a coordinated
global health strategy, (5) to carefully examine various new initiatives
which we might be able to start that would highlight the concern that
the President has in this area and also be a major new contribution on
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the part of the United States to dealing with this problem, and (6) to ex-
amine ways in which our contribution to the global health effort can be
fully integrated with the activities of other nations and of multinational
bodies particularly the United Nations Organizations.

The fundamental philosophical concept that we are attempting to
communicate which differs somewhat from that of other studies going
on with regard to international assistance is that we should define the
international health area as a global problem and not a problem exclu-
sively of the developing nations. This will allow us to get away from
the traditional dichotomy that has plagued us in the past of donor and
recipient nations, in which, the United States was in the posture of
giving to other countries in need without a sense of shared responsi-
bility for dealing with the suffering of their people. Even the concept of
a North-South dialogue maintains the notion of donor and recipient,
the only difference being that the United States has broadened the re-
sponsibility to include other industrialized nations. But it is still a ques-
tion of charity, in which the wealthier nations have some obligation to
the poorer nations. We hopefully will get beyond this, and conceive of
health as being something which is a responsibility of all the people of
the world regardless of where they live or what diseases they are lo-
cally afflicted by. In many respects the success in dealing with the
problem of smallpox is a model which exemplifies this concept. There
was a joint commitment by the countries throughout the world and by
the World Health Organization that together the problem of smallpox
would be attacked and defeated using a model that was quite different
from our traditional foreign aid effort. And on this basis the problem
has largely been virtually eliminated.

Specifically our project should be aimed at the following goals:
(1) Inventory all health resources within the federal government,
in detail both in terms of personnel, budget and programs, so that it is
possible to rapidly assess the extent of the federal resources in terms of
the effort going into a given country or diseases entity or major pro-
grams area such as research or manpower training.

(2) We should examine the organizational structure of the federal
government in order to determine the manner in which the interna-
tional health issue can best be incorporated into the development of
foreign policy. Military power has traditionally been the key ancillary
component of our foreign policy. Over the years international eco-
nomic policy has been incorporated as an important consideration in
foreign policy development and has been placed managerially within
the State Department structure. Even though President Carter has
made clear that concern with basic human needs is a fundamental ele-
ment in his overall foreign policy there is currently no single mecha-
nism within the State Department to allow for the effective incorpora-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
tion of this issue in the development of overall policy. This is in striking
contrast to the manner in which other countries have successfully inte-
grated concern for human needs into their foreign policy strategy. Only
in the limited role of foreign aid to developing nations has concern for
human needs any real role in the conduct of our own foreign policy.
Our recommendations as a result may involve organizational changes
within certain departments, particularly the Department of State.
(3) We should examine various alternatives that would allow for
the centralized coordination of international health policy. This might
take the form of a cabinet level coordinating committee, the develop-
ment of a lead agency responsibility, or a focus in the White House.
Coordination of sub-functions such as research, manpower, and the re-
lationship with the private sector needs to be considered.
(4) To establish basic health goals for the next four, ten and
perhaps twenty-five years with a clear cut plan as to how the United
States would contribute to the achievement of those goals. It is clear
that the development of such goals would have to be closely correlated
with those established already by the World Health Organization. This
is a function which we would not necessarily perform at this stage, but
should be clearly an anticipated responsibility which the ongoing
mechanism we set up would carry out in coordination with the Insti-
tute of Medicine and other groups.

(5) Having established the basic blueprint for America’s role in in-
ternational health we should examine the specific ways in which each
agency would play a role in the overall game plan. As clearly as pos-
sible we should define the role and mandate of each Department and
Agency. At the same time we would also examine the manner in which
the private sector and multilateral organizations would interface with
the efforts of the federal government towards the achievement of those
common goals.

In the long run I anticipate that we would end up with a global
health plan with clear objectives and specific plans for reaching those
objectives. As a derivative of that global plan we would have regional
plans and specific goals and timetables for Africa, Latin America, Asia
and other regions of the world, and at a third level specific goals for in-
dividual countries. These countries goals obviously would be the result
of a carefully coordinated consensus between the global and regional
goals which we had established and the goals which health planners in
each nation had themselves established. I anticipate that in the long run
the inter-agency coordinating mechanism that we recommend would
then on a regular basis review our global strategy, our strategy for each
region and our strategy in each individual country to insure that they
were consistent with an overall plan. At those meetings the participants
should have the capacity to present the entire federal effort going into a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
country or a region, and the policy basis on which the decisions were
made to commit resources from each individual agency. After re-
viewing the commitments ongoing from the various agencies in a
country this would be compared with the long-range objectives and
should there be deficiencies plans would then be made jointly between
the agencies to enhance or modify our efforts in that country to better
achieve the agreed upon goals.

I believe also that we should be able to carry out a similar periodic
review focusing on individual disease entities and that we should set in
conjunction with WHO specific goals for the eradication and control of
the remaining major cripplers and killers in the world. At a third level
we should examine the major generic causes of ill health, namely lack
of potable water, lack of adequate shelter, inadequate family planning
and should establish for those generic areas similar goals that could be
reviewed on a periodic basis by a single coordinating entity.

295.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to His Assistant (Fill)
Washington, August 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Themes for World Health
In my previous overview memo2 I failed to adequately stress the
use of health as a way, not merely to help us restore diplomatic rela-
tions with nations we do not currently have relations with but to bring
us closer together with countries such as Burma and Somalia with
whom we have formal relations, but are not close. Many of those coun-
tries are ignored or given a low priority because they are militarily or
strategically unimportant. Traditional use of foreign aid for this pur-
pose has not been as useful as had been hoped because of the lack of
flexibility and the severe constraints under which it operates.

296.

Memorandum From Harry Blaney of the Policy Planning
Staff to the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake)
Washington, September 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Possible Community Water Initiative—Background Paper
Attached you will find a “Background Paper” for a possible U.S.
community water initiative per our conversation. Material in the paper
can be used for a variety of purposes including:
—justification for the initiative;
—briefing material for an explanation of the problem and our re-
sponse to it; and
—discussion of various specific ways our assistance can be
utilized.

For this reason the paper is not perfect for any one of these pur-
poses and would have to be edited or tailored for individual use. Left
out of the paper, for the moment, is exactly how the initiative should be
organized and followed up on. It is my view that if it is enunciated it
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
will require some kind of special organizational backstopping if it
is not to fall into the bureaucratic quagmire and be swallowed up
thereby. (That’s what happened to many of Henry’s famous efforts in
speeches!)

I particularly call your attention to the section of the paper on U.S.
assistance levels. You will note that FY 79 funds for community water
programs now project a severe decline in overall funding levels. Obvi-
ously this problem must be dealt with.

If you need any more information or a retailoring of the material
attached, please let me know.

Attachment
Background Paper on Community Water Initiative by the
U.S.

Washington, undated
The Problem
Only about 10 percent of the population in the developing coun-
tries utilize fully protected water sources. Less than a tenth of the vil-
lages of India have access to clean drinking water. In the developing
countries many large urban areas’ drinking water supplies are unsafe.
There are, however, great differences between countries and particu-
larly between urban and rural areas. World-wide, about two-thirds of
the LDC population is without “reasonably adequate” water or sanita-
tion services. However, in many urban areas and especially in rural
communities organic waste is accumulating and water supplies are
being increasingly contaminated. The UN Children’s Fund estimates
about one billion rural people in the LDCs and 200 million in urban
shanty towns must use unsafe water sources.

A UN report has stated: “. . . Few could disagree that of any single
activity in these urban areas, the improvement of water supply would
have the greatest impact on the prevention of disease, the improvement
of living conditions, the cleaning of streets, the beautification of parks
and playgrounds, and the servicing of commercial, governmental and
industrial operations. Similarly, if any single action were to be taken in
these rural areas with the aim of reducing exposure to the most preva-
lent diseases, upgrading lifestyle (particularly that of women and chil-
waste deposited in surface soil. Further, there is a direct relationship
between deaths due to diarrheal diseases in children under five and the
availability of piped water systems. Water borne diseases also combine
with other factors including induced fever which interfere with the
body’s use of food energy which lowers nutritional value. More than
five million people die every year from water-borne diseases.
Another dimension of the community water problem is the scar-
city of water for growing urban centers. Many cities in the Third World
as they rapidly grow due to population increase are finding it increas-
ingly difficult to supply their citizens with clean water. The result
sometimes has been the increase in sickness, the drying up or pollution
of wells and conflict over water ownership between communities.
International Institutional Background
The problem of potable water was examined in varying degrees at
several UN conferences including those on the Environment, Popula-
tion, Habitat and most recently at the UN Water Conference at Mar del
Plata in March 1977. Specifically, both Habitat and the Water Confer-
ence passed resolutions or recommendations about community water
with the main aim dealing with the problems of the least developed
and most seriously affected countries. The Conferences called for in-
creased financial contributions, multilaterally and bilaterally, for as-
sisting community water supply and sanitation.

Also emphasis was placed on improvement of domestic hygiene
especially through education and motivation. The application of ap-
propriate and low-cost technology was cited as key elements in dealing
with this problem. Priority was also given to immediate national plan-
ning to give high priority to projects in this sector.

Specifically the key UN Water Conference recommendations were
“(a) That where human needs have not yet been satisfied, national
development policies and plans should give priority to the supplying
[Blaney placed this as a footnote at the bottom of the page but did not insert a footnote
marker in the text.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of drinking water for the entire population and to the final disposal of
waste water; and should also actively involve, encourage and support
efforts being undertaken by local voluntary organizations;
(b) That Governments reaffirm their commitment made at Habitat
to ‘adopt programs with realistic standards for quality and quantity to
provide water for urban and rural areas by 1990, if possible’;
(e) That in 1980 the national programmes which have been imple-
mented for that purpose, and the extent to which the countries con-
cerned have succeeded in mobilizing local and national support should
be reviewed by an appropriate mechanism to be determined by the
Economic and Social Council and based on the use of existing ma-
chinery, with a view to attaining coordinated action toward agreed
targets;”
Extent of Present U.S. Assistance Efforts
Direct AID funding for community water supply and sanitation
has had an irregular pattern varying between $16 million to 79 million
for community water supply and sanitation (CWS). In addition some
$29. million is being spent on projects in which there is a CWS compo-
nent. (These are mostly well sinking and farm projects.) In addition
some $96. million in Supporting Assistance (SA) is funded for CWS
largely in Egypt for the “Canal Cities Water and Sanitation” project.
($12 million also is going to Portugal.)
for CWS development assistance and $60 million for SA. Funding for
projects in which CWS is a component and SA programs similarly will
experience a major decline. An important reason for this is the inclu-
sion in FY 78 funds of new major projects especially those in Egypt.
However, the overall marked decline projected for FY 79 will impact
untimely upon total amounts devoted to this sector.

Multilateral Programs
A number of international development lending institutions
(IDLIs) have programs relevant to community water systems. In partic-
ular, the World Bank has projects in water supply and sewage. They
also support some programs dealing with the related problems of pop-
ulation and nutrition but little in other areas of health. (They only have
a Onchocerciasis Control Program in West Africa.) The Bank decided
not to fund health programs directly but to incorporate health ques-
tions into the basic design of projects.

Character of US Initiative
In keeping with the importance of the problem for human health
and productivity and in following up on the relevant UN resolutions,

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
the US is proposing a major concerted global effort to develop for the
poorest sectors in developing countries safe drinking water supplies
and safe sanitation in keeping with the recommendations of the UN
conference that dealt with this problem, including encouraging coun-
tries to have plans by 1980 for the accelerated development of drinking
water systems. The US is prepared to join with other countries and interna-
tional bodies to supply financial assistance to sound projects and to train local
personnel. We are also ready to assist where we can and where we are asked, in
the design of the plans now being developed.

A Comprehensive Strategy to Improve the Quality and Quantity of
Community Water Supplies
Improvement in the availability and quality of community water
supplies has a number of elements which must be integrated and un-
derstood for a successful program. The United States, within the con-
text of its initiative and its available resources supports a carefully
planned and integrated approach to community water problems. This
integrated approach and our assistance should include, as appropriate,
the following factors:
—Assistance programs should primarily focus on encouraging
local management and resource allocation to safe local water supply
and sanitation. The problem will not be solved alone by outside assist-
ance which can only be a small percentage of the total funding re-
quired. Thus strengthening and providing incentives for national and
local governments to undertake their own major efforts would be the
main focus for foreign assistance.
—A community water program should be integrated into other re-
lated areas such as health, family planning and nutritional efforts. Also
coordination with agricultural programs, especially irrigation, etc., will
be necessary if rural areas are to receive maximum benefit.
—An element in a comprehensive strategy to provide safe commu-
nity water is that of education and communication. Very simple and
limited basic information, if communicated to individuals can make a
great difference in their nutrition, sanitation and disease situation. This
is especially important for expectant mothers and those with young
children. Thus a community water initiative should include an educa-
tional component.
—In this regard, a maximum utilization of existing community
structures, including schools, rural extension services, health facilities
and local administration. Mass media and local schools should be uti-
lized in providing basic hygiene information.
—The interaction between large-scale water projects, community
water and sanitation systems and the spread of disease should be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
studied and programs developed to ensure maximum coordination to
minimize the possibility of untoward health hazards.
—Primary emphasis of the US effort will be on supplying initial for-
eign exchange costs (for example chlorination machinery and supplies)
and assisting in the development of national and local planning and
management capability. This might include, for example:
—Scholarships for Environmental and Public Works Engineers.
—Support for local educational and training institutions in the
fields of environmental planning, sanitation, public health and hy-
giene, etc.
—Foreign exchange costs of necessary equipment.
—Support of programs aimed at preventing and cleaning up pol-
luted surface and ground waters used for community purposes. (Part
of such an effort would be the early detection of such pollution and
identification of possible solutions.)
—Establishment of local laboratories for the analysis of water
samples to assist in preventing contamination and to warn of possible
dangers to human and animal health.
—Assistance in the installation, development and research associ-
ated with low-cost waste water treatment facilities or alternative ac-
ceptable economic uses of waste which would protect community
water supplies.
—To up-grade the local capability of the public health and other
relevant institutions to deal with water borne diseases particularly pre-
vention techniques.
—Promote regional cooperation in specific areas where such coop-
eration would increase community water quality and quantity and pre-
vent the spread of diseases.
—In addition, the US with other concerned countries would con-
sider supporting global and regional research and studies required to
deal with specific high priority community water problems especially
those affecting the spread of diseases through the aquatic environment.
—The US is prepared to work with other countries and interna-
tional organizations to deal more effectively with community waste
problems including specifically to increase the amount of total re-
sources devoted to this sector and the development of international
uniform methods and standards for assessing and monitoring water
quality and the control of waste borne diseases. We will urge interna-
tional development lending institutions to increase their efforts and to
specifically assist where long-term and large scale efforts are required.
In addition, multilateral institutions can promote regional cooperation
in this area.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues

297.

Letter From Secretary of State Vance to the Chairman of the
Board of the Population Council (Rockefeller)
Washington, September 17, 1977

298.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, September 27, 1977
Thoughts on Policy Areas Which May Be of
Special Interest To You This Year
Following up on our earlier conversation, I wanted to suggest a
few areas where I think your personal involvement and leadership
would be particularly important to the Department and the gov-
ernment. I selected the issues described below based on a sense that the

299.

Memorandum From Harry Blaney of the Policy Planning
Staff to the Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State
for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology (Lowrance)
Washington, November 10, 1977
SUBJECT
Review of International Health Policy Draft
I. Summary
Overall the report is far too long, lacks focus, consistency and an
adequate analytical framework and its recommendations are often too
general or unrealistic. Thus, I believe, the report requires a serious and
thorough redrafting. I recommend the present report remain in draft
form and neither be published nor go forward for detailed review by
Departmental principals or by the President until it has been edited, re-
drafted in parts, and reviewed by staff. Specific suggested changes in
the draft are contained in the attached copy along with some minor or
other comments.

II. Specific Comments
There are a number of inappropriate or incorrect statements about
US “diplomatic health interests” and our developmental assistance
policies which need either correction or some modification. For ex-
ample, in some places we imply that we have specific “commercial in-
terests” in our health diplomacy which gives the impression that the
chief benefit of some of our humanitarian assistance is to advance our
commercial interests. I believe these statements are both inappropriate
and incorrect.

In addition to inaccuracies in the characterization of US policy, the
report does not examine or make recommendations with respect to im-
portant international health issues which need both examination and
correction. For example, improving the structure and programs of the
World Health Organization3 is entirely missing. This organization is a
major component of any international health strategy and nowhere are
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
there recommendations about how to increase the effectiveness of its
programs.

Likewise, there is almost a total absence of priority setting4 with re-
spect to international health problems, particularly in our assistance
programs.

The relationship of the health sector to our entire development
assistance strategy5 seems to lack definition and analysis with respect
to the interaction between various sectors. There is no real under-
standing expressed in the report of how, for example, health problems
relate to food and nutrition and even, more importantly, to tough ques-
tions such as provision of community water services, education, and
urbanization. The assumption seems to be that health is somehow over-
arching many of these sectors and basically subservient to them. This
perspective is in part reflected by one of the recommendations in put-
ting environment and population under a Bureau of International
Health. It seems to me this is a mistaken approach since it does not give
adequate acknowledgement of the variety of forces at work in the de-
velopment process or indeed of the problem of political and social envi-
ronmental change which is fundamental to any development strategy.
Clearly, health is vital to any development strategy but it is not the sole
basis for either a human needs or a human rights policy.

In this same way, there is no recognition of limits to resources and
personnel that6 might be available to the health sector. In a period of
personnel and budgetary constraint within the USG it seems to me the
process of priority setting is all the more urgent but there is little recog-
nition of that reality. Further, there is no examination of appropriate
funding levels for our bilateral and multilateral assistance programs.
This, together with any substantive priorities in terms of international
health problems (tropical diseases, cancer, toxic substances, air pollu-
tion, etc.), makes for a very serious deficiency in the policy usefulness
of the report.

The characterization of the relationship between “health criteria”
and human rights8 in evaluating the establishment and nature of rela-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
tions with other countries needs reexamination and does not appear
consistent with actual policy or practice. (See page 300.) Further, the
broad characterization of the relationship between international health
and human needs while fundamentally correct does not help us go
very far in relating international health to other important human
needs sectors such as the provision of food, shelter, family planning
services, etc. There is no acknowledgement of how these different
sectors can interrelate with one another or the emphasis that should be
placed on one or another in our actual programming. In the harsh
world of governmental decision-making it is just these trade-offs which
must be taken into consideration when budgetary decisions are made.
Some policy guidance in this area seems useful but certainly is not con-
tained in the present paper.

An additional problem with this particular report is the request for
additional studies such as those contemplated on pages 298–299. There
are a number of other requests for reports to the President, reports to
Congress, new studies, etc. It seems to me that this examination was
largely meant to raise those issues, pose options and obtain decisions. I
can see the usefulness of specific studies, or better specific issue papers
with recommendations for action, but general calls for additional
broad-gauged studies seems to me to be a waste of bureaucratic re-
sources if they end with the same kinds of generalities and conclusions
that this report presently contains.

We have to be very careful about how we characterize human
rights and the provision of development assistance. In some cases we
will want to relate economic and social needs with human rights while
in other cases the connection may not be all that evident. For example,
there are many countries where political rights and social rights are
comparatively upheld by the government but what with the extreme
poverty there is little delivery of health and other services. We certainly
would not want to get into the position of characterizing these coun-
tries for denying basic human needs or rights to their people. In some
cases almost every country could be criticized including ourselves
about provision of services to our poorer people.

In addition, I think we need to examine the recommendations with
respect to the role of DOD and specifically the flow [role?] of military
programs in the health sector. The report recommends that military
programs in the international health area be “significantly expanded”.
This issue probably needs closer examination and discussion in a some-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
what wider forum. There is already a debate about the use of military
sources for “civic action” type programs, now euphemistically called
“nation building.” Some of these policy issues, in fact, may adversely
affect what we are trying to do in many of these countries in the human
rights field. There appears to be no acknowledgement of that harsh re-
ality in the report. In addition, there are important implications for AID
(let alone for our DOD budget) in some of the proposals for significant
increases in military assistance and increased personnel for this sector.
(See pages 306–307.)

With respect to international organizations, as noted above, the re-
port does not really examine how the WHO and other related organiza-
tions can be improved. While the report quite correctly raises the issue
of the limit of US funding for international organizations at the 25%
level, it does not specify what levels would be appropriate and how
they might be directed for high priority programs. The report does not
raise any of the more serious and important questions with respect to
our relationship to WHO and other health related organizations. For
example, it does not raise the issue of what relationship WHO should
have with UNDP and UNICEF.

The report rightly raises the question of the impact of health on
“global systems issues” but it does not go beyond mentioning this
harsh reality and relate health specifically to how these global systems
issues might be resolved by specific health related programs. For ex-
ample, there is no analysis of the relationship between health services,
population growth and food availability. (While it mentions OSTP’s
role in such global systems issues it should also include CEQ which is
now coordinating a Presidential study on population and environment.
Turning to the specific recommendations of the report, the fol-
lowing appear to be the appropriate State responses:
The establishment of a Bureau of International Health: We would best
note that this is an almost impossible bureaucratic and resource task
and would probably be counter-productive since it would isolate
health from a number of other issues. It would also create a difficult bu-
reaucratic situation among the nonhealth constituencies that would not
look with favor on placing such items as nutrition and population under
health. Rather, we should support the establishment of an Office of In-
ternational Health in OES and under the Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Environment and Population. In this way environmental and popula-
tion health matters can be integrated at that level and related also to the
entire spectrum of our foreign policy concerns.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Interdepartmental Policy Panel and the establishment of an Inter-Agency
Committee to Coordinate International Health Activities: My basic feeling
would be that we should not establish these organizations in quite the
form recommended by the report. Better options are available in-
cluding: in place of abolishing the NSC Ad Hoc Committee on Popula-
tion Affairs we might consider giving to that committee responsibility
for population, health and nutrition which would parallel our recent
policy emphasis in trying to integrate these sectors in our assistance
programs. Another alternative would be to establish a separate NSC
Ad Hoc Committee dealing with health issues chaired by the Assistant
or Deputy Assistant Secretary in OES. Finally, the last alternative could
have a White House chaired committee on international health perhaps
run by OSTP or Peter Bourne with the State Health Office acting as Ex-
ecutive Secretary.

New International Health Attache Program: I believe we should op-
pose the creation of this corps. We are already under-going an exami-
nation of our Science Attache program and perhaps we might look at
how science attaches can increase their responsibilities in the health
sector. But unless we wish to have every U.S. Government agency send
attaches to every Embassy, in effect duplicating the entire U.S. bureau-
cracy in each capital abroad, we need to find better alternatives to the
suggestion in the report rather than accept such a proliferation. We
might alternatively recommend that Foreign Service personnel be
trained and involved in international health policy issues in their regular
assignments abroad to a greater extent than has been the case hereto-
fore. AID itself would probably be opposed to this idea since it would
duplicate their health program officials that exist in many AID recip-
ient posts.

Annual Report on International Health: It seems to me not an unrea-
sonable requirement, but the difficulties are that such a report could be-
come merely an exercise in description and not a mechanism for im-
provement of programs. Far better would be policy papers with
recommendations on specific issues rather than a pro forma report.
III. General State Position and Response to White House
Finally, I believe the report should be considerably shortened and
more focussed in its recommendations. At the very least pros and cons
should be set forth for various controversial recommendations or alter-
natives offered. A sense of realism must be incorporated with respect to
resources which might be available in this area.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
In our approach to the meeting with Dr. Peter Bourne and other
agencies, I believe we should take the following basic tack:13
—The present report is too lengthy and diffuse14 and needs consid-
erable reworking before it is officially reviewed or further dissemi-
nated within the United States Government.
—We make this recommendation because we strongly support a
sensitive and integrated international health policy and the expansion
of our efforts in this field. We fear, however, that the present report
may harm rather than help this process.
—We are prepared to provide detailed comments and if appro-
priate a new draft of the Chapter V section: in any case it should be re-
viewed again by staff and then by the involved principals.
—The Department of State itself intends to upgrade our health ca-
pability but this must be from within the context of the whole range of
foreign affairs issues and responsibilities, including such issues as envi-
ronment, non-proliferation, population, energy, etc. We will establish a
new health office in OES but a bureau is unrealistic.
—We have some serious problems with a number of the recom-
mendations and would like to provide alternative solutions to the
problems they attempt to address.
—Finally, we should look at this report in the context of the action
memorandum to the President and ensure that both cover the priority
issues and will reflect fully the views of the participating agencies.
These documents should be reviewed together.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues

300.

Memorandum From the Chairman of the NSC Ad Hoc
Group on Population Policy (Green) to the President’s
Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)
Washington, November 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Foundations for a New U.S. International Health Policy
Among the recommendations in the chapter on Medical Diplo-
macy of the subject report2 is one to establish “an interagency com-
mittee to coordinate international health activities of the various
agencies relating to foreign policy” (p. 329). The recommendation goes
on to say: “Ideally this committee would replace the NSC Ad Hoc
Group on Population Affairs.”

301.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Kreisberg) to the Deputy Under Secretary of
State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology (Nye)
Washington, November 22, 1977
SUBJECT
Draft Presidential Decision Document on International Health Initiatives
The problems associated with the draft decision memorandum to
the President2 reflect many of the same difficulties the Department had
with regard to the larger International Health Report. These problems
include:
—Lack of Priority Setting: The decision document does not address
itself to the very thorny but key problem of where specifically we
should direct our resources in the area of international health. Should
we do more in the area of infant immunization, tropical disease re-
search, nutritional assistance, population or basic health services?
What should be the relative mix in our assistance program between bi-
lateral and multilateral programs or one form of health assistance vs.
other forms?
—Lack of Specificity and Clarity: In many of the recommendations
there is a lack of specificity with respect to who should undertake a cer-
tain action, how much a particular action would cost and what the ben-
efits might be in return for resources employed and the role of the
various agencies in supporting the initiatives. Also the report does not
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
really set forth an international health strategy which was initially the
purpose of the entire exercise. The President in reading this decision
paper does not, in fact, receive any analysis priorities, or basic strategy,
i.e., a meaningful context in which to make decisions about initiatives
and additional resource allocation.
—Lack of Analysis of the Interrelationship of WHO and Related Pro-
grams to Those of Donor Countries, LDCs and Our Own Ongoing and
Planned Health Activities: The decision memo does not relate existing
and planned international health programs to those of the USG. There
is no reference to programs by others or ourselves to deal with specific
health problems.
—Inaccurate Characterizations: In a number of cases the report char-
acterizes ongoing policies, programs and views of USG agencies in
ways which do not fully or accurately reflect the existing situation. In
particular, a statement that international health activities address only
agency specific missions is unsound. Nor does the report recognize that
AID health and other programs in fact are increasingly focussed on the
poor and the provision of basic health care. This has been the case over
the last year.
—Lack of Interrelationship/Coordination: The recommendations tend
to be placed in isolation from associated strategies and programs in re-
lated areas. There is no recognition of ongoing policies and studies such
as those dealing with AID development assistance. We may indeed
want to increase AID funding for health programs proportionately to
increased overall assistance levels, but no case has been made for this
recommendation.
—Creation of Overly Complex and Burdensome International Health
Bureaucracy and Coordinating Mechanisms: The recommendations to es-
tablish a three-tier international health bureaucracy headed by Dr.
Bourne does not seem the most efficient approach to developing and
coordinating an international health strategy. A simpler structure,
coordinated and staffed in the Department of State or alternatively
within the White House as part of the NSC system may be more time
and cost effective.

Funding Recommendations
Finally, the memorandum puts a total cost of $50 million the first
year rising to $76 million five years annually from now on the overall
recommendations. Unfortunately the paper nowhere indicates how
much improvement in the health and well being of the very poor will
be achieved by these increased figures. For example, would we not be
better off in taking this money and pledging it directly to poorer LDC
basic health care programs aimed directly at such diseases as schistoso-
miasis, malaria, or the typical childhood diseases. I suspect that the

302.

Memorandum From Harry Blaney and Carol Lancaster of the
Policy Planning Staff to the Director of the Policy Planning
Staff (Lake)
Washington, November 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Peter Bourne’s World Hunger and Health Initiatives
Peter Bourne, a special assistant to the President, is leading studies
of world health and hunger problems, aimed at developing Presiden-
tial initiatives in both of these areas. A third study involving narcotics
is also planned. This memo outlines the current status of these studies
and the specific difficulties they raise. The purpose is to alert you now
to possible problems in the coming weeks as these efforts of Bourne
lead to decision memos to the President.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Current Status
The world hunger working group has put together a draft options
memo2 with a wide variety of proposals drawn from suggestions from
problem is that they do not really address actual global health
problems. Benson and Nye have been involved in discussions of these
papers with Bourne. Further, D has had contact with HEW and the
White House on the problem. Reworked versions of the health report
and the Presidential “decision document” are to be seen by us and
other agencies before they go into the President.

Finally, we have been told that Bourne is interested now in the
field of education and is focusing on the forthcoming UN “Year of the
Child.”
orandum that Bourne forwarded is 11, rather than 20, pages long.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Problems
These studies, handled through the Bourne channel, present a
number of problems:
1. Bourne is, in effect, using studies and decisions in broad func-
tional areas to drive policies affecting a disparate set of domestic and
international programs. Indeed, the scope of the recommendations of
both studies go well beyond issues falling into the functional areas of
health, or hunger, for example:
—one recommendation in the hunger memo would require a rad-
ical reorganization of our agricultural trading arrangements, probably
including the establishment of a government grains board to control
trade.
—the health study recommends setting up a Bureau of Health in
the Department of State.

Moreover, these recommendations are not related to other studies
or efforts to develop policy elsewhere in the bureaucracy which deal
with the same issues.
2. The quality of the analysis produced by both the hunger and
health working groups is inadequate and, at times, dead wrong. The
Department is nevertheless put in somewhat of a defensive position in
having to address the analytical flaws in the studies, thereby diverting
attention and energy from the recommendations and from devising
new ideas in these areas.
3. These studies have thus far unfortunately produced few new
initiatives which can be justified on substantive grounds. What may fi-
nally result from these efforts is a focus on existing organizations or in-
stitutional arrangements for dealing with these problems which could
be futile at best and disruptive at worst.
4. The process in which these studies and recommendations have
been developed is troubling:
—these working groups threaten to short-circuit the normal policy
making process (i.e., NSC, PRC, OMB, etc.) on a number of issues
where a more adequate and careful consideration of the issues is
planned or underway.
—it is not always clear when final memos are scheduled to go to
the President or whether agencies will have an opportunity to review
them before they are sent.

Conclusion
Neither study or draft decision memo is yet complete and objec-
tionable statements or recommendations may yet be removed. Never-
theless, at some point we may wish to attempt channeling these exer-
cises into the PRC or other NSC mechanisms, although Bourne would
probably resist this strongly.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues

303.

Memorandum From the Assistant to the President’s Special
Assistant for Health Issues (Fill) to the President’s Special
Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)
Washington, November 30, 1977
SUBJECT
A Thought re Implications of a New International Health Policy
If we established as a principle of foreign policy that we would not
deny any needy nation international health assistance it would be a
first in U.S. history. By establishing this moral principle we would not
hesitate to award a license for lifesaving drugs to be purchased for

304.

Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Security
Assistance, Science, and Technology (Benson) to the
President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)
Washington, December 1, 1977
Dear Peter:
Since your November 9 draft of the Presidential decision docu-
ment on international health2 grows out of the draft Report on which we
have already commented, the remarks in my letter of November 143
apply equally to the proposed decision memorandum.

The State Department believes that the memo to the President
needs substantial revision. The memorandum will be most helpful to
all of us if it asks for the charge to explore and appraise the possibilities
instead of asking for a mandate to establish programs and institutions.
Those of us in State concerned with health will have to negotiate care-
fully with our internal management offices, with AID, HEW, EPA, and
other programmatic bureaus, and with the OMB. This will be true for
any of the major decisions. Further, these plans cannot be made outside
of the much larger contexts of the long-term planning for AID, our State
Department review of the technical attache´s’ program, and so on.
State Department role (initiative 2, page 6). The Department, as I have
assured you, is firmly committed to sharpening its attention to health
and related issues. Our intention is to establish a clear focal point for
health in the Department, to become staffed and able to identify and
seize upon opportunities as they arise, to represent the internationalist
cause to the domestic agencies, and to “broker” interests in this area ef-
fectively. For the State Department to become able to do these things
would constitute a major improvement.

But the leadership must be shared with HEW and the other depart-
ments and agencies. Initiatives are not likely to enjoy long-term success
unless the agencies that carry the required resources and technical com-
petence are deeply involved in their development. The State Depart-
ment is evolving to take on a larger role in space policy, energy policy,
environment
policy,
oceans
and
Antarctica
policy,
technical-
development policy, and communications policy—as well as health
policy. Considerations of both interdepartmental relations and internal
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
bureaucratic limitations dictate that we keep our expectations realistic.
We will work closely with HEW, AID, and others to improve coordina-
tion, and we will urge those agencies to upgrade their international
offices.

Health initiatives as a primary element of foreign policy (pages 1 and 2).
A better statement of what can realistically be expected, given all the
political, military, economic, and other issues that have to be attended
to, is that the United States should seek to give greater emphasis to inter-
national health issues and to better integrate health considerations with
those of development assistance, cooperative research and the like. To
overstate will serve no purpose.

Global Health Cadres (page 5). Although there doesn’t seem to be
much initial enthusiasm for this proposal in State, AID, or HEW, the
decision memo might call for consideration of the idea by these depart-
ments. The State Department is currently engaged in a review of the
technical attache´s’ program (science counselors, and energy, minerals,
fisheries, and other attache´s) and the question of how adequate the
technical representation in our embassies is. We will certainly examine
the desirability of health attache´s as well.

Interagency committees (implementation Task Force, page 5; Interagency
Strategic Coordinating Committee, page 6; and Executive Policy Group, page
6). It is just too early to consider establishment of all these committees
until our objectives become clear. Whatever group turns out to be nec-
essary should probably be set up either within the NSC Domestic
Council or other well-established structures.

Major conclusions (page 3). These are poorly worded. For instance,
the first “conclusion” is of little guidance as it stands: “A new ethic is
required—one of global collaboration among all nations based on hu-
manitarian not ideological themes, asking what we can do together not
how much we can or ought to do for another.”
The second “conclusion” is also diffuse, and it says that “[The
President’s] basic human rights policy is an ideal framework for global
health collaboration”; this should be clarified either to discuss the
human rights approach to health issues (which the Report did not ad-
dress very fully) or the basic human needs strategy.

The third “conclusion”—that “the full U.S. scientific and technical
potential is not directed to help meet basic human needs worldwide.
Significant changes are required to do so”—deserves amplification.
Specifically what changes are needed? Again, perhaps the memo could
elicit directions to HEW, OSTP, NSF, and others to review the long-
term health-related R&D agenda.

Priorities. The Report neither lays down priorities nor sets forth cri-
teria to be used in generating priorities. If in the revision process these
could be accomplished, considerable guidance to the U.S. government

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and health communities will have been provided. The biggest problem
in this entire sector is to chose efficaciously among the many possible
activities. For example, should we attack tropical diseases, or maternal
and infant malnutrition, or what? If tropical diseases, which one? And
by eradication of vectors, or by development of vaccines? Bilaterally, or
through multilateral efforts? The Report gives little guidance. What the
memo could do is call for the departments and agencies to establish
and adopt explicit priorities for their international health endeavors
(for example, to emphasize prenatal and infant health, or to target par-
ticular infectious diseases). Beyond that, of course, these priorities
should eventually be reflected in budgets.

Congressional relations. The document, like the Report, needs to give
much more attention to the need to work closely with the Congress, to
consult early, and to design initiatives within the limits of Congres-
sional tolerance.

Overall tone of the memorandum. Reference to “prevailing passivity
and skepticism” pages 2 and 4) are inaccurate and gratuitous and will
serve no constructive purpose. Also, the description of the failures of
the “trickle down” approach to development assistance (page 2),
though correct in its general criticism, does not give fair recognition to
the efforts and potential of the Peace Corps and other such activities.
These problems can be taken care of by editing.

Encouraging private sector involvement (page 5, item B). The ma-
jor study of incentives of private sector involvement might be con-
ducted better by a nongovernmental institution than by the federal
government.

Proposed Presidential Initiative (page 5, first paragraph of item C): “The
proposals which follow build on existing programs or create new ones;
they would specifically place your Administration’s stamp on basic
human needs in a comprehensive way which Senator Humphrey, Pres-
ident Roosevelt and President Truman, for example, have been try-
ing to do since the 1940’s.” This paragraph is both surprising and
unnecessary.

AID program (page 3). The recommendation that any increases in
health, population, and nutrition in the AID budget be made propor-
tional to any increase in the FY 79 budget needs examination. The
figures may even need to be increased above that level, but such a deci-
sion should be taken as part of an overall review of health and other
priorities relating to basic human needs. There is no reference to the
various AID reorganization studies. Organizational decisions should
not be made independently of an integrated view of AID’s future.
Other proposals: research and training centers (page 6); global health
National Endowment for International Health Assistance (page 10). None of

305.

Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for
International Development (Gilligan) to the President’s
Special Assistant for International Health (Bourne)
Washington, December 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Executive Branch Organization for International Health and Agriculture
You have now received comments from various agencies on your
proposals for U.S. initiatives to improve world health and alleviate
world hunger. I understand Secretary Califano’s comments emphasize
that HEW should assume “lead” responsibility for international health,
in addition to its domestic responsibilities. USDA has made a similar
suggestion regarding international agriculture. While we have always
encouraged greater HEW or USDA involvement in international pro-
grams, the shift they now suggest would divest AID of much of its leg-
islated responsibility for U.S. assistance to developing countries.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Their proposals raise the issue of whether U.S. assistance pro-
grams in agriculture and health—and by implication in population,
education, technology, environment, and other areas—should remain
principally the responsibility of one development agency or be dis-
persed to various government Departments. This is a fundamental
question of government organization that concerns your work, the in-
teragency study of future directions for foreign assistance, and OMB’s
proposals for reorganization of the Executive Branch.

If the United States is to make a serious attack on problems of de-
velopment, one agency must be the focal point for responsibility,
drawing upon the best skill and experience the U.S. public and private
sectors have to offer. The problems of developing countries must be
this Agency’s priority concern. A long-term commitment must be made
to strategies and programs that meld together various sectors and dis-
ciplines. If development assistance programs are folded into other De-
partments they will inevitably be given less attention than the principal
programs of these essentially domestic agencies.

Meeting basic needs in poor countries—e.g., by improving health
or agricultural productivity—requires approaches radically different
from those required in the United States. In developing countries half
of those who die are children under five, and the underlying causes of
death include malnutrition, high fertility, and parasitic infection. In de-
veloped countries mortality centers in the population over 50 and
arises from heart attack, stroke, cancer, and other conditions often asso-
ciated with rich diets, obesity, and sedentary work habits. The solu-
tions to health problems in developed and developing countries also
differ dramatically; few LDC’s can afford per capita health expendi-
tures of more than a few dollars annually. Thus they must rely less on
hospitals and physicians and much more on paramedicals and tradi-
tional healers.

Similarly in agriculture, American success derives from large
farms with relatively few people but much heavy equipment, irriga-
tion, fertilizer, pesticides, and so on. But poor food-deficit countries
must rely on small farms, labor-intensive approaches, and the sparing
use of capital to spur agriculture.

Furthermore, health and agricultural programs in developing
countries are closely linked. Improved health depends heavily on pro-
grams in agriculture that enhance nutrition and incomes; agricultural
productivity is much influenced by health programs that affect labor
productivity. In general, programs in several sectors, as well as under-
lying economic and social policies, strongly affect the achievement of
objectives in any one sector.

Effective development assistance programs thus require consider-
ation of health, agriculture, and other problems in the framework of a

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
broad development strategy. This approach lies at the heart of the
“New Directions” legislation underlying AID’s programs; it has been
reinforced by the enthusiastic endorsement given the basic human
needs strategy by this Administration.

AID’s job, under the foreign policy guidance of the Secretary of
State, is to design and implement such programs. Fragmenting respon-
sibility for assistance programs now among several agencies would de-
stroy the solid base that has been built. As a practical matter, these
other agencies cannot establish mini-foreign-aid offices, operate the
necessary overseas staff, or coordinate international assistance efforts
effectively. The inevitable result of such fragmentation would be a call
for one agency to manage and coordinate assistance programs. We
would have come full circle, and lost precious time in the interim.
I urge you, therefore, to resist vigorously any proposals to frag-
ment development assistance responsibilities within the U.S. Govern-
ment—especially by dispersing authority to agencies whose primary
concerns are domestic.

John J. Gilligan
Stat. 715) that added a statement of policy to the original Foreign Assistance Act of 1961

306.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to President Carter
Washington, January 9, 1978
SUBJECT
International Health
On July 30th, 1977 you sent me a note referring to the issue of Inter-
national Health directing me to prepare from you to key members of
the Cabinet a memo “directing them to cooperate with you in doing the
analysis—I can call them in later for a meeting when I understand from
you what we need to do.” In collaboration with the involved agencies
we have completed that analysis producing a 500 page report which we
have circulated for comment both within the government, and in the
private sector. It will be published as an administration document.
This memo summarizes the recommendations of that report, and fol-
lowing your trip4 I would like to request that we have the meeting you
proposed.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
I. Goals fo the Study
—To survey and inventory current U.S. government activities in
the area of International Health including legislative authorities,
budget allocations, policies and programs.
—To examine present goals and philosophies which currently
guide our International Health activities, and to assess their effec-
tiveness and relevance to the health needs of the world today.
—To examine the extent to which International Health is inte-
grated with other governmental activities including the formulation of
foreign policy, domestic health policy, development assistance as well
as commercial and trade policy.
—To review the relationship between the U.S. Government’s Inter-
national Health programs, private voluntary agencies and multilateral
organizations including international financial institutions.
—To review present mechanisms for interagency coordination and
for long range planning and goal setting of International Health
programs.
—To recommend organizational, programmatic and legislative ac-
tions that would improve the existing use of current resources and
create a sense of a new Carter initiative as a concrete manifestation of
the commitment to meeting global basic human needs.

II. Findings
The United States interests in International Health involve the fol-
lowing: the elimination of the remaining major infectious diseases af-
flicting mankind (being primarily the product of poor sanitation and
malnutrition, and involving for the most part the developing world),
the provision of access to a basic minimum level of health care for
people everywhere, the pooling of knowledge and fostering of collabo-
rative research activities to advance medical science, the use of medi-
cine as an instrument to form a common bond outside traditional polit-
ical channels with countries we wish to draw closer to us, and the
development of markets overseas for products of the American health
industry.
—22 Federal agencies are involved in International Health,
tive mandates.
—Involvement in International Health while traditionally thought
of as exclusively an aspect of foreign aid, includes not only develop-
ment assistance, but commercial, diplomatic, and environmental con-
siderations with the majority of U.S. Government expenditures cur-
rently being made outside the developing world.
—There is no government-wide coordinating mechanism to estab-
lish overall policy, goals or programmatic priorities. Extraordinary re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
sources exist within the government that are not being utilized with
anywhere near their full potential. New scientific discoveries are no-
where near as important as better application of current knowledge
and resources.
—The allocation of U.S. resources is not currently tied to any as-
sessment of real global health needs or priorities determined geograph-
ically, nor is it in terms of what the remaining major cripplers and
killers are as they affect lost human potential and compromised eco-
nomic development. Even for a given country it is often impossible to
tell which Federal agencies have programs there with no overall coor-
dination to work towards mutually agreed upon goals.
—While both you and Secretary Vance have made repeated strong
statements about the importance you attach to meeting basic human
needs, there is little or no integration of International Health into the
formulation and execution of U.S. foreign policy. This is largely due to
the lack of an organizational focus with technical expertise in health or
other basic human needs at a high level in the State Department. It is
also attributable to a traditionally held view that such human concerns
are “non-conventional diplomacy”.
—Fragmentation in the Executive Branch is compounded by over-
lapping and competing jurisdictions among different committees in the
Congress.
—The effective use of some of our greatest International Health re-
sources particularly in HEW and DOD is currently severely compro-
mised by specific and generally outdated legislative restrictions.
—There is a disproportionate focus on the development of high
technology health care in hospitals and the training of physicians rather
than upon prevention and community-based primary care programs to
reach poor and rural people. Such international research cooperation as
has occurred has overwhelmingly emphasized problems of developed
industrialized nations such as cancer and heart disease.
—The resources committed to International Health by the private
sector exceed those of the Federal Government. Academic institutions,
missionary, private voluntary organizations and other humanitarian
groups as well as business express a strong desire to coordinate their ef-
forts with the Federal Government, but believe there is no effective
mechanism for doing so.

III. Recommendations
We recommend that a program called “New Directions in Interna-
tional Health” be initiated, which could be identified as an initial fulfill-
ment of your promise to implement a global basic human needs
strategy. Consistent with your decisions in the recent memo relating to

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
development assistance, to stress aid to the poorest people in the
world, we feel attention to this group should be given the highest pri-
ority in the International Health initiative. We recommend the fol-
lowing goals:
—To develop and pursue a strategy aimed at improving the health
status of the 1 billion poorest people in the world.
—To emphasize the delivery of community based primary health
care, cost-effective training at the most appropriate level of health per-
sonnel as near to the point where they will deliver services, and the de-
velopment of research programs which place a priority emphasis on
the remaining major health problems, especially infectious diseases, of
the developing world.
—To encourage special emphasis on dealing with the generic
problems of ill health, malnutrition, lack of clean water supplies,
over-population and poverty, putting greatest emphasis on the preven-
tion rather than the treatment of disease.
—To focus, coordinate, and when appropriate reshape U.S. goals
in International Health to achieve a government-wide coordinated pro-
gram which would reduce current fragmentation, and insure that ex-
isting resources were used more effectively.
—To strengthen existing institutions in our government which al-
ready deal with International Health problems, and build a greater
awareness of International Health and concern for basic human needs
as a more legitimate and consequential element in our foreign policy.
—To establish certain specific new initiatives with which you per-
sonally could be identified.
—To engage, through your leadership, the active participation of
nations around the world both bilaterally and through multilateral or-
ganizations, especially WHO, UNICEF and the World Bank, in this
endeavor.
—To encourage greater private sector involvement in Interna-
tional Health activities, and a closer partnership with the Federal
Government.
—To plan a more coordinated and effective use of medicine as a
tool in our overall diplomacy particularly in dealing with countries that
have not traditionally been friendly towards the U.S.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
IV. Decisions
A. Improving Coordination and Long Range Planning
The key to a new International Health program is not the expendi-
ture of large amounts of new money, but a reprogramming and better
utilization of present resources. Establishing an effective interagency
coordinating mechanism can be the difference between success and
failure in this endeavor.

Apart from the fragmentation of International Health programs
between 22 agencies, a major problem exists because of divided respon-
sibility and authority among the largest agencies. A.I.D. has the bulk of
the program funds, but limited technical expertise. H.E.W. has excep-
tional technical resources, but considerable internal fragmentation; it is
legislatively restricted from engaging in international activities that do
not directly benefit the U.S. population. The State Department has the
formal policy making authority in this area, but currently lacks the or-
ganizational structure or technical competence at a high level to carry
out this responsibility or to take the lead which theoretically it should.
Treasury regularly makes major decisions, particularly regarding the
I.F.I.’s, that have extraordinary impact on world health, often without
any awareness of that impact. Peace Corps, NASA, DOD, the Commerce
Department, C.I.A., the Veterans Administration, E.P.A. and others all
have specific specialized areas of interest, but make decisions in their
own interests, in isolation, unrelated to any overall coordination or
policy.

Among the agencies there is general agreement that a coordinating
committee, or committees, need to be set up. There is, however, dis-
agreement as to who should have the lead responsibility. Secretary Cal-
ifano states, “the chief spokespersons on International Health affairs
should be the Secretary of DHEW, the Assistant Secretary for Health
and the Surgeon General. Any interagency committee on International
Health should be chaired by H.E.W.” This position is opposed by A.I.D.
Governor Gilligan is concerned about setting a precedent that would
go beyond the health area and comments, “I urge you to resist vigor-
ously any proposals to fragment development assistance responsibil-
ities—especially by dispersing authority to agencies whose primary
concerns are domestic.”
The organizational decision paper on development assistance cur-
rently being prepared by Henry Owen may have some bearing on this
area, however, in the meantime, I believe that given this conflict the
most effective coordination can be achieved by:
(a) Overall Coordination—Maintaining overall coordination out of
my office as we have done up till now. This would avoid some territo-
rial problems and also would symbolically maintain your own direct

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
interest. It should be clear that this would not be a permanent new
structure, but a short term mechanism to insure the momentum of a
new initiative establishing overall policy and priorities. I believe in this
way we can duplicate the highly successful coordination we have
achieved in the drug area, a similarly fragmented field.
(b)
Substantive
Program
Planning—Establishing
a
committee
chaired by DHEW that would be responsible for further developing a
government-wide substantive program in International Health. This
would involve identifying those disease entities amenable to major as-
sault, geographic regions or countries where U.S. resources could have
a major impact, and special generic areas such as vector control, global
epidemic surveillance and clean water supplies that might be appro-
priate to emphasize. In coordination with other agencies they would
determine how the available resources could be mobilized and coordi-
nated to deal with the priority areas they had identified. This com-
mittee would also establish sub-committees to address the setting of re-
search, manpower development and training priorities.

(c) Coordination with Foreign Policy—Establishing a committee
chaired by the Department of State that would review region by region,
and country by country, our goals and priorities in the International
Health area. The U.S. Government resources going into each country
would be carefully inventoried, a determination made of whether cur-
rent expenditures are adequately coordinated, and aimed at achieving
agreed health goals for that country. We anticipate A.I.D. would play
the major role in the review of the countries where they are involved.
We are prepared to ask the State Department to begin immediately
such a review of Africa, and to provide them the appropriate back-
ground material which my office has prepared. This committee would
also address the issue of how International Health activities could be
most effectively coordinated within our missions overseas, and how
host countries could best be made aware of the range of resources, such
as appropriate training opportunities, now available in the United
States. This committee would also address the issue of how Interna-
tional Health could be better incorporated into our overall conduct of
foreign policy.

(d) Upgrading the Emphasis on International Health—Understanding
that in order to realize fully the U.S. Government’s potential in the In-
ternational Health field certain internal changes need to be made
within the departments. In response to the high priority you have at-
tached to this area some of these changes already have been instituted.
DHEW is completing an extensive internal review of its International
Health functions, upgrading its emphasis, centralizing coordination
and considering the creation of a position of Deputy Assistant Secre-
tary for International Health. The role of C.D.C., which has already es-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tablished a worldwide reputation for excellence, is to be expanded. The
State Department lacks the high level focus with technical competence to
permit adequate incorporation of health or basic needs concerns in gen-
eral into the formulation of foreign policy. More important, a change in
philosophy is needed so that concern for basic human needs is accepted
as a legitimate aspect of foreign policy. This I believe can only be over-
come by clear direction from you. They are moving now to create such
a competent high level focus. A similar problem exists in Treasury. The
Department needs to heighten its own awareness of International
Health in internal decision making. Treasury should acquaint the IDLIs
with evolving U.S. policies on International Health, and encourage
them to give greater priority to an appropriate role for projects
touching on health among their overall development loan programs. In
DOD, legislative constraints and old but perpetuated administrative
decisions continue to restrict adequate utilization of our single greatest
untapped resource in this field. A clear instruction from you to all of the
agencies to seek ways to make their resources more readily and effec-
tively available is important.

I believe that the steps outlined above, if you approve, would over-
come the problems of fragmentation and the present lack of clearcut
long range goals providing the framework for an effective Presidential
initiative in this area.

DECISION:6
B. Presidential Initiatives
In addition to the significant impact an improved and streamlined
planning and coordinating mechanism would have on world health, I
believe, certain specific new initiatives should be undertaken which
could be identified as reflecting your personal involvement.
(a) World Blindness—More than 30 million people in the world are
blind, most of them from preventable causes. A major administration
effort to reduce blindness worldwide would have dramatic appeal,
could be uniquely and distinctively identified with you from other
present International Health emphases, would be geared to the poorest
people in the world as well as being relevant to the industrialized na-
tions including the U.S., and would not be vulnerable to the criticism
that we were saving lives that would only amount to more mouths to
feed. It would of necessity result in a program with special emphasis on
the Middle East. It would overlap and complement, (without com-
peting with) the World Health Organization’s highly visible Tropical
Disease Research Program. I also believe it would generate strong in-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
ternational and domestic support, for instance, from Lions Clubs. By
re-programming existing budgeted funds, this program could be im-
plemented immediately. An enhanced and expanded plan could be
prepared for next year’s budget cycle.

DECISION:
(b) Rural Water Supply—It is estimated that by making clean
drinking water readily available to all people in the world, 50 million
lives a year would be saved. The World Health Organization has set
this as a priority, and 1980 is the beginning of the U.N. “Decade of
Water”. Following the two U.N. Conferences this year on Water and
Desertification8 an interagency coordinating committee chaired by the
State Department has been established to develop overall U.S. policy
on global water supply. While less dramatic than some other initia-
tives, strong clear support by you of the goal of clean drinking water for
people everywhere would, in the long run, probably have the most sig-
nificant lasting impact on world health of anything you could do. Initi-
ating programs that make clean drinking water available also will sig-
nificantly affect, for the better, the role of women in the developing
world, who spend major parts of their lives drawing and carrying
water from distant sources. While the potential level of expenditure for
this purpose is almost unlimited, a major start can be made now
without new funds, and careful consideration can be given to ex-
panding our programs in this area in next year’s budget.
DECISION:
(c) International Health Service Corps—There is a great deal of in-
terest in the possibility of establishing a health oriented volunteer pro-
gram that would use American volunteers at all levels of health exper-
tise. Such a program, which would clearly be identified as your
concept, would be formed building on the Peace Corps in ACTION and
the National Health Service Corps in the Health Services Administra-
tion in DHEW.

ACTION currently has over 1,000 health volunteers in such serv-
ice. This number could be expanded and the proportion of health pro-
fessionals among them increased. ACTION should continue to increase
its efforts in health programming in order to ensure effective assign-
ment and performance of these volunteers.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The National Health Service Corps can apply two of its current
functions to an International Health Service Corps: (1) to recruit per-
sonnel and administer their assignment to positions programmed for
them by ACTION; and (2) increase the number of Public Health Service
Scholarships awarded annually allowing a like number of scholarship
recipients to satisfy their scholarship payback requirements by serving
in the International Health Service Corps. A slight modification to ex-
isting legislation would result in 150 to 250 scholarship recipients
serving annually in the International Health Service Corps. This would
have no adverse effect on domestic health manpower needs, yet would
greatly improve chances to recruit health professionals for interna-
tional service. As experience has shown many will eventually return to
domestic health service. The Health Services Administration in DHEW
could also serve as a recruiting clearing house for other government
agencies in International Health and in managing development of U.S.
Government personnel for careers in International Health. Estimated
cost would be $3–5 million as an additional increment over present
expenditures.

DECISION:
(d) Up-Grading the Fogarty International Center at The National Insti-
tutes of Health—Specific legislative authority should be developed to
upgrade the existing Fogarty International Center at the National Insti-
tutes for Health10 making it a more visible focus as a center of excel-
lence for the development of International Health policy. This action
would provide needed organizational strength and authority for the
center to carry out long range studies of International Health problems.
It would also raise its stature in the U.S. and international scientific
communities reflecting the new priority attached to International
Health by your Administration. In particular, the Center would ad-
dress the issue of long range manpower development, stimulating in-
volved mobilization, and coordination of the U.S. academic medical
community to build health skills in the developing world. In conjunc-
tion with A.I.D. they would work towards the development of Interna-
tional Health consortia among academic institutions in this country
that would establish linkages with institutions in the developing world
aimed at building their capabilities in research and training. These con-
sortia could in particular address the problems of blindness and world
water supplies.

DECISION:

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
(e) Presidential Scholars in Global Health—The U.S. should establish
a program for “Presidential Scholars in Global Health”. Twenty Asso-
ciate Scholars, all in early stages of their careers, would be selected (by a
distinguished public/private panel of scientists) to study problems of
implementing change in International Health. In addition, four distin-
guished Senior Scholars would prepare scholarly papers on contempo-
rary International Health policy problems; they would work and lec-
ture at NIH, and be based at the Fogarty Center. Annual cost would be
$650,000, including personnel positions to run the program.
DECISION:
(f) Expanding Private Sector Involvement—The U.S. private sector,
i.e., academia, multinational corporations, labor, church-related orga-
nizations, private voluntary organizations foundations, and indi-
viduals, should be given wider opportunities to contribute to U.S. In-
ternational Health activities. Their efforts have been significant among
the contributions this nation has made in International Health. In many
cases they can be more effective, more innovative, and more acceptable
in many countries than direct U.S. Government efforts. Recent tax and
foreign policy decisions, as well as inflationary erosion of their pur-
chasing power, have reduced private sector capacity to expand or even
sustain their past activities. Reversing this trend could substantially re-
duce the burden on direct U.S. Government expenditures. The U.S.
Government should actively seek ways to capitalize on and expand the
involvement of the private sector. While the organizational paper being
prepared by Henry Owen will address this area within the broader
context of development assistance we believe certain specific steps
could be taken now to strengthen the role of private voluntary organi-
zations in the health area:
—Strengthen and formalize the PVO-grant making activities of
A.I.D. to increase PVO performance on A.I.D. projects.
—Establish an expanded PVO program which is centered in A.I.D.
(A.I.D. has recently set up an Office for Private Humanitarian As-
sistance). It would involve all agencies with significant International
Health programs who would assign a PVO liaison coordinator to work
—Consideration should be given to providing 5 year care support
($1 million per year) to create a consortium of PVOs including the es-
tablishment of an Information Clearinghouse for their activities to re-
solve the present lack of communication and collaboration.
DECISION:
The effectiveness of the new International Health initiative is tied
closely to working in a supporting and collaborative way with multi-
lateral organizations such as the World Bank, UNICEF, and the World

307.

Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, January 25, 1978
SUBJECT
Implications of Worldwide Population Growth for United States Security and
Overseas Interests: Evaluation of Population Program Performance
In response to your memorandum of May 17, 1977, and in further-
ance of this Administration’s continuing efforts to improve the effec-
tiveness of our foreign aid programs, the attached format evaluating
the performance of population programs on a country-by-country basis
has been developed by the Department of State, in consultation with
the Agency for International Development and the Department of the
Treasury, and approved by the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population
Policy.

This effort attempts to assess the effectiveness of our population
assistance activities in the context of the programs of recipient gov-
ernments. It attempts to estimate the prevalence of contraceptive use as
a measure of the effect of a country’s overall population program in re-
ducing birth rates, and to estimate the dollar cost per contraceptive user
as an indication of the cost-effectiveness of the program. As the at-
tached discussion of the format emphasizes, however, any serious at-
tempt to evaluate the effectiveness of population programs must take
into account the influence of other socio-economic determinants of
birth rates. For this reason, the performance evaluation format calls for
data on a wide range of socio-economic variables potentially affecting
fertility, and incorporates this data in the final section of the format in
which the overall effectiveness of the program is analyzed. Additional
work must be done to improve our understanding of the relative con-
tributions of family planning services and these other determinants of
fertility reduction; as this work progresses the evaluation format will
be refined by the Ad Hoc Group to increase the usefulness of these cri-
teria and to develop new and better measures of program effectiveness.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The information provided by this evaluation effort will be used in
deciding how to allocate funds for our population assistance and will
be included in the required annual reports of the Ad Hoc Group. Pri-
ority attention will be given to the key countries established as prior-
ities for U.S. assistance by NSDM–314.

Peter Tarnoff
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, January 16, 1978
Description of Format for Evaluation of
Population Program Performance
The attached format for the evaluation, on a country-by-country
basis, of programs to reduce population growth5 has been developed
by the Department of State in consultation with the Agency for Interna-
tional Development and the Department of the Treasury. The evalu-
ation will be used: (1) to assess the commitment and progress of coun-
tries in controlling population growth and the effectiveness of existing
population programs; (2) to assist and support decisions about future
funding levels and the direction and priorities of our assistance
programs.

The format calls for information and analysis in the following
categories:
—basic demographic data over five-year periods or other useful
intervals; especially 1965–1975;
—social, economic, and political factors affecting population
programs;
—nature and extent of population programs;
—financial inputs, prevalence of contraceptive use, and cost per
contraceptive user; and
—critique evaluating the overall effectiveness of the programs.
Using data from a number of sources, including AID, the United
Nations system, the World Bank, the Bureau of the Census, the Popula-
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
tion Council, and the International Planned Parenthood Federation, the
performance evaluation effort attempts to:
—assess the impact and cost effectiveness of population programs,
both national efforts and external assistance, and
—assess the effect of economic, social, and political factors which
may have an influence on fertility and which provide a context for pop-
ulation programs.

This will involve the development of data on past, present, and
projected resources dedicated to efforts to reduce population growth at
country, regional, and global levels from all sources. These data will be
used to examine the efforts not only of AID but also of donors receiving
AID support, including the United Nations Fund for Population Activ-
ities, other external donors, and recipient governments’ own national
programs. The data collected and evaluations made will be measured
against specific global priorities and objectives which have been
established.

I. Demographic Data
Section I summarizes the demographic situation in the host
country over five-year periods (1965–1975). Most demographic data are
not definitive and the range and trends are indicated. Specifics are re-
flected in Appendix A6 along with the source of the information.
II. Program Setting
Section II discusses the general setting in which the national pro-
gram functions, including the socio-economic phenomena that may re-
late to the fertility reduction process and the various political, religious,
cultural, legal, administrative, managerial, and other constraints that
impede progress in developing a self-sustaining population program.
Information for this section is summarized from data contained in the
Development Assistance Program (DAP), AID program documents,
Sector Reviews, Area Handbooks, Project Evaluation Summary, the
World Bank, and the UNFPA.

III. The Population Program
Section III describes the stage of population policy development,
the degree of commitment to the policy, and the establishment of de-
mographic goals.

The national program is summarized—its administration, the ra-
tionale under which it operates, and the participation of other Govern-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ment ministries and organizations such as education, agriculture, and
health in population control activities.

Subsections cover the role of AID, donors receiving AID support
(including the UNFPA), other donors, and the host government in the
national program (including the percentage of the national budget des-
ignated for family planning activities).

IV. Financial Inputs, Impact, and Cost-Effectiveness
Section IV consists of three subsections:
A. Annual per capita funding from 1965–70, and subsequent years
through 1976, by the category of donors and the host government. Total
funding, per capita, and the percentage of financial input by each to the
overall national program are summarized. Details are reflected in Ap-
pendix B.

It is recognized that measuring resource allocations to family plan-
ning (FP) programs by the host government is difficult, because re-
sources come from both direct and indirect allocation of funds and in
the form of infrastructure support. National budgets do not reflect ac-
tual expenditures for FP in many cases. In addition, the quantity of re-
sources expended on FP activities does not always reflect the quality of
the services. Changes in the pattern of a host government’s resource al-
locations can be attributed to a number of factors which will differ be-
tween countries, such as demographic factors, availability of domestic
financial resources and external donor support, level of development of
the health and social service infrastructure, existence of government
policy, and the perceived necessity by the government for direct FP
activity.

Any conclusions on host government resource support are in most
cases tentative, and cross-country comparisons, while necessary,
should be made only with extreme caution. It is hoped that AID will be
able to improve on the uniformity and reliability of the data in the
future.

B. The impact of the program is measured in part by prevalence of
use—the percentage of married women of reproductive age (MWRA)
or couples using a reliable method of contraception; the percentage of
MWRA/couples with reasonable knowledge of a reliable method of
contraception; and the percentage of MWRA/couples with reasonable
access to contraceptive services.

Data on the above indicators were compiled by a number of the
AID Missions last December for the AID Worldwide Population Of-
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
ficers Conference. This performance criteria effort relies on the ability
of the USAIDs to continue to collect these data on an annual basis.
Conceptually, the best measure of accomplishment of a FP pro-
gram would be the difference between the reduction in fertility pro-
duced by the program and what theoretically would have been
achieved in the given socio-economic conditions without any FP pro-
gram. Even attempting to estimate this difference would require a
much better understanding than we now have of the relationship be-
tween fertility reduction in a particular country and family planning
services and other socio-economic factors.

In the absence of such multivariate analyses of the determinants of
birth rates, one measure of fertility reduction is provided by the in-
crease in the use of contraceptives obtained from public and private
programs throughout the country. Based on field experience in selected
countries, a rough approximation of the relationship between the crude
birth rate and use of reliable methods of contraception (i.e., excluding
abstinence, coitus interruptus, and rhythm) is that a two percent in-
crease in the percentage of couples using contraception is associated
with a decrease of one birth per thousand population, and that a con-
traceptive user rate of 60 to 70 percent is associated with a replacement
level birth rate of 20 per thousand.

In measuring rates of contraceptive use, there is considerable vari-
ation among developing country FP programs in the quality and reli-
ability of FP service statistics. Many systems generally collect only data
on new acceptors, from which current use rates must be estimated
through the application of method continuation rates to new acceptor
data or through analysis of contraceptive distribution over time.
An increasing number of the developing countries are beginning
to use prevalence of use as a measure of program impact, and AID has
initiated programs to assist them with this activity. Estimates of contra-
ceptive use and births averted can be improved by better data and
more sophisticated techniques of analysis.

The responsibility would rest with AID in cooperation with the Of-
fice of the Coordinator of Population Affairs, State Department, to es-
tablish guidelines for the missions to estimate prevalence of use, and to
continue efforts to develop new and better estimates of program
impact.

One measure of cost-effectiveness can be obtained by dividing an-
nual financial inputs from all sources by the number of users. These
cost-per-user statistics (in dollars) are calculated for the last year in
which data are available and as averages of the latest three, five, and
ten-year periods.

A crucial aspect of the analysis of cost-effectiveness is the explana-
tion of variations in cost-per-user rates. These rates tend to be much

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
higher in those countries where social, economic and cultural factors
encourage population growth. For example, in Bangladesh, where
rural societies are male-dominated, village systems are weak, adequate
numbers of administrators are lacking, and rural health and educa-
tional systems are sadly deficient, costs per user are almost certain to be
higher than in a country such as Thailand, where basic social, economic
and cultural factors are more favorable. Hence, any performance evalu-
ation system must take these essential factors into consideration in
judging cost-effectiveness.

V. Critique
The purpose of this Section is to evaluate the overall effectiveness
of a country’s population program, bearing in mind the socio-economic
factors affecting the program, the leadership commitment to the pro-
gram, the encouragement, especially through person-to-person con-
tacts, of smaller families and the supply and delivery of family plan-
ning services. To the extent possible, quantitative estimates are made of
the effect of these factors in reducing fertility. The critique also contains
recommendations for program action and emphasis.

In order to make this overall assessment of program effectiveness,
additional data must be obtained, through such means as better vital
registration systems, sample surveys, and research projects. There is
also the need, especially in key countries, for more sophisticated multi-
variate studies to quantify, as far as possible, the impact of socio-
economic variables on population growth and identify more accurately
the degree to which a nation’s family planning program is responsible
for lowering fertility rates.

Global Policy and Program Analysis
These individual country analyses are aggregated into an overall
examination of the global effort to reduce population growth. This
global summary includes an evaluation of the efforts of recipient na-
tions, the U.S., other donor countries, and multilateral and private or-
ganizations. Total funding for population programs on a regional and
global basis is measured against special priorities and objectives which
have been established and, where possible, progress toward specific
targets is estimated.

The performance evaluations, as improved by new data and
analysis, are applied on a regional and global basis to guide decision-
makers with respect to the performance of US-funded bilateral, multi-
lateral, and private population assistance. The global summary will in-
clude a projection of demographic factors and estimated impacts of al-
ternative funding and program strategies.

308.

Report by the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy
Washington, January 1978
U.S. INTERNATIONAL POPULATION POLICY
SECOND ANNUAL REPORT
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This Annual Report, agreed to by the eighteen agencies repre-
sented on the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy, reviews popu-
lation trends and program developments, broadly and on a country-
specific basis, and reaches certain conclusions as to how to achieve
better results in coping with this complex problem.

We recognize the adverse effects of current high developing
country population growth which results in: possible worldwide food
shortages, rising unemployment, frustrated economic development
amongst poorer nations, widespread environmental deterioration,
overcrowded cities where living conditions for countless millions are
worsening, social unrest, and both national and international tensions.
Above all, excessive population growth contributes in a major way to
the suffering and poverty of countless millions and limits the prospects
for a better life for their children.

While the pace of population growth seems to be slackening, it re-
mains too high in too many developing countries, where most couples
seem to desire at least four surviving children rather than the one, two,
or three that would make population stabilization possible sometime in
the next century.

Fortunately, there is mounting international attention to this situa-
tion, reflected in the fact that at least three-quarters of the people in the
developing world live in countries whose governments have recently
adopted population programs related to their economic development
plans. There are also increasing amounts of donor assistance from gov-
ernments, international organizations (especially the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) and the World Bank (IBRD)),
as well as from private organizations, prominently including the Inter-
national Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF). We strongly support
increasing U.S. contributions for the Agency for International Develop-
ment’s (AID) population programs, which, aside from their intrinsic
classification marking. Sent under cover of a March 15 memorandum from Tarnoff to
Brzezinski. Forwarded to all diplomatic and consular posts as Airgram A–1345, April 5.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
merit, are likely to encourage other donors to be more generous and re-
ceiving nations to apply themselves more vigorously in coping with ex-
cessive population growth.

Yet, despite all the progress achieved over the past decade, there is
urgent need for a broader and more concerted effort by donors and re-
ceiving nations alike to deal with the problem.

In this situation, AID, while extending the availability of family
planning services and building on that base, is now tackling the popu-
lation problem along a broader front, recognizing the relevance of the
many factors that bear upon fertility determination. As a result, 1977
witnessed the initiation of multi-year population strategies; the devel-
opment of comprehensive performance criteria; the extension and sup-
port for low-cost and community-based delivery systems, increasingly
integrated with health services; intensified research on the determi-
nants of fertility, and more focus on motivation for smaller families.
Most of these developments are described in detail in this Report. The
Report also spells out how AID’s Fiscal Year 1979 Congressional popu-
lation funding request for $205. million will enable the Agency to ac-
celerate implementation of its broader approach, including continued
major emphasis on expanding and improving family planning services
and delivery systems.

We continue to believe, based on reports from our Missions in de-
veloping nations, that the most successful population programs usu-
ally depend on: (1) national leaders being clearly, firmly, and actively
committed to promoting broadly based national population programs;
(2) rooting family planning in communities (villages) and relating
family planning to the economic interests and social development of
the community; (3) training paramedics and others to provide general
health services, including family planning, in communities (villages)
where these people are known and trusted and ensuring that these par-
amedics provide personalized family planning advice and support;
and (4) advancing the legal, social, and economic status of women.
Although U.S. policy requires that our leaders, Ambassadors, and
others be knowledgeable on population issues and that they discuss
them, as appropriate, in their contacts with key figures in other gov-
ernments, particularly those in developing nations, this is often over-
looked in the press of day-to-day business. Opportunities are thus lost
for high-level exchanges, at least on an informal basis, on this funda-
mental issue.

One of the most effective ways in which we could bring our influ-
ence to bear in discussions with developing country leaders would be
in encouraging and supporting them to undertake programs for en-
listing the support of their own people in community or village pro-
grams. Population programs have enjoyed greater success in commu-

309.

Letter From the Director of the Office of Management and
Budget (McIntyre) and the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, February 17, 1978
Dear Mr. Secretary:
The President has approved the broad concept of an international
health initiative as outlined in Peter Bourne’s memo of January 9th.
The President’s State of the Union Message promises to “present a
strategy this year for working directly with other nations and through
international organizations to raise the standards of health and nutri-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tion around the world”. Such an initiative, which should be an impor-
tant component of the recent U.S. commitment to major increases in
foreign aid through 1982, requires decisions now to develop the foun-
dation for specific actions and programs later.

We have initiated a process to devise and implement a world
health strategy. Our approach will be two-fold: first, to identify and
highlight the many activities already in process and, second, to focus
current U.S. Government activities in international health within a
coordinated framework of priorities and goals so as to work more effec-
tively with related U.S. Government activities, with private organiza-
tions, with other nations, and with the several international and multi-
lateral organizations.

With regard to international health programs in the developing
countries, the strategy developed should be fully coordinated with the
studies of foreign aid organization and program reform currently
underway.

Building on the considerable amount of work already done by the
agencies in developing the strategy, the first step has been taken by
Peter Bourne’s staff in preparing a report on international health. The
next step is to develop a broad policy statement encompassing the hu-
manitarian goals and identifying specific areas of Presidential interest.
To this end, enclosed is a draft statement of strategy including general
objectives and several proposed initiatives which were developed
during the initial review of U.S. international health programs. This
draft will be the basis for developing the broad policy statement. Before
proceeding further, however, we need each agency’s views of the
overall initiative and how it feels it can best contribute to the effort.
Comments should address both the merits and problems associated
with the proposed initiatives. While detailed analysis will be addressed
later in the process, we seek your initial assessments as to the program-
matic and budgetary implications of the proposals. Your preliminary
analysis will help us to assess the likely cost-effectiveness of the several
possibilities and determine which merit priority attention.
The development of the broad policy statement should be com-
pleted by April 1, 1978, in the form of a decision memorandum to the
President. We have established the following schedule:

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
March 3
—Receipt of agency comments on the enclosed draft.

March 10 —Circulate draft decision memorandum to the agencies
for comment.

March 22 —Receipt of agency comments on the draft decision
memorandum.

March 27 —Circulate revised draft decision memorandum.
March 29 —Cabinet-level review, if necessary.

April 1
—Decision memorandum to the President on the initial
strategy.

April
—A statement of general direction and emphasis will be
included in the OMB Spring Planning Review. As
necessary, designate lead agencies for further pro-
gram development and establish coordinating com-
mittees to develop Response Memoranda on specific
issues.

To meet this schedule, we request that you forward your com-
ments to Peter Bourne by March 3 on the proposed strategy and key
issues contained in the enclosed draft memorandum, with emphasis on
options available to the United States and recommendations regarding
implementation or needed further analysis.

James T. McIntyre, Jr.

Peter G. Bourne, M.D.

Attachment
Draft Statement of Strategy
Washington, February 15, 1978
DRAFT
WORLD HEALTH STRATEGY
I. Background
In mid-1977, Peter Bourne, Special Assistant to the President for
Health Affairs, began a review of international health to determine the
nature and status of the United States’ programs in this area. In October
1977, a draft report was published titled “Foundations for a New U.S.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
International Health Policy: Assessment of Problems, Programs, Re-
sources and Opportunities.” This draft report was circulated to the in-
volved Departments and agencies for their comment. On January 9th,
Dr. Bourne recommended a program called “New Directions in Inter-
national Health” be initiated as the first response to the President’s
promise to implement a global basic human needs strategy.
At present, U.S. Government international health programs are
scattered among 22 agencies with various responsibilities and author-
ities, operating relatively independently of each other. Both domestic
and international issues are involved in international health matters,
which highlights the need for a flexible and responsive management
structure. The Federal agencies involved in international health spent
dates; yet there is no government-wide coordinating mechanism to es-
tablish overall policy, goals or programmatic priorities. A central focal
point is essential to achieving the full potential of current knowledge
and resources and is likely to be as important to basic health needs as
are new scientific discoveries.

What is needed is the allocation of U.S. resources on the basis of an
assessment of real global health needs taking into account health
problems which cause most damage to human potential, and most se-
verely compromise economic development, and vice versa. Priorities
must be set, working with the World Health Organization and the in-
volved countries, and programs developed for action against the re-
maining major crippling or fatal diseases. Criteria must be developed
for resource decisions, taking into account cultural differences, country
or area priorities and levels of training and systems capacity for contin-
uing to carry out the program at the local level.

International health has in the past been exclusively thought of as
an aspect of foreign aid primarily through development assistance.
However, commercial, diplomatic, and environmental avenues are also
ways to approach international health problems.

Presidential endorsement and higher priority on U.S. involvement
in world health matters is fundamental to a new strategy. Potential
Presidential initiatives which are suggested involve impaired vision
and blindness, rural water supply systems, establishment of an Interna-
tional Health Services Corps and other measures and changes in policy
which would enhance the effectiveness of our international health
program.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
II. Statement of Strategy
The basic strategy will be to highlight and focus U.S. Government
activities in international health so as to work more effectively with
other nations, private voluntary organizations, and international orga-
nizations, within a broad, coordinated set of program priorities and
goals. Presidential participation will encourage the active involvement
of all Departments within the U.S. Government and of nations around
the world. International health will become an integral aspect of U.S.
foreign policy. The strategy will aim at increasing awareness of world
health problems and support for both ongoing and new efforts to im-
prove world health and nutrition. It will focus on long-range planning
and local capabilities for continuing health programs.
Another aim of the strategy will be to develop a mechanism for en-
suring that both current programs and new directions are complemen-
tary, and provide the appropriate programmatic basis for the Presiden-
tial “New Directions in International Health” initiative.
General Objectives
Broad goals that this strategy will promote are:
—Working toward the elimination of the major infectious
diseases.
—Providing access to a basic minimum level of health care for
people everywhere, especially the poorest one billion.
—Emphasizing the delivery of community-based primary health
care training to health personnel as near as possible to the point where
they deliver services.
—Encouraging
special
initiatives
to
deal
with
the
generic
problems of ill health, malnutrition, and lack of clean water supplies,
with a priority on prevention aspects of these problems.
Action Plan
The general approach to developing a world health initiative
includes:
—A Presidential statement, at an appropriate opportunity, indi-
cating a personal interest in raising the level of public and private activ-
ities aimed at improving health around the world. Emphasis would be
on program development, capitalizing on current U.S. programs, and
striving for increased partnership with other donor countries, as well
as with receiving countries, in making basic improvements consistent
with the general objectives above. Better coordination of “human
needs” activities would be a central theme.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—A number of potential initiatives are identified in the following
section of this paper. Based on comments and recommendations re-
ceived from the involved agencies, these initiatives will be announced
or assigned for further action as appropriate.

Further action could include assigning higher priority to an on-
going effort, assignment of the appropriate Department for preparation
of an implementation plan or establishment of an interagency com-
mittee to develop a recommended approach. The most important op-
portunity for inclusion in the Administration’s planning is through the
OMB Spring Planning Review. Therefore, it is important that general
guidance with a sense of relative priorities be available to OMB by early
April. This schedule does not require immediate specific programmatic
recommendations or that potential organizational questions be re-
solved during the first phase of this review.
—The remainder of the year would be planned to accomplish the
necessary studies, and to seek opportunities to encourage efforts to im-
prove world health and to strengthen coordinative activities, including
within the U.S. Government, with and between international organiza-
tions, and with private sector organizations.

Proposed Initiatives
The initial review of international health, conducted by Peter
Bourne’s staff, and comments received from the relevant agencies led
to selection of areas where improvements may be made in the U.S. ap-
proach to international health. Outlined below, these potential initia-
tives are discussed in more detail in the following section.
1. Expand U.S. involvement with health-oriented activities of in-
ternational organizations.
2. Encourage and facilitate private sector involvement to comple-
ment international health programs.
3. Expand capacity for knowledge development and use.
—Upgrading the Fogarty International Center.
—U.S. Global Health Consortia.
—Foreign Research and Training Centers.
4. International health manpower.
—Presidential Scholars in Global Health.
—Global Health Cadre.
—International Health Services Corps.
5. Presidential priorities in prevention.
—World Blindness.
—World Water Supply.
6. Coordination of U.S. Government activities in world health.

310.

Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the
Department of State
to April 5—Final Report.

Summary. There follows a delegation evaluation of the results and
achievements of the 27th session of the Commission on the Status of
Women (CSW). This is in addition to a more detailed report which will
be submitted. The Commission session began and ended with contro-
versial issues—election of the chairman and a resolution on apart-
heid—but nevertheless managed to devote a large portion of its time
and energy to constructive work. The US and other Western delega-
tions worked closely with Latin, African and Asian delegations on key
issues concerning the preparations for the proposed 1980 World Con-
ference, the future of the Commission, and in putting the emphasis on
Limited Official Use. Repeated to the Mission in Geneva.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
practical development issues. The Eastern European group concen-
trated, as expected, on exploiting political issues and on attempting to
put the main focus of future work on international peace and security
rather than development or equality. End summary.
1. The Commission’s agenda contained a limited number of items,
but provided room for discussion of all aspects of the political, eco-
nomic, social and cultural status of women. Specific items included
A) international instruments and standards relating to the status of
women, B) developments relating to the program of the UN Decade for
Women, C) protection of women and children in emergency and armed
conflict in the struggle for peace, self-determination, national liberation
and independence, D) the effects of apartheid on the status of women,
and E) communications concerning the status of women.
2. Program of the Decade and World Conference. The Commission
spent the majority of its time on the omnibus item pertaining to imple-
mentation of the Decade and specifically on discussing plans for the
to give greater emphasis to peace and disarmament issues. The devel-
opment issue is the area where the relations between the Western
group and developing countries are closest and working relationships
most successful, and the Eastern group is least able to exert influence.
The US should, therefore, continue its efforts to promote the addition of
agenda items relating to development in order to minimize politiciza-
tion and make the most of an area in which the US has taken a strong
leadership role.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
3. Future of the Commission. In view of the concurrent informal
meetings of the Economic and Social Council at which the future status
of the Commission on the Status of Women, as well as that of other
sub-bodies of ECOSOC, was being discussed, the majority of the
members of the Commission agreed that the Commission should take
action to forward its views to ECOSOC to be taken into account in its
deliberations on restructuring scheduled for the spring session. The US
joined other delegations in taking the lead on this issue and along with
Mexico, Thailand and Belgium, cosponsored a draft resolution inviting
ECOSOC to retain the Commission and, at the same time, to redefine its
mandate. An additional draft, cosponsored by Niger, Zaire, Senegal
and France was tabled concurrently and the cosponsors of both texts
combined efforts to produce a consensus text for transmission to
ECOSOC. The final text followed closely the lines of the original US
proposal. The exercise caused some anguish to Sweden, UK and Japan.
Sweden had reservations regarding the continuation of the Commis-
sion while the UK and Japan argued that they did not wish to prejudge
the results of the ECOSOC deliberations. The developing countries
were solidly in support of continuation of the Commission.
4. Political issues. The agenda item entitled “Protection of Women
and Children in Emergency and Armed Conflict in the Struggle for
Peace, Self-Determination and National Liberation and Independence”
did not produce the expected vitriolic debate and contentious resolu-
tions which ordinarily ensue from such items. In view of the recent Is-
raeli actions in Lebanon, the Western group expected the worst on this
item. The FRG, therefore, decided to take the lead and table a construc-
tive draft resolution on this subject, which focussed on international
conventions and humanitarian relief efforts. While the debate included
strong attacks on Israel by the Eastern Europeans, the Arab delegates,
and the PLO observer, no further resolutions surfaced and the FRG
draft was adopted by consensus with only minor amendments intro-
duced by Byelorussia and Cuba. We have no explanation as to why the
Eastern European spoilers allowed this agenda item to go by without
controversy, but can only conclude that they were unprepared for a
Western initiative on the subject and expected the Arab delegates (in
fact represented only by Libya) would take the lead.
5. The sole issue on which the US cast a negative vote at the Com-
mission and on which the US parted company with the African group
and other developing country delegations was on the apartheid issue.
The African cosponsors of a draft resolution on the effects of apartheid
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
on the status of women showed themselves amenable to negotiations
on their text, although their proposed final version was not wholly ac-
ceptable and the US, UK and FRG prepared to abstain on the text. The
introduction just prior to the planned voting of amendments by the del-
egation of Bulgaria led to renewed negotiations, a revised text, a hard-
ening of the Western position and a negative vote by the U.S. African
delegates reacted with both anger and understanding to the Western
position. Western delegates made clear that their opposition was due to
the divisive elements introduced into the text by Bulgaria and that they
supported the otherwise mostly constructive text which dealt primarily
with voluntary assistance programs for women in Southern Africa. The
delegation of Sweden found itself in a most uncomfortable position, as
the African group had earlier in the day chosen the representative of
Sweden to represent the Commission at the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination. This choice was made in
spite of the active lobbying and efforts of the Eastern group to nominate
Byelorussia. Following the vote on the apartheid resolution, the Af-
rican group, at the insistence of Ethiopia and Madagascar, met to recon-
sider the Swedish nomination. The moderates, led by Senegal, pre-
vailed and the group subsequently announced that the choice of
Sweden to represent the Commission would not be revoked.
6. Other issues. The Commission adopted a total of 15 resolutions,
approving all but two by consensus. In addition to the issues discussed
above, the Commission passed resolutions in improving national ma-
chinery for dealing with women’s issues, improving relations with
intergovernmental bodies outside the UN system, strengthening UN
institutions for implementing the World Plan of Action, as well as reso-
lutions on consumer protection, measures to combat prostitution, a
proposal to rationalize the reporting system, and integration of women
in development in international conferences.
7. Relations with other delegations and groups. The Western
group met frequently to coordinate positions, although there was not
always final agreement. The Western group took the initiative on sev-
eral issues, as noted above, and was successful in achieving its goals on
several key issues. The US and other members of the Western group
which included Japan made a concerted effort to hold frequent consul-
tations and to work closely with developing country delegations to find
areas of common interest and to reach consensus on these issues.
Among the developing country delegations, India, Niger and Libya ex-
ercised the strongest leadership. The African group was far more active
than either the Latin or Asian group and took more initiatives to pro-
mote its own interests. Neither the Latin nor Asian groups appeared to
have any group cohesion and initiatives from these delegations were
due to individual delegation actions rather than concerted group ef-

311.

Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre) and the President’s
Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne) to
President Carter
Washington, April 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Status Report—World Health Strategy
As stated in our memorandum of February 1 to you, we have cir-
culated a draft World Health Strategy to all of the interested agencies
asking for comments on the overall approach and on each of the pro-
classification marking. The President initialed the memorandum. Attached as Tab C of
Blaney’s July 10 briefing memorandum to Cooper, Document 314.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
posed initiatives. Their responses indicate that work is underway and
there is support for elements of the strategy; however, further analysis
and joint discussion is needed to develop the program initiatives. The
number of agencies involved, combined with the differing perspectives
of health as a function of developmental assistance or of medical re-
search, requires that we complete the policy review before we will be in
a position to announce the details of a major initiative.
As a result of your continuing interest, the Departments and
agencies have already initiated internal efforts to determine how they
can support the initiatives.
—HEW is developing a draft message for Secretary Califano to de-
liver, as your personal representative, to the World Health Assembly in
May. AID, State and others are involved in the planning.
—AID has issued FY80 program guidance based on its draft
strategy to promote health within a basic needs framework.
—Treasury has asked the World Bank to assess the Bank’s effec-
tiveness in the health sector, and the possibilities for future lending.
—DOD has asked the military departments to identify specific
projects in the areas of education, training and research.
In cooperation with the international organizations, we plan to
consider giving special attention to the following:
—Basic health, nutrition and family planning measures particu-
larly to improve maternal and child health;4
—Prevention of blindness;5
—Provision of safe water and basic sanitation; and
—Development of better ways to improve health.

“Basic needs” approaches to development must include health
considerations. Decent health is essential to both labor productivity
and learning ability. Young children and mothers suffer particularly
poor health. Yet their suffering can be substantially alleviated through
inexpensive, basic health programs in conjunction with measures to
improve agriculture and expand education. Most third-world families
lack the simplest means or information to deal effectively with the com-
monest health hazards. About 70 percent of the population lacks safe
water, and even more do without adequate sanitation. Approximately
40 million people in the world are blind. We believe the American
people will support initiatives to help provide families in developing
countries with essential and inexpensive health care and immuniza-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
tions, clean water, elementary sanitation and measures to prevent
blindness.

There are no immediate reorganization implications which might
create potential for conflict with your decision to create a new Interna-
tional Development Cooperation Administration6 and allied coordi-
nating mechanisms. These initiatives will be developed in coordination
with these mechanisms.

The review itself has generated sufficient momentum that we
should again emphasize the identification of this effort as your initia-
tive. Your Lagos speech7 contributed to this momentum by putting Af-
rican health initiatives in the context of a broader U.S. international
health effort and indicating further cooperation on African health
problems. We propose three actions:
—Emphasis on Secretary Califano’s role as your personal repre-
sentative to the World Health Assembly and your endorsement of Cali-
fano’s message spelling out the U.S. role. We will have his message by
April 27 for final clearance.
—Release of a Statement of Principles as the first step in a
long-term effort over the next two years to establish a world health ini-
tiative. We recommend you announce this prior to Califano’s message
on May 9. We have tentatively scheduled time for you in the press
room.
—Completion of the policy review, with an Administration
strategy and detailed program initiatives by September 1, 1978, to sup-
port the development of the FY 1980 and subsequent budgets. A
schedule is attached.

312.

Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple
Diplomatic and Consular Posts
107370. For the Ambassador from Sec Vance and Admin Gilligan.
Subject:
Ambassador’s
Role
in
Dealing
With
Pressing
Global
Problems—Population Growth and Adequate Food Production. Refer-
ence: State 128220.

Summary: You are requested to establish and report on a contin-
uing dialogue with host country leadership regarding the need for the
nation to deal more effectively with population/food problems in
order to meet basic needs of the poor through self-help measures and to
advance their own plans and aspirations for economic development.
End summary.
1. The following instructions are based upon the policies and pri-
orities of the Carter administration as enunciated by the Secretary in re-
cent testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee3 and
opment and Assistance Act of 1954, as amended. The Secretary stated
that the cooperation of Third World is essential in helping resolve such
pressing global problems as rapid population growth and inadequate
food production. The principal purposes of our assistance programs
Limited Official Use. Drafted by Green and Lee; cleared by Mink, Gilligan, Tarnoff,
Blaney, and Tuchman, as well as in draft by Cavanaugh and in substance by Hathaway;
approved by Vance. Sent to Kabul, Dacca, La Paz, Santo Domingo, Quito, Cairo, Addis
Ababa, Accra, Guatemala City, Conakry, Georgetown, Port au Prince, Tegucigalpa, New
Delhi, Jakarta, Kingston, Amman, Seoul, Beruit, Bamako, Rabat, Islamabad, Manila,
Lisbon, Dakar, Freetown, Mogadiscio, Colombo, Khartoum, Damascus, Dar es Salaam,
Tunis, Kinshasa, Lusaka, and Lima. According to telegram 207555, August 16, the De-
partment repeated telegram 107370 on May 5 to Algiers, Banjul, Bangui, Abidjan, Bissau,
Bangkok, Ankara, Asuncion, Bogota, Brasilia, Bridgetown, Cotonou, Bujumbura, Ca-
racas, Gaborone, Lilongwe, Libreville, Lagos, Lome, Kathmandu, Kigali, Managua, Ma-
puto, Maseru, Mexico City, Monrovia, Mbabane, Ndjamena, Niamey, Nairobi, Nouak-
chott, Ouagadougou, Panama City, Port Louis, Sana, San Jose, San Salvador, Santiago,
Taipei, and Yaounde. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
are to meet the basic needs of poor people in the developing world and
to give them a chance to improve their standard of living by their own
efforts. The Act of 1954 requires consideration of the extent to which a
recipient country is undertaking self-help measures to increase per
capita production, including carrying out voluntary programs to con-
trol population growth. This is consistent with and reinforces NSC ap-
proved policy concerning the Ambassador’s role in making more effec-
tive use of our food assistance in stimulating countries to deal more
effectively with their population/food problems.
2. We believe it is necessary to focus host countries’ attention on
this issue. We have in mind (A) long term projected worldwide food
shortages, based on FAO, USDA and other data, and (B) the Congres-
sional requirement stated in Section 103(A) that our assistance be in-
creasingly concentrated on countries that make effective use of such
assistance, including their performance in improving agricultural
output and nutrition and reducing population growth.
3. This administration’s emphasis that food and other assistance
serve all development interests, to which population is integrally
linked, reinforces the need for these instructions.
4. As appropriate in your normal contacts with top leadership of
host government, you should discuss need for cooperation of Third
World countries to resolve pressing global problems that affect all na-
tions, including rapid population growth and inadequate food produc-
tion. The principal purposes of our assistance programs are to meet the
basic needs of the poor people in the developing world and to give
them a chance to improve their standard of living by their own efforts.
5. In your presentation, you should make clear that we are not at-
tempting to establish a condition for U.S. assistance. On other hand,
projections of food/production trends suggest that U.S. and other
major food-exporting countries (of which there are only five: Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, Argentina and Thailand) as well as EEC will
not be able in the long run to meet projected world food demand. As
determined by the International Food Policy Research Institute, popu-
lation in developing countries (excluding People’s Republic of China
Of them, 2. billion may well be living in food deficit countries, making
the present precarious situation much more alarming in the absence of
corrective actions. In addition, the logistics of food transport and
storage will become an increasingly difficult problem.
6. We suggest you make point that, in a situation in which supplies
may simply be inadequate to meet demands, prudence suggests that
we jointly cooperate with food-deficit countries to explore ways in
which their domestic supply and demand can be brought into balance.
Efforts to increase agricultural production are a vital part of such solu-

313.

Editorial Note
On May 2, 1978, the White House issued a Presidential statement
on international health. In January, the President’s Special Assistant for
International Health Affairs Peter Bourne had recommended that Pres-
ident Jimmy Carter use either a message to Congress or a speech to ex-
plicate the administration’s international health strategy (see Docu-
ment 306). In addition to the Presidential statement, Secretary of
Health, Education and Welfare Joseph Califano, head of the U. S. dele-
gation to the 31st annual World Health Assembly in Geneva, Switzer-
land, would formally reiterate the administration’s commitment to an
increased role in international health activities. According to an April
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
“Consistent with the announced expansion of foreign aid, and our
effort to focus that aid on the poorest of the world’s people, my admin-
istration has undertaken a review of international health needs. Our
aim was to determine the most effective ways in which the U.S. Gov-
ernment and private organizations could help reduce the personal and
economic impact of widespread malnutrition, infectious diseases, and
other health
hazards
including
those
associated
with
frequent
childbirth.

“As a result of that study, I am announcing today my intention to
launch a program to strengthen the participation of the United States in
worldwide efforts to overcome disease and ill health.

“Our efforts will be based on the following principles:
“—A basic minimum level of health, nutrition, and family plan-
ning services should be available to the world’s poor, whether they live
in rural areas or urban slums.

“—Developing nations can eventually meet their own health
needs if we assist them in strengthening their institutions and building
their own health systems.

“—Community-based primary health care, including the use of
community resources and the training of appropriate health personnel
as near as possible to where they will deliver services, is the most effec-
tive means of achieving the standard of health we desire for all people.
“Our objective is to concentrate on the prevention of disease and ill
health. We will put special emphasis on providing clean drinking
water, basic sanitation, basic immunizations, and efforts to prevent and
treat blindness. This emphasis will be reflected in our own programs
and in our support of priorities established by various international
organizations.

“We will work toward the lasting control or eradication of the
major infectious diseases, particularly ‘tropical’ diseases that continue
to be the leading causes of death and disability.

“We will give special attention to the major causes of death in chil-
dren—diarrhea and respiratory disease, particularly when aggravated
by malnutrition.

“Private industry provides most of the goods and services needed
to sustain the world’s health. It can play an important role by exercising
initiative and careful judgment in developing needed products and in
helping to make sure they are used wisely to improve health in the de-
veloping world.

“We recognize the invaluable contribution voluntary organiza-
tions have made in improving the health of people throughout the
world and their special services in developing nations. We will strive to
aid them in their efforts and to coordinate our activities.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“We plan to:
“—Strengthen institutions in our Government which are dealing
with international health problems, reemphasizing our commitment to
help meet the health needs of other nations, and improve the use of ex-
isting resources through better coordination.

“—Build greater awareness among the American people of the le-
gitimacy and the importance for our foreign policy goals of improving
other people’s capacity to meet their basic human needs.
“—Work closely with nations around the world, individually and
through organizations such as WHO, UNICEF, the World Bank, and
the regional development banks, to improve the health of people
everywhere.

“—More fully involve American universities, technological foun-
dations, and other private organizations in making U.S. scientific and
professional resources more accessible to the developing world.”
The full text of the statement is printed in Public Papers: Carter,
consular posts, May 5, the Department repeated the text of the Presi-
dent’s statement with a request to “bring this statement to the attention
of the Minister of Health and other appropriate officials.” (National Ar-
Califano, in his May 9 address to the World Health Assembly, re-
emphasized many of the objectives outlined in the Presidential state-
ment. The Secretary pledged additional resources for the combating of
major infectious diseases, especially in the area of child immunization.
Providing clean drinking water also existed as a high priority; to this
end, Califano highlighted U.S. support for the United Nations Decade
for Drinking Water and Sanitation (1980–1990). Califano also described
American collaboration with the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) in formulation
of international nutrition programs. He indicated U.S. support for
WHO programs dedicated to the prevention and treatment of
blindness and extension of primary health care programs, including
maternal and child health services, nutrition, and family planning. In
his concluding remarks, Califano asserted, “We are, as you know, a na-
tion seeking to reassert our commitment to human rights—at home and
in the world. Our participation in this organization gives us an oppor-
tunity to express that commitment not simply in words but in deeds.
Together with you, we stand ready to seize that opportunity. We can,
and we must, build a healthier world for all our children.”
The full text of Califano’s remarks is printed in Department of
U.S. delegation included Assistant Secretary of Health, Education and
Welfare Julius Richmond; John Bryant (Director-designate, Office of In-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
ternational Health, Department of Health, Education and Welfare);
Robert Andrew (Director, Agency Directorate for Health and Drug
Control, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of
State); Lee Howard (Director of Health Services, AID), and U.S. Repre-
sentative to the U.S. Mission in Geneva William vanden Heuvel. (Public
Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, page 885)
314.

Briefing Memorandum From Harry Blaney of the Policy
Planning Staff to the Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs (Cooper)
Washington, July 10, 1978
Status Report on Peter Bourne’s International Health Review
After considerable interagency meetings, numerous lengthy drafts
of reports, etc., the White House on May 2 released a Presidential State-
ment on International Health. (See Tab A.) This statement generally af-
firmed the intention of the President “to launch a program to
strengthen the participation of the United States in worldwide efforts to
overcome disease and ill health.” The basic elements of this strategy
included:
—concentration on prevention of disease and ill health with em-
phasis on clean drinking water, basic sanitation, immunization, and
blindness;
—control or eradication of major infectious diseases—particularly
tropical; and
—causes of death in children.

The President stated that the strategy would be developed “as part
of our budgetary and legislative recommendations for the next year.
Where possible, however, we will move immediately to carry out this
program.” Secretary Califano elaborated on this statement in his
speech to the WHO Assembly on May 9. (See Tab B.) The basic White
House/OMB memo to the President on this is at Tab C.
classified. Sent through Lake. A copy was sent to Garten.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
A World Health Strategy Group was established under Peter
Bourne with four agency-led working groups.

I. Initiatives for the Developing Countries (AID-chaired)
II. Scientific and Manpower Development (HEW)
III. Multilateral Agencies (State)
IV. U.S. Commerce in International Health
The goal, originally, was to achieve a single draft document by July
14 with a final report to the President by August 25. A short draft
over-view and outline for the health strategy report has been circulated
along with a list of key issues and revised work schedule. (See Tab D.)
These latter documents assume an increase in foreign aid and es-
pecially health as a part of our BHN strategy. No dollar figures have yet
been set for the specific initiatives to our knowledge.
The main initiatives proposed include:
—Support of “Integral Health Services Systems” including Pri-
mary Health Care, prevention, health, nutrition and family planning
and paramedical training;
—Action against disease control—infectious diseases, blindness,
mental health;
—Support for water and sanitation efforts;
—NGO involvement in bilateral assistance programs;
—Helping LDC resource and institutional capacities;
—Establishing foreign centers for research and training;
—Assistance in “Leadership Manpower Development”;
—An “International Health Service Corps”;
—Extension to present ACTION authority to provide assistance to
“Domestic Development Service Programs” in LDCs;
—Have UNDP earmark funds for special health programs of
multilateral agencies with “minimal growth in regular budget”;
—Increase in USG agency staff responsible for health activities of
multilateral agencies;
—More PVO involvement in USG programs including more Fed-
eral funding for PVOs to coordinate work;
—Fund “U.S. Private Commerce” conference by NAS;
—Establish interagency coordination to develop policy and pro-
gram design;
—New U.S. manpower clearing house for world health programs;
—Permit foreign assistance funds to be applied to international
health programs outside AID, State, Treasury and ACTION.
Comment: The above illustrates the ambitiousness of the initia-
tives being considered. Many will be hotly debated, especially the es-
tablishment of a new International Health Service Corps. Many of the
initiatives are not well defined. As there are increasing pressures
against AID funds, we face difficult choices among the suggested pro-
grams or a reallocation of our assistance priorities towards “health”
type activities. Some of the “priority” areas make great sense in terms
of impact on health for the relative cost involved and the LDCs existing
capabilities, (e.g. community water and sanitation), while others, (e.g.,
mental health) may prove less effective in terms of foreign assistance.
Within State, Under Secretary Lucy Benson has been the key State
coordinator of our work with Dr. Bourne. (The staff person in her office
is Bill Lowrance.) Bourne’s staff leader on this is Krys Krystynak. State
(T) chairs the Working Group on Multilateral Health Organizations.
S/P is a member of the group and assists as required.
If we can be of any further help on this matter please let me know.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
315.

Issue Paper Prepared by the Task Force on International
Health
Washington, July 11, 1978
COORDINATION, ORGANIZATION, STAFFING
I. Purpose. The U.S. must strengthen the means by which its several
government agencies can relate and join their separate missions and ac-
tivities in international health. It must do so in a way which supports
and is supported by the activities of the U.S. private sector, other donor
countries, and multilateral and voluntary organizations. This will re-
quire a government-wide policy on international health, interagency coor-
dination at both policy and strategic levels, capacity for development and
promotion of new initiatives, and improved intra-agency coordination.
II. Policy. Although many distinct policies exist within and among
individual agencies, the absence of a government policy on interna-
tional health deters the achievement of a fuller humanitarian benefit to
global health. In particular, if international health is to profit more from
opportunities now available in various U.S. Government departments
and agencies, explicit policy detailing the nature of the relation be-
tween international health and the various agency missions and activ-
ities must be established, understood and implemented by all. That
policy must stress U.S. concern for basic health needs at the highest
level of government policy-making and complement the President’s
human rights policy, demonstrating real and effective concern for the
health of people everywhere. It would serve as a model for changes in
foreign policy decision making to better support economic and social
development and efforts to improve international relations. It would
seek to benefit from and improve domestic health activity. It would
support and seek support from international economic and commercial
policy.

A clearly defined international health policy would also establish
more direct guidance for U.S. relationships with multilateral agencies
and international financial institutions. The policy must also recognize
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
and complement the unique potential of the U.S. private sector—
academia, PVO’s, U.S. private business, and private individuals.
III. Coordinating Mechanisms. Twenty-two agencies engage in inter-
national health related activities. A way is needed to relate and
strengthen the separate purposes and potential contributions of these
agencies to the benefit of overall government goals such as those cur-
rently espoused by the President. An explicit policy will be instru-
mental in creating such procedures. In order to establish a government-
wide policy, keep it current, and manage its implementation, the major
problem of divided responsibility and authority among the largest
agencies will have to be overcome.

There is general agreement among the agencies that coordination
can and should be improved. Two levels of interagency coordination
are required: a policy level and a strategic program level.
The policy level responsibilities include:
• the planning and evolution of U.S. Government international
health policy;
• establishment of the government-wide goals and principles for
agencies to use in designing international health programs;
• resolution of any impasse from the strategic level of coordina-
tion, especially regarding acceptance and assignment of lead responsi-
bility for different international health activities;
• publication and transmission to the President and Congress of
an annual report on international health activities.

Public input should be invited to assist in the performance of all
these responsibilities.

Strategic level responsibilities include:
• the planning and evolution of U.S. Government international
health strategy;
• interrelation of goals and activities of international health pro-
grams throughout government;
• development and promotion of international health initiatives
coming from ongoing government programs, international science and
health attaches (described in the following paragraphs), the U.S. pri-
vate sector, foreign countries, or international organizations;
• maintenance of information on relevant governmental and
worldwide international health activity.

The key issues to be considered in improving coordination for in-
ternational health are: structure, lead, and relation to other related
coordinating bodies.

Structure. Of the 22 agencies currently involved in international
health activities, AID, HEW and State are the most directly involved,
followed by ACTION, DoD and Treasury. Broad policy is most easily
developed among those agencies most active in international health.
Strategy and broad program coordination, however, requires wider in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
volvement of all agencies with related concerns and potentials for con-
tribution. Ad hoc groups, such as the newly formed African Regional
Health Strategy Group, can best serve immediate needs.

Other Coordinating Groups. Three existing coordinating groups
with health related concerns are: (1) the DCC; (2) the NSC Ad Hoc Pop-
ulation Committee; and (3) Agriculture’s Food Policy Group. The foci
and functions of these groups partially involve international health
matters. However, there are significant aspects of international health
which are not fully covered by any one of them alone or even all three
taken together.

Any international health coordinating body will be concerned
with improving health in the developing, as well as the developed
world. The NSC and Agriculture groups do not address international
health concerns broadly. The DCC does not address international
health concerns of the United States and the rest of the developed
world, nor does its mandate include advancing health science. Good
coordination would be made more difficult to achieve, therefore, by
parcelling out international health policy and program responsibility to
these groups. Whereas population, hunger and perhaps other basic
human needs activities might be most appropriately connected to one
of the three groups, in the case of international health, it seems more
appropriate to consider whether coordination should be separate from
these three groups with significant liaison on respectively appropriate
matters.

The most difficult question in this regard concerns the newly es-
tablished role of the AID Administrator as the President’s and the Sec-
retary of State’s principal advisor on development programs and
policy, and as the Executive Branch’s principal spokesperson to the
Congress on development assistance. In this role, the Administrator
will chair an expanded Development Coordinating Committee3 (DCC).
The DCC will deal with issues of bilateral aid, multilateral aid, P.L. 480,
aid for certain international organizations, and legislative strategy and
tactics. DCC subcommittees have been established on: bilateral aid
loans and grants; multilateral aid including IFI and IFAD loans (but a

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
separate National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Fi-
nancial Policies will be chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and con-
tinue to advise him on policy toward the IFI’s); food aid; develop-
mental
programs
and
budgets
of
international
organizations
(excluding organizations now backstopped by Treasury); Human
Rights and Foreign Assistance; legislative strategy (to be established);
and a working group to review strategy for implementing a foundation
for International Technological Cooperation.

Lead. State believes the lead should be shared. AID accepts State as
the central point of coordination but believes AID should lead for
LDC’s and HEW for developed countries. HEW believes it should lead,
but underscores the need for a focal point in State and for coordination
between HEW and State. Various agencies (and many nongovernment
parties) want a significant White House role in the lead.
The answer to who should assume the lead for coordinating U.S.
international health policy and programs will depend to a significant
extent on the way in which current reorganization and coordination
proposals and plans in various areas develop. The new DCC/CDPP
structure will take some time to establish how its concern for develop-
ment programs and policy will relate to international development
assistance in health and to international health activity not primarily
related to development. The proposed Foundation for International
Technology Cooperation is just now into the earliest planning stage
with only very little known of its relation to health. AID responsibilities
are currently being considered for reorganization. HEW, DoD and
others (EPA, VA, Labor, etc.) are considering strengthening their inter-
national health involvements. Congress (Javits and Kennedy) is pro-
posing new roles and structures for the agencies in international health.
OMB is moving toward a consolidated budget review for international
health. The World Bank is currently reviewing its health sector policy
and should be finished doing so early next year. WHO and the U.N.
family in general are undergoing significant policy and programmatic
reorientation. Until these and other developments take shape, there-
fore, it would seem appropriate to retain leadership for coordination of
international health activity in the White House.

IV. Initiative Development and Promotion. Global health programs,
projects and initiatives can and do originate in many ways, in many
places, and for many purposes. They serve goals of global health (in-
cluding health of U.S. citizens), foreign policy, medical diplomacy, de-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
velopmental and supporting assistance, professional and scientific ex-
change, and U.S. commerce and finance. At present, it is cumbersome
to develop and introduce such initiatives government-wide. Coordina-
tion is ad hoc when it takes place. More systematic procedures should
help to ensure an integrated, government-wide strategy to implement
these initiatives in ways which best exploit government capabilities in
concert with U.S. international health and foreign policies.
Development and promotion of such international health initia-
tives require the capacity to identify needs or opportunities for assist-
ance or collaboration in other countries, to promote these objectives in
the U.S. and host country governments, and to design and select appro-
priate projects and allocate responsibility for implementation among
the many U.S. agencies and private sector resources devoted to interna-
tional health activity.

To some extent, AID personnel perform these functions in devel-
oping AID health programs in countries that meet their criteria for
assistance. Attaches of the State Department perform similar functions
in broader areas related to science, technology, agriculture and com-
merce; but little or no direct attention is paid to health and basic human
needs. Other agencies are similarly involved, e.g., HEW’s research and
scientific exchange activity and VA’s technical assistance for hospital
construction. But, AID’s coverage of health problems is limited to AID
countries and operationally directed to its own programming needs;
State’s Attaches are only minimally oriented to health; and the activ-
ities of other agencies often miss opportunities for more effective in-
volvement, fuller U.S. participation, or more coordinated activity.
Therefore, development and promotion of international health initia-
tives as described above requires some improvement.

In the future, such initiatives should be routinely developed and
promoted through whatever means exist in the government for inter-
national health coordination. In addition, Working Group II recom-
mends working within the State Department’s Attache system to the
following extent by:
(1) Creating the post of Deputy Science Attache for health in some
countries;
(2) Recruiting health scientists to serve as Science Attaches; and
(3) Raising awareness of Science Attaches by:
(a) health orientation at annual or regional meetings of the Science
Attaches; and
(b) visits to Science Attaches at their in-country posts.
Furthermore, in the case of international health initiatives with
multilateral organizations—especially with WHO, the current staff at
HEW, AID and IO is fully deployed and overextended. Most staff work

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
is performed as a part-time responsibility. A study by IO/State5 recom-
mends increasing U.S. staff to permit better coordination in Wash-
ington and more frequent contacts with WHO headquarters and WHO
regional staffs. This is all the more important as WHO is decentralizing
its activities to the regions. Working Group II proposes that HEW
create Health Attache positions in at least four of the WHO regions.
This would work best if HEW would designate an additional three
full-time WHO representatives at OIH, and if State would add an addi-
tional health officer in IO.

V. Intra-Organizational Coordination. In order to implement such a
policy and coordination framework, Departments and agencies will
have to establish more clearly their focal points for international health
responsibility. In HEW and AID this would require significant intra-
organizational coordination among functions (assistance, training, re-
search) and responsibilities (other agency missions and international
health). In State, ACTION, DoD, Treasury, Commerce, EPA, etc., this
will require identification of organizational points of coordination with
international health policy and program activity in their own agency
and government-wide.

In the State Department, for example, it would be helpful to for-
mally designate a focal point at which the relationship between inter-
national health and international relations would be clarified and
strengthened. Because of State’s role as ultimate manager of all U.S. in-
ternational relations—thus including international health activities in-
volving other countries or their citizens, it would be most useful if this
sort of focal point were to serve as State’s point of liaison for all of its
activity regarding international health: representation of international
health during formulation and conduct of foreign policy and vice
versa; development, promotion and management (but not necessarily
conduct) of international health initiatives taken primarily to improve
U.S. relations with other countries; leadership in major agreements
with other countries on transnational health problems with the envi-
ronment, safety of goods or services in trade, etc.; and neutral broker
for the relationship of international health government-wide with U.S.
international policies in other areas.

In order to operate such a focal point, State will have to upgrade its
organizational capacity and staff in international health. State is cur-
rently investigating on their own an appropriate way to improve their
ability to meet responsibilities such as those outlined above.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Other agencies may not require as much structure as suggested
above. At a minimum, however, some specific delegation of responsi-
bility for international health matters would be appropriate.

316.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Under Secretary of State for Security
Assistance, Science, and Technology (Benson)
Washington, July 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Issues and Options Paper for UN Water Decade
Attached at Tab 1 is a revised issues and options paper for the U.S.
policy toward the UN Water Decade, reflecting comments of AID and
OES as well as our own up-dating of certain data. We briefed OMB
staff on the paper and invited their comments. However, despite gen-
eral admonitions about need for fiscal restraint they have not offered us
any specific thoughts.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
The paper contains three basic options. We have assumed that Op-
1. Early provision for planning assistance to all relevant LDCs in
This should not be very controversial since AID is already moving in
this direction, although the extent of their intended funding is not yet
certain.
2. Two medium level efforts:
(a) US would assist a limited number of “lower tier” LDCs to de-
velop replicable model programs and then to implement them in a lim-
over a decade with FY 80 funding at about $100 million development
assistance (DA).

(b) US would assist both lower and upper tier countries as in (a)
above. Estimated cost: $3. billion over the decade.
3. US would take lead in major effort to largely fulfill the rural
sector UN Water Decade goals for most LDCs reaching 1 billion people
$150 million in the first year.)

These figures compare with a total CWS AID development assist-
decade is not an extraordinary increase over past expenditure. In fact
AID currently spends about 3% of its DA budget on CWS. Option 2
We’ve arranged with your staff for a senior level UN Water
Decade coordinating group meeting to be held on August 2nd. At Tab 2
is a draft memo from you to members of the Senior Group announcing
the meeting.

Before August 2 we would like to offer some suggestions on the
meeting itself.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

317.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State and the Mission in Geneva
22011. Geneva for Dr. Fortuine. Dept pass HEW/OIH. Subject:
WHO/UNICEF Alma Ata Conference on Primary Health Care. Ref:
Geneva 10701.
1. The WHO/UNICEF Conference on Primary Health Care con-
cluded 1800 hours September 12 with approval of Conference final re-
port and reading of “Declaration of Alma Ata”. The Conference held
relatively few surprises, with careful WHO/UNICEF staff preparations
evident throughout and final document closely following an advance
staff text.
2. The universal acceptance of the goal of making some type of pri-
mary health care available to everyone by the year 2000, with LDC rec-
ognition that each country bears prime responsibility for building a
health delivery system suited to its economic and social conditions, is
doubtless a milestone in international health matters. The full signifi-
cance of the “Declaration”, however, will depend on how rapidly and
effectively individual nations and intergovernmental organizations are
able to translate the generalities of the “Declaration” into action
programs.
3. As host nation, the Soviets played a generally useful and mod-
erate role during formal Conference deliberations. Their effort to favor-
ably impress conference participants with the Soviet health system was
extraordinary. The entire city of Alma Ata and surroundings were
freshly scrubbed and stocked with meat and other scarce food items
(we had one report from a local inhabitant that mutton suddenly ap-
peared on sale a few days before the start of the conference, after 18
ority; Limited Official Use.

“Final Document of the WHO/UNICEF International Conference on Primary Health
Care,” and the Secretariat’s comments, urged the U.S. delegation to thoroughly prepare
for the conference, and clarified conference logistics. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780291–0885) Richmond and Bryant represented the United States
at the WHO/UNICEF Primary Health Care Conference, held in Alma Ata, Kazakhstan,
proposed Alma Ata Declaration. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
fundamental human right and insisted that governments devise policies, strategies, and
plans of action to ensure that all people receive adequate primary health care. (Primary
Health Care: Report of the International Conference on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR,

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
meatless months in the Alma Ata region.) The field trips the Soviets or-
ganized for Conference participants during the September 9–10
weekend to urban and rural Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan featured So-
viet physicians and other health personnel in immaculate uniforms and
surroundings reciting the usual stock phrases in praise of the Soviet
system. Overstaging, and lack of visible patients, detracted from what
could have been an impressive show.
4. Senator Kennedy’s address4 delivered to the plenary the evening
of September 6 attracted wide attention, and brought warm response
from the galleries packed with local Soviets. Hundreds of Soviets gath-
ered in the square facing the conference hall to catch a glimpse of the
Senator’s departure.
5. The Conference, in contrast to recent world health assemblies,
was relatively free of extraneous political debate. Soviet Health Min-
ister Petrovsky adroitly handled his duties as President of the Confer-
ence and assisted in the general move for consensus. The only political
flap was created by the SWAPO delegate in the closing hours of the
conference, who requested that “liberation movements” be inserted in
a listing of groups supporting health care in the summary of discus-
sions of the conference. A sharp exchange ensued with Algeria,
Zambia, Afghanistan, Mozambique, GDR and the PLO registering sup-
port for the SWAPO proposal and the FRG, Canada, Australia, France,
Guatemala, and Costa Rica noting opposition. The suggestion was re-
ferred to the Secretariat to work out appropriate wording for inclusion
in the final conference report. Notwithstanding the heavy majority of
LDCs participating, together with SWAPO and the PLO, the final con-
ference document was moderate in tone. The racism-Zionism issue
which had plagued previous WHO conferences was not raised.
Garrison

318.

Letter From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
Representative James H. Scheuer
Washington, October 24, 1978
Dear Mr. Scheuer:
Thank you for your letter2 and subsequent cable to Secretary
Vance3 concerning the future role of the Department of State in popula-
tion affairs. I am glad you have had the opportunity to discuss these
matters with Assistant Secretary Pickering, and in Secretary Vance’s
absence I would like to respond further to your concerns.
Secretary Vance and I share your high regard for Ambassador
Green and your regret at his departure after three years of able and ef-
fective service as Coordinator of Population Affairs. We believe your
assessment is entirely correct that under his leadership population
issues have assumed a high importance in our foreign policy—a pri-
ority reflected in the President’s message to Congress in May of last
classification marking. Vance departed Washington, D.C. on October 13 for Pretoria,
South Africa, whereupon he met with South African officials to discuss problems related
to Namibia.

Working Group on Population Policy. Under Secretary Benson and I
will continue to work with the new Coordinator, as we have done with
Ambassador Green, to ensure that the major developments in our pop-
ulation policy are brought to Secretary Vance’s personal attention. I ap-
preciate your support for these organizational improvements.
I want to reiterate, however, the Department’s view that the ap-
pointment of Dr. Richard Benedick is not a downgrading of our com-
mitment to population policy. Dr. Benedick is a senior career diplomat
with over twenty years of experience. He has worked and published in
the population and development field and was strongly recommended
by Ambassador Green and others for this post. He will be supported by
the continued active involvement of Ambassador Green, who has
agreed to remain available as a consultant.

We are confident, in short, that Dr. Benedick’s appointment and
the other organizational changes I have mentioned will enable the De-
partment to maintain its commitment to population issues as a vital
part of our foreign policy. We hope to continue working closely with
you and the Select Committee on Population on these issues, and
would like to express our appreciation for your strong interest and in-
volvement in this area of great importance to the future of our nation
and the world.

Sincerely,
Warren Christopher

320.

Editorial Note
Beginning in October 1978, the Department of State Bulletin serial-
ized three articles written by Coordinator of Population Affairs Ambas-
sador Marshall Green and his Special Assistant Robert A. Feary and as-
sisted by Department of State demographer Lydia K. Giffler. Entitled
“World Population: The Silent Explosion,” the articles outlined the cen-
tral issues of population growth and global responses to the problem.
Part 1, published in October, provided a brief historical overview of the
population explosion, postulated as to the distribution of the world’s
population by 2000, and discussed the implications of classical demo-
graphic transition theory. (Department of State Bulletin, October 1978,
pages 45–54)
The second installment of “Silent Explosion,” printed in the No-
vember issue of Department of State Bulletin, explored the negative
consequences of rapid population growth upon the world food system,
national economies, social services, the environment, and internal and
external politics:
“The overpopulation problem is most often viewed in broad eco-
nomic, social, and political terms. But it is fundamentally a problem of
the frustrations, deprivation, and suffering of millions of individual
human beings, predominantly in the developing countries. Millions of
women are caught up in a cycle of endless childbearing, wasted health,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
drudgery, and limited life expectancy. Vast numbers of children are
born into a future of undernourishment, physical and mental impair-
ment, and virtually no prospect of advancement and a better life. Multi-
tudes of adults and youths are without meaningful employment.
“Population pressures are by no means the only cause of these con-
ditions. Poverty and suffering existed long before there were such pres-
sures. But the central importance of overpopulation in the syndrome of
mounting demands on diminishing life support systems, and sta-
tionary or declining living standards over most of the developing
world, is clear.” (Department of State Bulletin, November 1978, page 4)
Part 2 also described multilateral efforts toward curbing popula-
tion growth, notably the 1974 adoption of the World Population Plan of
Action (WPPA), and national efforts toward instituting family plan-
ning programs.

The December issue of Department of State Bulletin featured the
third and final part of “Silent Explosion.” After offering several “pri-
ority action areas” designed to improve the effectiveness of population
programs, the authors highlighted U.S. international population pol-
icies, notably the 1977 amendment of the 1961 Foreign Assistance Act
(FAA), the establishment of the House Select Committee on Population
in September 1977, and the work of the National Security Council Ad
Hoc Group on Population Policy. Asserting that the world could no
longer “gloss over population problems,” Green, Feary, and Giffler
concluded:
“Whether world population stabilizes at 8, 11, or more billions, one
thing seems clear: There will be mounting pressure on resources and
environment everywhere. Awareness of this fact has been slow in
coming, but there is now widening recognition that lifestyles are going
to have to change. Fortunately, many religions and cultures already re-
flect appreciation of the intangible and spiritual over the material. But
anguishing adjustments remain in store.

“The world population explosion impacts on almost all global
issues—food, energy, environment, North-South disparities, and, most
fundamentally of all, improving conditions of life for countless millions
of people. Whether the world community can act adequately and in
time to stabilize population levels will critically affect the future of
mankind.” (Department of State Bulletin, December 1978, page 47)
In a November 16 action memorandum to Secretary of State Cyrus
Vance, sent through Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance,
Science, and Technology Lucy Wilson Benson, Assistant Secretary of
State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs
Thomas Pickering suggested that the Department transmit copies of
“Silent Explosion” to all Chiefs of Mission. Commented Pickering, “I
believe it should be required reading for all U.S. Ambassadors and

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
principal staff, as a useful aid in their continuing diplomatic contacts
with foreign leaders, for it has been demonstrated that leadership com-
mitment to national population programs is a vital element in their
success.” He stressed Vance’s “personal involvement,” and proposed
that Vance send a personal message to all Ambassadors. (National Ar-
letter, prepared in the Bureau of Oceans and International Environ-
mental and Scientific Affairs, urged Ambassadors to “examine and
use” “Silent Explosion” and offer any thoughts as to “how the United
States and the international community might more effectively address
this transcendent global problem.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
memorandum from Executive Secretary of the Department Peter Tar-
noff to all Assistant Secretaries and office heads, the Department had
sent copies of “Silent Explosion” to all Chiefs of Mission under a per-
sonal letter from Vance. (Department of State, RG 59, S/S (I): Principal
Memo File Jan–Feb–Mar 1979)

321.

Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Population Affairs
PARTICIPANTS
Congressman James Scheuer
Mike Teitelbaum, Staff Director for Select Committee on Population
State Department
T—Undersecretary Benson
OES—Mr. Thomas Pickering
H—Mr. Tom Weston
Due to a delay in his plane, Congressman Scheuer missed his
meeting with the Secretary. Mrs. Benson explained, however, that the
time had been used for discussion by the Secretary, herself and Tom
Pickering about the need for a new approach on population matters.
The Secretary is looking for ways to emphasize this Administration’s
commitment to population issues. Scheuer noted that on several occa-
sions, when a high-level visit to a major LDC was contemplated, he had
written letters to the Secretary asking that population be raised. As an
indication of the lack of proper emphasis, he had not even received re-
sponses to those letters. More to the point in Scheuer’s mind was the
fact that, following the meetings, he had inquired of the State Depart-
ment whether or not it had been raised. In all instances he found that it
had not been. He therefore welcomed the Secretary’s commitment to
new initiatives on population matters, but, citing the letter of October
24 from Deputy Secretary Christopher, expressed skepticism about the
commitment of the Department. The Secretary should exercise firm
leadership in this field.

Mrs. Benson agreed that not enough attention had been paid to the
population problem, but added that the Secretary was committed to ex-
ercising leadership in this field. If the Secretary is to provide leadership
he must have individual issues called to his attention, in this case by
herself and Tom Pickering.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Mr. Pickering noted that, in the meeting this morning with the Sec-
retary, Mr. Vance had explored ways in which the prestige and entree
of Mr. Benedick could be enhanced, for example, through an ambassa-
dorial appointment. Mr. Vance also raised the possibility of bringing in
distinguished outsiders to head missions in this area. Scheuer reacted
with the comment that it was not a question of increasing Benedick’s
prestige, rather that an essential appointment was given to a person
who may be very capable, but, to Scheuer’s knowledge, had never had
ambassadorial rank and had no reputation outside the State Depart-
ment on population matters. Such an appointment was a clear signal to
others that the United States government’s emphasis on population
issues had been lowered.

Mrs. Benson pointed out the need for someone working full-time
within the bureaucracy, if prominent outsiders were to be fully pre-
pared to undertake a mission on population issues. Congressman
Scheuer wondered whether a more prominent person with ambassado-
rial experience could be appointed to such a position. He gave as an ex-
ample Ambassador Easum, now in Lagos, and emphasized that the
key was direct access to the Secretary without going through several
bureaucratic layers. Mr. Pickering agreed that prominent outsiders
must be brought in, but added that it was very difficult to find such
people willing to spend full time on these issues. This was the reason
for an officer within the bureaucracy. He thought one prominent
person for population missions would be Congressman Scheuer and
asked for suggestions of other prominent figures. Scheuer responded
that he would be available to undertake any mission at any time but
that more was needed. Names of people could be obtained from the
White House but he would make himself available for consultations
whenever needed.

The Congressman hopes to meet in the near future with the Secre-
tary, Mrs. Benson, Mr. Pickering and Marshall Green. He was informed
that the Secretary would be calling him that afternoon (December 4) to
discuss this issue further.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

322.

Memorandum From Mary Hanley of the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to the Director of
International Women’s Programs, Bureau of International
Organization Affairs (Good)
Washington, January 5, 1979
SUBJECT
HA Policy Responsibilities Regarding Women
The Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs is directly
concerned with how official U.S. policy can better respond to the rights
of women. The following are ways in which we can improve this
responsiveness:
to submit annual reports to Congress on the human rights situation in
countries receiving economic or security assistance.
Guidelines to all posts for country reporting should call for specific
information re status of women. Request for such information in gen-
eral terms has so far brought little success.

323.

Memorandum From Michelle Bova of the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to the Assistant Secretary
of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(Derian)
Washington, January 11, 1979
SUBJECT
Green/Pickering Memos on the Plight of Women in Developing Countries
In response to the memos sent to you by Thomas Pickering and
Marshall Green, respectively (copies attached), I met separately with
Ambassador Green, Arvonne Fraser and Luke Lee of Mr. Pickering’s
office. These meetings elicited the following suggestions for how this
Administration and HA, in particular, could take a more active role in
promoting the rights of women and children internationally:
1. HA should create a full time officer position which would deal
with the rights of women and children internationally. Discussion: Luke
Lee has done some impressive work in this area, as attested by the at-
tached sample of writing material which he has produced. Now that
Patsy Mink has left OES and Ambassador Green will be leaving, the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
priorities of the office have changed. Luke is no longer being encour-
aged to take a broad range view of the causes and less conventional
cures of over population. He plans to return to academic life but would
prefer to stay on at State and continue the work he has begun. Ambas-
sador Green believes that if you speak with Tom Pickering there is a
chance that he could transfer Lee’s current position in OES to HA. An-
other possibility lies in convincing the Inspectors of the need for such a
slot in HA. I do not believe that our current staffing would enable us to
take on this additional responsibility in a meaningful way. The fol-
lowing two recommendations are probably not feasible if this position
is not created.
2. HA should recommend the creation of an Inter-Agency Group
on the Status of Women and Children Internationally. Discussion: There
is a need to coordinate the various programs carried out by USG
agencies domestically and overseas which affect the status of women
and children. A Task Force composed of representatives of State (HA
and IO), AID (Women in Development), Treasury (International Devel-
opment Banks), The Census Bureau, Labor and HEW could be assigned
this task. Its mandate could be linked to U.S. participation in the Inter-
national Year of the Child and the UN Decade for Women. In order to
work it would need dynamic and experienced leadership. I believe
Marshall Green would be willing to assume this task. I am certain he
would do an excellent job. Sara Weddington at the White House would
probably lend her support.
3. In conjunction with PA, HA should issue a booklet similar to the
“Silent Explosion” (attached) which deals with women’s and chil-
dren’s rights and needs in an international setting. This booklet would
be disseminated to all our missions and used domestically to en-
courage outside support and other USG agency attention to the
problems raised. The booklet could be sent to our missions under a cov-
ering message from you to our Ambassadors highlighting U.S. partici-
pation in the International Year of the Child and the UN Decade for
Women.
4. Next year’s human rights reports should give more detailed and
much more sophisticated attention to the rights of women and chil-
dren. Discussion: This year’s reports mention that problems exist in gen-
eral terms. We do not, however, have the data base to describe those
problems in a serious and detailed fashion. This year we were able to
give greater attention to social and economic rights. Next year let’s add
women and children. By encouraging our posts to become better in-
formed on these issues and helping them by providing scarce informa-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
tion or putting them in touch with likely sources, we will encourage the
development of more information. Most importantly we will sensitize
our missions to these problems and this, in turn, will enable them to
raise the issues with host governments and develop programs for mu-
tual cooperation. Arvonne Fraser is promoting several projects which
address the need for increasing the data base on the status of women in
developing countries.

I’ve attached the Report she submitted to the Congress in August,
esting example is described after the heading “Country Profiles” on
page 182).
5. HA should support increased efforts in AID and IO to develop
specific programs dealing with the rights and needs of women and
children. Discussion: HA support of programs of the Bureau of Private
and Voluntary Affairs was instrumental in maintaining higher budget
levels for that Bureau. While funding does not appear to be a problem
for the women’s programs, as we have noted in the case of the human
rights money, there is a real reluctance on the part of AID field missions
and overworked planners in the regional bureaus to develop good
projects in a field which many of them believe is peripheral to develop-
ment, or, at least, not of a high priority. HA could do more to nudge
them along.

324.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs (Pickering) and the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the
Under Secretary of State for Management (Read)
Washington, January 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Women’s and Children’s Rights—New Position
We believe that the Department is vulnerable in not having a
full-time, high-level position devoted to international issues pertaining
to rights of women and children. In much of the world, the plight of
women and children comprises one of the most serious denials of basic
human rights, as well as being a major impediment to social and eco-
nomic development. Concern for these issues by Congress (especially
in light of the Percy Amendment) and others, including humanitarian
organizations, is certain to increase because of the International Year of
the Child (1979) and the 1980 mid-term Conference of the United Na-
tions Decade for Women. Further, the Department is in process of orga-
nizing an interagency task force on women and children, in which HA
should obviously play a central role.

An OES officer, Dr. Luke T. Lee, FSR–2, possesses unique creden-
tials in these fields. He has considerable academic and legal experience
and is an international authority on rights of women and children. He
has been involved in several United Nations projects and has published
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
extensively, including one of the most authoritative works in the field,
Law and the Status of Women.

Dr. Lee is currently in the Office of the Coordinator of Population
Affairs. Although OES has a stake in advancing the status of women, it
is not appropriate for the U.S. to be arguing the case for women’s and
children’s rights on grounds of their impact on fertility rates. The issues
are more clearly related to concerns of HA, not OES.

We therefore recommend that a position be established in HA, to
be filled by Dr. Lee, covering the international status and rights of
women, children, and the elderly.

We do not believe it feasible to cut the population affairs position
in order to achieve this change. The staff of the Coordinator is, in fact,
being reduced from five to four officer positions. The departure of Mar-
shall Green and his replacement by a less senior FSO has already
drawn criticism from Congress and from private institutions, on
grounds that this represents a down-grading of the Department’s com-
mitment to population issues. The Chairman of the House Select Com-
mittee on Population has requested a personal meeting with Secretary
Vance to press his concerns on the Department’s role and activities in
this area, and the Secretary has agreed to see him. Recent reaffirmation
by the Secretary of the importance of population issues in our foreign
policy has somewhat mollified Congressional and other criticism, but it
is obvious that the Department is being closely watched by the popula-
tion community. The loss of another population position would cer-
tainly raise new questions—especially at a time when responsibilities
in this area, including coordination of expanding AID and non-
governmental programs, preparation and implementation of U.S. inter-
national development strategies for the Third Development Decade,
and the complex interrelationships of population growth with such
global issues as world hunger, the environment, unemployment, ur-
banization, energy and resources, etc.—are clearly growing.
Mrs. Benson agrees with these recommendations.
issue of the Columbia Human Rights Law Review examining the legal status of women in
numerous countries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
325.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for International Organization Affairs (Maynes) to Secretary
of State Vance
Washington, May 14, 1979
Personal Message from the Secretary of State to all Chiefs of Mission
on Worldwide Status and Rights of Women
Issues for Decision
As we approach the mid-points of the United Nations Decade for
Women and the International Year of the Child, and the onset of the
Third Development Decade (1981–1990), and the UN Mid-Decade for
Women’s Conference scheduled to be held in Copenhagen in July 1980,
it is essential that we and other nations intensify our efforts toward pro-
moting the status, rights and well-being of women throughout the
world. Even though women and girls represent over half of humanity,
they are the most frequent victims of discrimination and deprivation.
While most of the nations of the world are committed through
various UN and other instruments to uphold the rights of women and
to improve their conditions, there may be a tendency on the part of
these nations to regard their agreement to those resolutions as dis-
posing of the problem. Therefore, a considered effort is needed to fulfill
the letter and spirit of international obligations.

What we do at home to advance the status and well-being of
women has a material bearing on our ability to influence other nations.
Internationally, our Ambassadors and their staffs have a particularly
important role since they are aware of conditions in the countries
where they serve, can judge what can be effectively done, and are in a
position diplomatically to further our policy through discussions with
leaders and other influential persons in those countries. Oftentimes,
this can best be done on an informal basis.

Recommendations:
Since the State Department and its overseas missions have a
leading responsibility in our worldwide efforts to advance the status of
women, it is recommended that:
classified. Drafted by Good, Baer, and Green on May 8; concurred in by Dalley, Bleakley,
Goott, Montgomery, Vogelgesang, Graham, Cheshes, Schwebel, Jennone Walker,
Fleisher, Schuker, Lee, Barbara Thompson, Lollis, Hanley, Arvonne Fraser, Becker, Rein-
hardt, and Mary King. Dalley initialed his concurrence; Good initialed for the other
clearing officials. Tarnoff also initialed the memorandum.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1. You send a message (Attachment 1) to all our Chiefs of Mission,
stressing the importance which you attach to this issue and enlisting
their assistance in promoting accelerated progress toward goals widely
approved by governments.
2. Shortly thereafter, you send a second message (Attachment 2) to
all Chiefs of Mission of certain key developing countries asking for
their views on and attention to these issues on the part of the host gov-
ernment, and (b) how we could be most supportive of individuals and
private organizations working in this field in the host country.
3. A Departmental Notice on this subject (Attachment 3) be distrib-
uted to all employees in the foreign affairs agencies.
4. Responsibility for follow-up action in this field be assigned to
the Ad Hoc Working Group, comprising representatives of interested
bureaus of State, AID, ICA and Peace Corps which prepared this mem-
orandum and its attachments. The Ad Hoc Group, which would be
co-chaired by Ambassador Marshall Green and me, in coordinating
and articulating U.S. policy in this field, will be guided by the advice of
our Ambassadors and other authorities and will remain in close touch
with Committees already established by our Government which have
related responsibilities. Within this general frame of reference, the
Working Group will draw up its own terms of reference and devise its
own method of approach, all of which are subject to your final ap-
proval; it will also prepare the information brochure referred to in the
cable.

326.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, May 23, 1979
SUBJECT
U.S. Population Policy
Let me transmit some recommendations, arising out of the Third
Annual Report of the NSC Ad Hoc Group on U.S. International Popula-
tion Policy, which confirms the critical importance of international
population activities to our broad foreign policy objectives. U.S. popu-
lation activities should stress the factors, which the Report highlights,
that contribute to declines in fertility rates. In accordance with Section
The Coordinator of Population Affairs should explore means of
encouraging other bilateral donors and UN agencies, the World Bank,
and regional development banks to develop projects that reinforce na-
tional population programs where they currently exist and encourage
their adoption where they do not. The Population Coordinator should
work closely with the Chairman of the Development Coordination
Committee in pursuing these and other objectives.

Zbigniew Brzezinski
classification marking. A notation in the bottom right-hand corner of the memorandum

327.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
138588. For Ambassadors or Charge´ from the Secretary, inform
Consuls. Subject: Worldwide Status and Rights of Women.
1. A key objective of U.S. foreign policy is to advance worldwide
the status and conditions of women. I believe that special attention
should be given this issue as we approach the mid-way point in the
United Nations Decade for Women and the International Year of the
Child, and as we prepare for the Second Women’s World Conference,
scheduled to be held in Copenhagen in July 1980.
2. Despite the many commendable instruments and resolutions on
this subject, agreed to by virtually all nations, and despite some encour-
aging developments in recent years, the fact remains that progress has
been too slow. Women continue often to be victimized, their interests
and viewpoints overlooked, their educational and job opportunities
limited. Physical abuse of women persists to a shocking degree.
3. Mindful of the vital contribution which women can make to na-
tional development, the Congress in 1973 adopted the “Percy Amend-
ment” to the Foreign Assistance Act, which requires that our aid pro-
grams encourage and promote the participation of women in the
national economies of developing countries. Yet, the world commu-
nity, to a distressing degree, continues to be deprived of the full partici-
pation and talents of that most-overlooked asset of nations: women.
Meanwhile, urbanization and new technologies seem to create more
problems for women than for men.
4. Most effective in dealing with these problems will be the efforts
of women themselves, working together nationally and internationally,
but they need more active support of leaders, governments, and orga-
nizations, if the spirit of internationally approved resolutions is to be
translated into effective practice.
classified. Drafted by Good, Baer, and Green; cleared by Maynes, Dalley, Phyllis Oakley,
Bleakely, Cheshes, Schwebel, Graham, and Jennone Walker; approved by Wisner. In a
May 25 handwritten note from Green to Newsom, found attached to the May 8 draft tele-
gram to certain diplomatic posts (see footnote 3, Document 325), Green alluded to the
lengthy process involved in preparing the Department’s statement: “I would hope that at
long last we could get the message out. I have toiled on this for 2 years, fighting off efforts
by IO to make this even longer, and incorporating the many additions pushed by ICA,
AID and others who cleared.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

328.

Paper Prepared in the International Development
Cooperation Agency
Washington, undated
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AGENCY
North-South “global negotiations” starting in mid-1980. Some of our
industrialized allies have decided to sustain higher growth rates in de-
velopment aid budgets than we, despite severe budget deficits. Japan
will have doubled its aid in the years 1978–80 and is projecting further
and the Netherlands, France and Sweden are also planning increases in
their aid contributions.

We no longer question that the development of the Third World is
important to the United States. This importance relates to our moral
values and our economic, political, and strategic self-interest. A combi-
nation of these factors has impelled us to promote development for the
last three decades. An interdependent world, made ever smaller by in-
creasing trade and sophisticated communications and transportation,
demands that we carry on this work.

In the years ahead, to be true to our values and to achieve our na-
tional interests, at a minimum we must:
1. Accelerate the Attack on Global Poverty
—Major changes should be set in motion to carry out the recom-
mendations of the Hunger Commission2 by increasing the attention de-
voted to agricultural development and food security by international in-
stitutions as well as by our own bilateral programs.
—We will increase our population and health programs, and will give
priority to countries with a demonstrated commitment in these areas to
help meet their objectives.
—We will take the lead in encouraging the design of development
plans and programs that explicitly recognize the crucial role of women.
2. Manage Economic Interdependence with Developing Countries for
Mutual Prosperity
—Programs are being designed to increase the amount of energy
available to developing countries from their own resources.
—The United States should cooperate with other countries and in-
ternational institutions to forestall debt problems in developing countries
and to respond to financing problems promptly, and with adequate re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
sources to promote adjustment without political upheaval and eco-
nomic stagnation.
—The United States should remain open to the exports of devel-
oping countries so that the developing countries may earn more of the
capital required for development through trade.
—OPIC’s capacity to stimulate private U.S. investment in devel-
oping countries will be enhanced, and AID’s program to increase op-
portunities for U.S. companies abroad will be expanded.
3. Focus Special Development Efforts on Regions and Countries of
Highest Concern to the United States
—A program will be prepared to accelerate the development of
countries in the Caribbean Basin.
—The United States will cooperate more closely with other aid-
providing countries and development institutions in dealing with the
extraordinarily complex development tasks facing the governments of
sub-Saharan Africa.
—The United States will give preference in its assistance alloca-
tions to countries that respect human rights as fundamental for
achieving equitable development.
4. Design a Development Strategy to Meet the Challenges of the 1980s
—The United States will participate actively and creatively in de-
signing the global agenda for the Third Development Decade which is to
be adopted in 19803 and in the UN’s consideration of a round of global
negotiations on international economic issues.
—With U.S. support, the United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development called for the creation of a special in-
terim fund for science and technology, to be administered by the UN
Development Program (UNDP). Your initiative in proposing the new
Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation (ISTC) will enable
the United States to maintain its leadership in fostering research and
development of knowledge and skills for peaceful and humanitarian
purposes.
—IDCA will review the allocation of resources for the various devel-
opment assistance programs that the United States now supports in
order to prepare a U.S. development assistance policy for the 1980s.
tional Development Strategy for the Third Development Decade on December 5, 1980, in
Resolution A/RES/35/56.
which the President signed into law on August 14, 1979, authorized the President to es-
tablish an Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
5. Increased Efficiency and Effectiveness
—In the case of AID, an increased assistance program will be car-
ried out with reduced staff by improving the efficiency of AID’s efforts.
The International Development Cooperation Agency was created
in order to construct and coordinate national policies that promote the
development prospects of the poorer countries. As discussed in the re-
mainder of this statement, the programs and policies recommended
here address the most challenging problems we face. They are our
agenda for 1980.

DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
Developing a country is an extraordinarily complex social, eco-
nomic, and political task. The major responsibility for the task falls on a
country’s people and government. Foreign donors have a limited,
though important, role to play. Assisting a country’s development re-
quires patience and varied techniques and talents. The United States
has supported development efforts through the United Nations’ spe-
cialized agencies, the multilateral development banks, and our own bi-
lateral assistance.

This document does not review and analyze those programs.
Rather, it highlights our emphases and priorities for the year ahead.
1. Accelerate the Attack on Global Poverty
Agriculture
—Major changes should be set in motion to carry out the recom-
mendations of the Hunger Commission by increasing the attention de-
voted to agricultural development and food security by international in-
stitutions as well as by our own bilateral programs.

In the face of rapidly increasing population and widespread mal-
nutrition, attaining minimal levels of food production and consump-
tion spells the difference between starvation and survival in devel-
posing IDCA’s creation, the President indicated that the IDCA’s Director would “report
both to me and to the Secretary of State, and would serve as our principal international
development adviser.” After outlining the various responsibilities accruing to IDCA, the
President noted: “I believe these steps will substantially strengthen the coordination of
U.S. policies affecting the developing world, and will lead to a more coherent strategy of
development and the more effective use of the various bilateral and multilateral instru-
ments by which the U.S. can encourage the growth of developing economies. I am
pleased that these actions and proposals are similar to those proposed last year by the late
Senator Hubert H. Humphrey. I look forward to joining with you to put them into opera-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
oping countries. Millions of children die annually of starvation and a
billion people suffer from chronic undernourishment. A sufficient food
supply supported by a distribution of income which, at a minimum,
supports food consumption is not only a developmental but also a
moral imperative. The recommendations of the Hunger Commission
can be carried out, but only by intense efforts.

Three major types of actions will be required in the next decade.
First, food production in developing countries, especially where
hunger is most severe, must be increased. Second, the earnings of the
poor must be increased to permit them to increase consumption of
needed food. Third, the United States must not only maintain its status
as a food surplus nation, but also must continue to provide financial re-
sources to help transfer food where it is needed and to increase
production.

These actions will require a variety of specific commitments by
both developed and developing nations. Developing countries must
accord higher priority to agriculture and food. Three-quarters of the
poor people in developing countries are engaged in agriculture. Many
countries must transform their economic structures to permit broader
access to productive resources, especially land and water. These na-
tions must also increase the political participation of their people. The
United States should support these efforts.

In recent years, we have increased the emphasis in our bilateral
AID program on agriculture, nutrition and rural development. The
million requested in 1981. In international discussions on a new food
aid convention, the United States pledged to contribute not less than
prices continue to rise, a larger financial commitment for food aid will
be required to maintain this volume.

The lending record of the multilateral development banks also
shows a substantial concentration of resources in this sector over the
past three years. From 1977 to 1979 the World Bank Group, for ex-
ample, devoted more than $8 billion to projects in agriculture and rural
development. About one-third of the Bank’s concessional resources
were used for these purposes in fiscal year 1979. Within the sector,
there has also been a greater emphasis by all the banks on lending that
assists small farmers, helping them to increase their productivity and
incomes.

We are encouraging the multilateral development banks and the
specialized agencies of the UN to expand even further their agricultural
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
programs. Of particular interest is the future of the International Fund
for Agricultural Development (IFAD), which will soon need its first re-
plenishment of funds. IFAD’s initial resources came 56% from OECD
countries and 43% from OPEC countries. Its lending has concentrated
on expanding food production by and for the rural poor in countries
with the more serious food deficits. IFAD represents a very promising
prototype of OECD/OPEC/other LDC cooperation for development.
Assuming continued effective performance and OPEC assistance, the
United States should participate in the replenishment of IFAD’s
resources.

Population and Health
We will increase our population and health programs, and will give
priority to countries with a demonstrated commitment in these areas to
help meet their objectives.

Development continues to be frustrated by rapid population
growth. If recent trends continue, the two-child family will not become
the average world-wide until 2020, and the world’s population will not
Population is a global problem, but the effects are suffered first
and most by the poor in poor countries. Reduced population growth
enhances the possibility for increased investment in productive em-
ployment opportunities and reduces the demands on food, housing,
health care, and educational facilities.

The United States must do more to encourage and support volun-
tary family planning. Requests for family planning assistance are being
made by the governments of most Third World countries, representing
many faiths and cultures. The United States should continue to re-
spond favorably to their requests. Development policies and programs
must be designed to make smaller families a more attractive option.
We should provide assistance not only through our bilateral pro-
grams, which have particular strengths in the improvement of family
planning techniques and in service-delivery systems, but also through
other donors, such as the World Bank and the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities.

World Bank President McNamara recently identified population
growth as the most critical of all developmental problems. He called
dressed the World Bank on October 2 and described population growth as the “gravest
issue” for the upcoming decades. See Eric Bourne, “A McNamara plea for third world,”
Increase Gold Sales: Plans to Help Dollar Studied at Belgrade,” The New York Times, Oc-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
on member governments to undertake effective family planning serv-
ices and to alter the economic and social environments that tend to pro-
mote population increases. World Bank Group lending expressly for
population and nutrition in 1979 amounted to more than $114 million,
an almost threefold increase over the level of $47 million achieved in
1977. In addition, the World Bank now incorporates family planning
components into some of their other lending programs including those
for health and rural development. The regional development banks in-
tend to do the same.

In health we are carrying forward your commitment, first an-
nounced in May 1978 and reiterated by Mrs. Carter at the World Health
Organization in May 1979, to promote health in the Third World.
Drawing on your Statement of Principles, we are expanding support
for primary health care and clean water/sanitation, and for control of
major diseases such as malaria. Last year the World Bank group
mounted a massive effort to provide much needed assistance for water
supply and sewerage. From a base of $300 million in fiscal year 1977, its
In primary health care, we have joined other nations in a major
commitment at the UN Conference at Alma Ata, to extend basic
health, nutrition and family planning services as the essential first step
in a campaign to improve the health of the poor. Our bilateral aid for
in 1980. In water/sanitation we are also working on an international ef-
fort—the UN Water Decade—and aim at providing much of the U.S.
assistance through an organizational structure led by the United Na-
tions and the World Bank.

Women in Development
—We will take the lead in encouraging the design of development
plans and programs that explicitly recognize the crucial role of women.
On grounds of both human rights and efficacious development,
women must receive better access to economic opportunities, educa-
tion, and health care.

The United States must put greater weight behind its own commit-
ment to women-in-development and urge others to do so as well. In
position for this Conference, and will encourage the pioneering efforts
of AID in the women-in-development field.

Women-in-development is not a sector, such as energy or agricul-
ture; it is a subject that cuts across all sectors. IDCA will work to ensure
that development projects are designed to benefit women. We shall
continue to help focus more attention on women in the Development
Assistance Committee of OECD and the multilateral development
banks. There must be universal recognition that equitable development
requires the vigorous participation of women, and that this participa-
tion must be an objective at the level of project design throughout the
development field.
2. Manage Economic Interdependence with Developing Countries for
Mutual Prosperity
Energy
—Programs are being designed to increase the amount of energy
available to developing countries from their own resources.
Solutions to the energy problem are as crucial to the developing
countries as they are to us. Those countries can not bear indefinitely the
increasing financial burdens of importing their needed energy.
In our bilateral assistance programs we plan to increase the
amount of funds spent in the energy field. In particular, we plan to
begin a program for training engineers, geologists, chemists, and other
scientists from developing countries to enable them to accelerate their
own exploration and production. Our target is to have students en-
rolled in the program here by September 1981. At a recent DAC High
Level Meeting, the United States urged our OECD colleagues to initiate
similar programs. We will also work with the multilateral development
banks and the UN specialized agencies in this area, urging that they in-
crease the amount of funds devoted to training in the energy sector.
All of the multilateral development banks are now placing more
emphasis on lending programs to expand and diversify sources of en-
ergy in non-OPEC developing countries. Over the next five years,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
World Bank lending for fossil fuel development is projected to reach
of lending is expected to result in the production of energy equivalent
to two million barrels of oil a day. When hydroelectric power projects
are included, about 15 percent of overall Bank lending during the next
five years will be for energy purposes.

The Inter-American Development Bank will be devoting a large
proportion of its lending to develop geothermal, hydroelectric, and
other energy potential in Latin America over the next several years, and
the Asian Development Bank has embarked on a large lending pro-
gram to finance the production of primary energy fuels. These Bank
funds, moreover, should encourage additional private investment in
this critical area, thus improving the oil supply situation for the world
as a whole.

An interagency task force has been created under IDCA’s leader-
ship to identify additional techniques for channeling private resources
into exploration and development of new energy sources in the Third
World. It will help obtain the most workable solutions from all agencies
of our government and the business community in solving energy
problems.

Financing
—The United States should cooperate with other countries and in-
ternational institutions to forestall debt problems in developing countries
and to respond to financing problems promptly, and with adequate re-
sources to promote adjustment without political upheaval and eco-
nomic stagnation.

Financial problems in developing nations have the potential to re-
duce world trade, impede adequate development, and bring instability
to the private financial sector. From the development standpoint, no
strict lines can be drawn between financial and other problems; when a
developing country suffers a balance of payments crisis the price is
paid in reduced growth.

Trends in the global economy in the 1970s have resulted in major
attention being given to the issue of “debt” within the context of the ad-
equacy and direction of financial flows to developing countries.
Various actions have already been taken to help these countries. Fur-
ther efforts to prevent or alleviate debt problems must recognize that
crises can result from overborrowing or misuse of funds, as well as
from insufficient foreign exchange receipts due to changes in patterns
of trade and payments. Moreover, the solutions to the financing
problems of the poorest countries, which are heavily dependent on
concessional assistance, are different from those of middle-income
countries, which are heavily indebted to private creditors. IDCA will

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
give special attention to the range of financial and so-called debt issues
which are in the forefront of international discussions.
We will support stepped-up efforts to conclude studies and imple-
ment decisions regarding increased co-financing with private markets,
program lending, and further cooperation between the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund. Additionally, further study is re-
quired on how best to relate public and private credit flows to the de-
velopment plans of individual countries in order to prevent financial
crises from occurring.

Dependable and predictable total financial flows to finance devel-
opment should be sought. This has long been a goal on the public side.
Donor countries must be assured that their assistance will be used to
support efficient development efforts in which private capital plays an
increasing role; developing countries should consider and plan their
private borrowings in order to minimize unpredictable fluctuations in
the financing available for their development.

Early efforts in this direction have been unsuccessful, although
great strides have been made in collecting necessary information.
IDCA will support a renewed effort in an appropriate forum, such as
the IMF/World Bank Development Committee, to study and agree on
means to achieve this goal.

Trade
—The United States should remain open to the exports of devel-
oping countries so that the developing countries may earn more of the
capital required for development through trade.

The growth of the world economy is tied to the growth of world
trade. Developing country prosperity fosters our prosperity. As their
economies grow they are able to buy more of our goods, and exports
built on their comparative advantages lessen our own inflationary
pressures. Moreover, debt crises are unavoidable—even worse, unre-
solvable—if developing countries cannot at least bring into greater bal-
ance their import and export accounts. In fact, the North-South dia-
logue emerged from the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development. You have determined that development issues will be
considered in the framing of our trade policy, and we intend to be con-
structive in this domain. The review of the Generalized System of Pref-
erences and the implementation of the codes of the MTN are two op-
portunities for the United States to demonstrate our enlightened
commitment to interdependence.

IDCA will raise for government-wide consideration the possibility
of establishing a trade alert system, so that developed countries can an-
ticipate and plan for evolutions in product cycles that require adjust-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ment assistance to the minority of workers and owners who might lose
out for the benefit of the country as a whole.

Investment
—OPIC’s capacity to stimulate private U.S. investment in devel-
oping countries will be enhanced, and AID’s program to increase op-
portunities for U.S. companies abroad will be expanded.

The creation of productive employment and the ability of a nation
to export are both essential to development. One of the most important
means to achieve these objectives is through increased private sector in-
vestment in the developing nations. We will work to expand OPIC’s
abilities to stimulate increased investment in all the developing na-
tions. Special efforts will be made to develop energy and other natural
resources in these nations. In conjunction with the U.S. Trade Repre-
sentative, we intend to review and seek to resolve legal and other ob-
stacles to sound investment relationships.

Investment abroad often means exports for U.S. industry, and
other benefits as the investment reaches a productive stage. In ac-
cordance with OPIC’s mandate, we will pursue investments for the
benefit of poorer countries with concern for the domestic U.S. effects.
Additionally, we will make a special effort to maximize the benefits for
U.S. business of AID’s reimbursable development assistance program.
3. Focus Special Development Efforts on Regions and Countries of Highest
Concern to the United States
Caribbean Basin
—A program will be prepared to accelerate the development of
countries in the Caribbean Basin.

We will help design an overall U.S. strategy for accelerating devel-
opment throughout the Caribbean Basin. This program will be aimed
at ameliorating social and economic difficulties, as well as at strength-
ening the democratic institutions of our neighbors to the South. This
program will emphasize development assistance aimed at long-term
economic development, as well as funds for meeting short-term needs
in both public and private sectors. The World Bank and Inter-American
Development Bank are also committed to supporting effective devel-
opment in this region. This effort will have to be coordinated carefully
with policies outside the assistance field, particularly those related to
trade.

We believe that a serious effort should be made to help the Carib-
bean nations achieve the kinds of societies that meet the aspirations of
their people.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Sub-Saharan Africa
—The United States will cooperate more closely with other aid-
providing countries and development institutions in dealing with the
extraordinarily complex development tasks facing the governments of
sub-Saharan Africa.

This region provides some of the most complex development and
coordination challenges that the world has faced. The number of
donors and the difficulty of the problems requires that we work closely
with the other countries and institutions that are determined to assist
with the development of this very poor area. As a result of decisions al-
ready taken by you, we have begun the required consultative process.
Very shortly, we will involve representatives of the recipient countries
in planning a coordinated attack on their poverty problems.
Human Rights
—The United States will give preference in its assistance alloca-
tions to countries that respect human rights as fundamental for
achieving equitable development.

The United States must continue to lead in seeking equitable de-
velopment that includes protection of human rights and the growth of
democratic institutions. The United States has no long-term national in-
terest in increasing the economic strength of countries with brutal re-
pressive political systems. Our own institutions will flourish best in a
world with a growing number of countries that allow their citizens to
exercise human rights.

It is, therefore, vital to the national interests of the United States to
continue our efforts to protect the human rights of the citizens of the
developing countries, and to encourage the creation and nurturing of
democratic institutions that permit the participation of all of the people
in questions involving political and economic power.

We must lead the way in stressing the fundamental concept that
the basic needs of a population are met best, not by the benevolent deci-
sions of a dictator, but by political institutions that respond to the needs
of the people when they are free to express themselves. Finding solu-
tions to the extraordinarily complex problems inherent in equitable de-
velopment requires a free and open society stimulating the most inven-
tive and flexible approach to problem-solving.
4. Design a Development Strategy to Meet the Challenges of the 1980s
Third Development Decade
—The United States will participate actively and creatively in de-
signing the global agenda for the Third Development Decade which is to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
be adopted in 1980 and in the UN’s consideration of a round of global
negotiations on international economic issues.

In the months ahead the United States will be faced with extensive
negotiations on development issues in the United Nations. We will be
preparing for a new round of global negotiations which are likely to be
launched by a Special Session of the General Assembly in August
198015 and which will deal with the full range of subjects connected to
the economic health of the developing countries. We will also be partic-
ipating in the drafting of a strategy for the Third Development Decade
which is to be adopted by the Special Session.

It is important that the United States not view these negotiations as
an unnecessary irritant, but rather as an opportunity to present our
views on how the world should deal with questions concerning raw
materials, energy, trade, development, technology, and finance in the
decade of the 1980s. IDCA will work with other interested parts of our
government to assure that on each development issue the United States
will have a constructive position on how it would like to see the world
economy function in the years ahead.

An important element in this effort is the design of a U.S. develop-
ment strategy for the 1980s—another task of IDCA. There is no es-
caping the fact that, though great strides have already been taken to
help developing countries, other steps will be needed in the years
ahead if significant progress is to be made in reducing world poverty.
Of one thing we can be sure—the world will not be the same when
the next decade ends. The question before us is how constructive a role
we play in helping to shape the outcome.

Scientific and Technological Cooperation
—With U.S. support, the United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development called for the creation of a special in-
terim fund for science and technology, to be administered by the UN
Development Program (UNDP). Your initiative in proposing the new
Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation (ISTC) will enable the
United States to maintain its leadership in fostering research and devel-
opment of knowledge and skills for peaceful and humanitarian
purposes.

The UN Conference on Science and Technology, held in Vienna in
August 1979, set a target goal of $250 million for the UN Interim Fund
for Science and Technology. The Fund, which is to begin implementing
the program of the UNCSTD Plan of Action recommendations in 1980,
sembly was held August 25–September 15.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
will have a two-fold purpose: to utilize the scientific and technological
resources of the developed world to help developing countries solve
urgent problems, and to help these countries develop the indigenous
scientific and technological capability to solve their own problems over
the long run. The Fund will coordinate its activities with those of other
bilateral and multilateral programs to avoid duplication. The United
States should be prepared to contribute to the Fund.

At the UN Conference on Science and Technology for Develop-
ment, developing countries’ representatives hailed your initiative in
proposing ISTC. They saw it as a signal of recognition by the United
States of the importance attached by developing countries to building
the capability to solve their own problems, and of the mutual benefits
to be gained from a cooperative approach to the solution of global
problems.

ISTC was authorized by Congress last year. As this report is sub-
mitted, however, Congress has not yet approved funding for the Insti-
tute in 1980. Assuming that funding is available, 1980 will obviously be
a year of crucial importance for the Institute. ISTC’s purpose will be to
promote close relations with individuals and institutions in developing
countries concerned with science and technology. Up to one-third of
the members of the ISTC Council, which will advise the Director on
broad policy and program matters, will be drawn from developing
countries.

Scientific and technological talent is one of this country’s greatest
strengths. ISTC should take the lead in mobilizing this talent for the
benefit of developing countries. ISTC should be the focal point in the
U.S. Government for assessing scientific research of relevance to devel-
opment, and identifying for high priority topics of mutual interest that
are most urgent to developing countries. In this regard, one of the first
undertakings envisioned for it is a study of ongoing research activities
in the U.S. Government, and an information system to keep this inven-
tory accurate. ISTC should stimulate and assist U.S. nongovernmental
scientific and technological institutions to give more emphasis to
building up the scientific competence of developing countries, through
joint research activities, improved training of their students, and assist-
ance to their research institutions.

More and more countries in the developing world are reaching the
“middle-income” level at which AID assistance is no longer appro-
priate. ISTC, with its problem-focus, could supplement the work of the
multilateral development banks, and undertake cooperative work with
these developing countries to deal with the development problems that
remain.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Allocation of Resources
—IDCA will review the allocation of resources for the various devel-
opment assistance programs that the United States now supports in
order to prepare a U.S. development assistance policy for the 1980s.
The 1980 budget request calls for 35 percent of our development
assistance to support multilateral efforts, with the remaining 65 percent
to support our bilateral program. The 1970s have seen the creation of
several new and worthwhile international funds. Donor countries have
maintained their commitment to growth by their support of interna-
tional development banks and institutions.

Although our bilateral program has grown, our commitment to
multilateral efforts has been even greater. Regionally, also, there have
been changes in the allocations of bilateral and multilateral donors—
from the relatively wealthier to the poorer developing countries.
The complexity of the development task, the size of the capital re-
quirements, and your commitment to cooperate and consult with
Congress in the design and implementation of our development pro-
grams, mean that we must review now the patterns of assistance that
we will implement in the 1980s.

Fundamental to these allocation questions—and to the credibility
of our efforts to help alleviate Third World poverty—is the amount of
development assistance we provide. In the 1950s and 1960s, we led the
world and urged and cajoled the other industrial nations to follow our
aid example; they rose to the challenge while our assistance efforts
flagged. At 0. percent of GNP, our development assistance is near the
bottom among the industrialized democracies. In real terms, it is lower
now than in 1971. As you have pledged on earlier occasions, we must
renew our efforts to reverse this decline.
5. Increased Efficiency and Effectiveness
—In the case of AID, an increased assistance program will be car-
ried out with reduced staff by improving the efficiency of AID’s efforts.
By studying the most effective techniques used for providing
assistance to countries at different stages of development, we will be
able to increase the amount of assistance provided without increasing
our staff. Additionally, by modifying the procedures now used in AID,
it should be possible to carry out our programs more rapidly.
IDCA is preparing Development Assistance Strategies for key
countries. This will enable assistance to be provided in a more rational
and coordinated fashion.

Working closely with the Treasury Department and the Agency
for International Development, we are reshaping an early-warning
system in order to enable U.S. overseas personnel to react to the

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
projects of the multilateral development banks well in advance of their
presentation to their boards of directors. This will enable the United
States to make its views known at a time and in a manner likely to be
most effective.

To achieve these results will require understanding that the most
effective assistance techniques depend upon the level of development
and the particular problems in each country. Careful program design
will insure that maximum use will be made of the private sector, both
profit and non-profit, and of our own employees.

A final word about IDCA’s responsibilities—under your Reorgani-
zation Plan—to speak to the American public, as well as to Congress. It
is commonly urged that development assistance should be given in
spite of public opinion that is indifferent at best and hostile at worst.
Although many Americans certainly share this view, we believe that an
effective public case can and should be made for financial support to
developing countries.

This case is partially rooted in humanitarian concerns for poor
people in those countries. The public and Congressional responses to
your leadership in increasing U.S. aid to Kampuchean refugees16 show
how deep is the compassion of the American people, and how effec-
tively it can be channeled into action. But as I vividly saw17 on a recent
trip to South Asia, the seldom-reported plight of millions of poor
people in Dacca and elsewhere is fully as grim as that facing the ref-
ugees. If the tragedy of their lives is honestly presented, public support
for increased assistance should also grow.

It is sometimes argued that Americans oppose help to developing
countries because “charity begins at home.” But development assist-
ance serves basic United States economic and political interests, as well
as charitable concerns. As you well know, our international trade and
investment, our energy outlook, our security concerns in many areas,
and our overall objectives on scores of different fronts, all depend on
our relations with developing nations. We should make clear the direct
benefits to the United States of development help. Your initiative in es-
tablishing the International Development Cooperation Agency will
help the United States be a constructive and creative leader in the dia-
logue on development at home and abroad.

The programs and policies recommended here were selected not
only because they address important and challenging issues of concern
to developing countries but also because they are feasible. They will be
on IDCA’s agenda for 1980 and beyond.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

329.

Memorandum From the Director of the International
Development Cooperation Agency (Ehrlich) to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher)
Washington, January 7, 1980
SUBJECT
NSC Ad Hoc Committee on Population
Chris—2

330.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, January 11, 1980
U.S. NATIONAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL
DECADE FOR DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION
The Government of the United States of America is committed to
playing an important part in the International Decade for Drinking
Water and Sanitation and, in accordance with the Action Plan adopted
by the Mar del Plata Water Conference2 and the decisions of the Third
Special Session of the Committee on Natural Resources and ECOSOC,3
is prepared to share its experiences with other governments and to as-
sist interested countries in upgrading their drinking water supply and
sanitation facilities.

General
Few issues of public policy offer a greater complexity than those
associated with water resources and water management. In the U.S.,
the availability of good quality water is considered a necessary element
of an acceptable standard of living. At the same time, increasing efforts
are under way to bring together science, technology, economics, man-
agement skills, and political awareness in order to assure responsible
planning and management of our water resources.

The advent of the International Decade for Drinking Water and
Sanitation is serving to raise the consciousness of every nation to the
need to adopt not only national plans but also to examine the possibil-
ities of regional and global cooperation in this vital sector. The United
States welcomes this opportunity.

Water in the U.S.A.

In the United States, adequate safe drinking water is accessible to
most of the population. The quality of drinking water is now generally
high, but this has not always been the case. As recently as seventy years
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ago the United States was plagued by massive outbreaks of typhoid,
cholera, dysentery, and other waterborne diseases. With the develop-
ment of improved treatment techniques for sewage and drinking water
supplies, including drinking water disinfection, epidemics have been
eliminated.

In a 1974 law, Congress required that public water systems supply
safe drinking water. Each of the fifty States had to adopt new drinking
water standards at least as strict as national standards and had to con-
duct adequate monitoring and enforcement programs. To help the
States meet their responsibilities, the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) was directed to provide financial and technical assistance.
The United States has recognized the importance of safe drinking
water and sanitation. Through diversified programs, the problems of
water pollution have been studied and solutions to solve these
problems established, but the problems are not completely solved. It is
recognized that more research and interagency coordination are
needed. While much progress concerning water management has been
made in the United States, many problems remain to be solved during
the coming decade.

U.S. Policies and Programs related to Drinking Water Supply and
Sanitation for Developing Countries
At the Mar del Plata Water Conference, it was agreed to “increase
attention to” community water supply and sanitation for the world’s
poor over the decade of the 1980’s. The U.S. has committed itself to sup-
port the principal objective of the Water Decade, which is to provide
safe water and sanitation facilities for all by the year 1990. U.S. partici-
pation will be carried out both multilaterally and bilaterally with devel-
oping country governments.

U.S. participation in the Water Decade will be government-wide,
involving many of the agencies and departments which have responsi-
bility for domestic water policy as well as those principally involved in
international assistance. The International Development Cooperation
Administration (IDCA) will develop policy and coordinate bilateral
assistance programs for the U.S. Government. The principal opera-
tional instrument for bilateral assistance, however, will be the Agency
for International Development (AID).

The Peace Corps also will make a major contribution to the bilat-
eral assistance effort. This agency has long experience working with
water, sanitation and related matters in rural villages and can supply
law on December 16, 1974.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
technicians trained to work with villagers in their native language to re-
solve problems at the village level.

AID and the Peace Corps have agreed to consult and collaborate as
closely as possible in future programs so as to combine creatively the
technical resources, expertise and funds of AID and the rural commu-
nity based practical experience of the Peace Corps.

The U.S. Government in its bilateral programs will focus on rural
and peri-urban water supply and sanitation where it perceives the
greatest need. In the U.S. view, the proper strategy is to seek to improve
the availability and quality of water in conjunction with primary care
and efforts to increase food supplies in order to improve both health
and the general quality of life.

Accomplishment of that goal requires not only supplying funds,
material and technicians to build water supply and sanitation systems.
Equally important is the training of village workers and the develop-
ment of community participation in the planning and management of
projects so that there subsequently may be adequate monitoring and
maintenance of facilities. Without such training and maintenance, ex-
penditures on facilities may be wasted. Training in health and hygiene
is another essential component if water supply development is to ben-
efit fully the community concerned.

Also essential in the U.S. view, is that water supply and sanitation
projects, whether small or large scale, should be planned carefully
within the context of overall water management including supplying of
water for agriculture and industrial use.

The U.S. plans to increase significantly its contributions to multi-
lateral agencies and bilateral programs in support of the UN Decade for
Water Supply and Sanitation. The magnitude and trend of existing bi-
lateral programs reflect the strong support of the U.S. for the objectives
of the Decade.

Currently, the U.S. is carrying out a broad based assistance pro-
gram in water related development. Expenditures by AID for invest-
ments in water projects will increase substantially in the course of the
decade. In addition to actual water supply and processing programs,
the U.S. supports related programs such as water-disaster assistance;
environmental health training; land conservation and natural resources
management; and development of new energy technologies, including
remote sensing applications. All these activities have water compo-
nents and, thus, are relevant to U.S. involvement in the Decade for
Drinking Water and Sanitation.

In its future assistance efforts, the U.S. will seek opportunities to
promote Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries. This
policy will include the use of third country consultant firms to imple-
ment projects, support for training programs located in developing

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
countries, employment of third country nationals for water projects,
procurement of materials in third countries, increased co-financing of
aid projects by the U.S. and middle income countries to be carried out
in third countries, and the use of U.S. owned local currencies to fund
TCDC projects.

The Congress has passed legislation which calls for the establish-
ment of a new Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation.
When funded this Institute plans to undertake programs of research,
training and institution building in a variety of development areas, in-
cluding water resources management, agriculture and environmental
planning.

In order to increase U.S. effectiveness in assisting developing
countries to develop their water supply and sanitation facilities, new
approaches must be formulated, tested, evaluated, and improved.
Coordination and cooperation among multilateral and
bilateral
agencies, non-governmental organizations and technical cooperation
among the developing countries themselves can help greatly in this
process. In addition to AID, other U.S. agencies carry out activities
which can support the objectives of the Decade. These include: tech-
nical assistance for assessments, program planning and project devel-
opment; manpower development at all levels; institutional infrastruc-
ture development; financing of materials, equipment and services;
research on implementation and evaluation methodology; collection,
evaluation, selection and dissemination of technical information; and
impact studies on the relationship between water, sanitation and
health.

The United States believes that developing countries participating
in the Water Decade have an excellent opportunity to improve greatly
the dental health of their populations by incorporating fluoridation ca-
pability in their new water systems. The U.S. will assist governments
desiring this improvement to include it in community water supply
projects.

On the basis of the best available data, which are unavoidably
sketchy, the UN estimates that providing a billion rural people with
“safe” water and improved sanitation will cost at least $44 billion (1977
prices). Of this, about two-thirds would be provided by the developing
countries themselves, while the remaining one-third would come from
external sources.

The U.S., through its contribution to multilateral agencies, through
its own bilateral activities and those of private organizations, plans
substantial support for water and sanitation projects over the Decade,

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
subject to funds being appropriated by the U.S. Congress and on the as-
sumption that:
a. Developing countries accord high priority to such projects and
commit themselves to cover an appropriate share of the costs over a
sustained period.
b. Other governments and international financial institutions are
prepared to provide substantial support for these projects.
The U.S. Government believes safe water will have many direct as
well as indirect benefits, including:
—Improved health by protection from infection from ingestion of
unsafe water.
—Improved health from increased availability of water for more
frequent washing of persons, clothing, and household effects, thus re-
sulting in better home and personal hygiene.
—Better nutrition since food utilization is inhibited during diar-
rhea which often is caused by waterborne organisms.
—More productive labor and ability to work harder for longer
hours.
—Increased life expectancy because of less disease caused by con-
taminated water.
—Saving in labor and time if water is more conveniently supplied,
thus freeing people, particularly women, to do other things with their
time and thus improve the quality of their lives.

In summary, the United States stands ready to do its part. We fully
support the objectives of the Water Decade and plan to provide tech-
nical assistance and additional funds for the Decade.

331.

Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple
Diplomatic and Consular Posts
18499. Subject: Population in the International Development
Strategy.
1. The USG is concerned that discussions and documents re-
garding the preparation of a new International Development Strategy
(IDS) for the Third UN Development Decade2 have to date virtually ig-
nored the issue of population growth. This is of concern given broad in-
ternational understanding that excessive population growth is a
problem which affects every aspect of development, including nutri-
tion, health, environment, natural resources, urbanization, unemploy-
ment, and political and social stability. As this will be the basic devel-
opment strategy document for the 1980’s we believe an appropriate
statement on the role of population policies would provide significant
reinforcement to national leaders in initiating or upgrading population
policies and programs.
2. An international consensus exists that population issues are an
inseparable part of the overall problem of development. As stated by
World Bank President McNamara at the World Bank Annual Meeting
in Belgrade in September, excessive population growth is the greatest
single obstacle to the economic and social advancement of most of the
societies in the developing world. Approximately 65 different nations,
representing well over 90 percent of the population of the developing
world, currently have some form of policies and programs aimed at
limiting population growth and/or promoting family planning, al-
though the effectiveness of such programs varies considerably.
Limited Official Use. Drafted by Sergeant and Theodore Nelson; cleared by Benedick,
Reimer, McNutt, Graham, Jorgenson, Cornelia Bryant, Herz, Van Dusen, IO/IEP, and
Ruth Goldberg; approved by Edgar. Sent to USUN, Accra, Addis Ababa, Algiers, Ankara,
Bangkok, Beijing, Bogota, Brasilia, Buenos Aires, Cairo, Caracas, Colombo, Dacca, Dakar,
Dar es Salaam, Jakarta, Kathmandu, Khartoum, Kigali, Kinshasa, Kuala Lumpur, Lagos,
Lima, Manila, Mexico City, Nairobi, New Delhi, Rabat, Rangoon, Santiago, San Salvador,
Singapore, Seoul, Tunis, and USINT Havana. Sent for information to the U.S. Mission in
Geneva. The Department repeated the telegram to the same addressees and sent it for in-
formation to all OECD capitals on February 2. (Ibid.) In telegram 56269 to multiple diplo-
matic and consular posts, March 1, the Department explained that telegram 18499 had
been repeated to all OECD posts for information, as the original telegram had been sent
to a “selected list of third world countries,” and requested that the OECD addressee posts
provide the same information requested in telegram 18499. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800106–1033)

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
3. The fundamental interrelationships between population matters
and socio-economic development are recognized in the World Popula-
tion Plan of Action (WPPA) adopted by 136 countries at the World Pop-
ulation Conference at Bucharest in 1974. The plan recommends, inter
alia, that countries wishing to affect fertility levels give priority to im-
plementing development programs which are likely to affect fertility
norms and behavior, including expanded opportunities for women in
education and employment, improved infant and child health and im-
proved family income. Moreover, all countries are urged to respect and
ensure the basic human right of persons to determine the number and
spacing of their children, and to make available advice, information,
and the means for limiting births.
4. In 1979, the first five-year review and appraisal of the implemen-
tation of the WPPA, carried out by the UN Population Commission,
was the basis last May for an ECOSOC resolution (E/RES/1979/32)
containing specific recommendations for priority action by gov-
ernments for national implementation of the WPPA. This resolution
also calls upon the IDS Preparatory Committee to include in the new
strategy “full recognition of the interrelationships of population factors
and social, economic, cultural, and political development, and the need
for full and urgent action to deal with population problems.” More re-
cently, the Colombo Declaration of September 1979, adopted by the In-
ternational Conference of Parliamentarians on Population and Devel-
opment, called on the UNGA 1980 Special Session to recognize the
integration of population and development as a “key issue in the IDS to
be adopted for the next decade.” It is believed that all G–77 members
have participated in one or more of these expressions of international
consensus beginning with the Bucharest Conference.
5. Prior to the 4th session of the Prepcom, scheduled for February
11–29, USUN should contact anticipated leading personalities in the
G–77 who are concerned with IDS and have or will have a role in IDS
negotiations, either within group or in Prepcom. USUN Mission should
raise population issue with them and encourage their active support
for incorporation of appropriate references to population growth in the
new IDS. In addition to paras. 2–4, you may, for a full exposition of the
dimensions and policy implications of the population problem, draw
Colombo Declaration reaffirmed the linkage of population programs to overall national
development plans and recommended holding a UN World Population Conference in
1984 to mark the 10-year anniversary of the Bucharest Conference. For additional infor-
mation concerning the Declaration, see Colombo Declaration on Population and Environment
(New York: United Nations Fund for Population Activities, 1979)

332.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Special Representative for Economic Summits
(Owen)
Washington, February 9, 1980
SUBJECT
Summit Proposal for UN Water Decade—Background and Options
The 1977 UN Water Conference resolved that by 1990 everyone in
the world should have reasonable access to adequate water and sani-
tary facilities. The UNGA subsequently declared 1981–90 the Interna-
tional Drinking Water and Sanitation Decade.

The US strongly supports the goals of the Decade. Provision of rea-
sonably pure and conveniently located water supplies, and of adequate
sanitary facilities, can make a tangible and meaningful contribution to
human well-being. It is a prerequisite of good health and is essential to
the betterment of the lot of the Third World’s rural women, millions of
whom must walk miles each day with heavy loads of water. Provision
of potable water is consistent with our broader North-South strategy
emphasizing direct efforts to meet basic needs.

The US has urged the world community to take the Decade seri-
ously and was instrumental in arranging for a special one-day session
of the General Assembly on November 15, 1980, to launch the Decade.
Peter Bourne is coordinating Water Decade activities within the UN
system. He is arranging for the DAC to hold a meeting of the donor
community late in the summer in Geneva in order to determine (and
encourage) donor commitments.

The goal of meeting the potable water needs of all by 1990 may be
impractical—the capital cost of providing basic services to the 2. bil-
lion people who will need them (taking into account interim popula-
World Bank. However, with strong support from donors and LDCs, it
will be feasible to make a major dent in the problem. The UN calculates
that one billion rural people can be provided with safe water for $44 bil-
lion (1977 prices), two-thirds of which would be provided by LDCs
themselves.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The U.S. Position
In late 1978, negotiations among State, AID and other interested
agencies produced an agreement that AID should provide a total of
$2. billion over the decade in bilateral aid for rural water supplies and
sanitation, with the annual disbursements rising toward the end of the
decade. This figure was contingent on commensurate support from
LDCs and other donors and on future absolute increases in the AID
budget. AID direct spending on water and sanitation in recent years
has been in the range of $150–$180 million; if this level is maintained,
two-thirds of the current annual total is accounted for by a few large
ESF projects, mainly urban, in the Middle East. Urban projects had not
been counted against the original target of $2. billion, but, given cur-
rent funding prospects, will have to be included in any future an-
nouncement of a target.

In view of the uncertain funding outlook, AID now opposes an-
nouncing any spending target for the decade. AID is committed to
doing more on water, which has second priority in their health sector to
the broader primary health care program (which includes water and
sanitation in an integrated approach). Doug Bennet agrees that the pro-
portion going to water should increase as the total DA health budget
increases. However, AID is unwilling to vitiate the primary health care
program to meet a high water spending target. Whether or not the high
level of ESF going into water and sanitation can be maintained will de-
pend on funding levels, the future mix of ESF recipients, and recipients’
desires and needs for major water and sanitation investments.
AID is currently unable to project its water and sanitation expendi-
tures for the coming decade. Over the next two months they will con-
duct a water policy review and will clarify their own priorities.
Other Donors
Some multilateral agencies, especially the World Bank, are gearing
up for major efforts. The World Bank already spends close to $1 billion
a year on water and sanitation. Its staff has drawn up and submitted to
McNamara plans that would push expenditures for the 1980s up to
nearly $20 billion, and increase the share going to rural areas. (As-
suming McNamara approves the new water policy, we should make
sure the US director endorses it.)

European donor interest, according to Peter Bourne, is high, but
the willingness to commit resources varies. The West Germans and
Swedes have been leaders in this area, between them helping 37 LDCs
develop national plans for the decade. The British are interested but are
working with a shrinking aid budget. The French are, as usual, inter-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
ested mainly in former colonies and in linking aid to domestic commer-
cial interests.

The Japanese have provided aid for a number of water-related
projects but have not yet expressed a particular commitment to the UN
Decade. In Canada, interest was high in the previous government,
dropped off with the election of Clark, and will probably recover
should Trudeau be reelected.

The EEC is enthusiastic about the decade and has promised to give
it high priority, subject to the degree to which recipient countries re-
quest such aid. The EEC will try to promote the decade among member
countries and will probably hold a two-day meeting in Brussels next
fall to encourage and coordinate European donor interest.
All the main donors seem to accept the idea of the Water Decade as
good as in principle. However, given the uncertain and unformed na-
ture of many other summit countries’ commitments, the US would
have to exert early leadership and pressure to achieve a significant re-
sult at the summit.

Options for the Summit
others to announce comparable targets
A summit initiative would have maximum impact if the countries
could announce high targets. Public announcement of a US target
would also be a useful lever for encouraging other donors to set such
goals. However, this option faces two major obstacles: 1) it will be diffi-
cult, given the fiscal climate, to gain OMB acceptance of the requisite
additional funding and advance commitment of funds; and 2) it will
probably be quite difficult to persuade all the summit countries to
make similar announcements.

In order to make a public commitment of $2. billion in bilateral
aid for domestic water and sanitary projects (urban and rural) for the
decade, the President and OMB would have to:
—agree to an absolute increase in AID’s budget specifically for this
purpose. The exact amount of the needed increase has not been deter-
mined but may approach $1 billion spread over the decade.
—agree to an advance commitment of $2. billion for AID
spending on water supplies and sanitation over the decade.
courage others to announce comparable targets
AID and OMB may be more willing to make this smaller commit-
ment, though even this level probably exceeds current AID spending
expectations. Announcing a specific target, even if it is lower than that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
agreed upon internally in 1978, provides us with greater leverage over
other donors and more credibility with LDCs. A figure lower than $2.
billion, however, might not have the same advantages, since it would
represent little increase over the status quo.

Option 3. Express strong support for the Decade without announcing
funding targets
The US and other summit countries could declare their strong sup-
port for the goals of the decade, and pledge to provide increased aid for
water and sanitation without specifying funding levels. Some countries
might be willing to say they will increase the share of their aid funds
that will be devoted to these subjects.

This option would be easily achievable and would be better than
nothing in terms of the decade. However, it would be a weak statement
for a summit.

Conclusion
Because of the tangible human benefits that could result from a
successful Water Decade, I feel we should do all we can to make it
meaningful. I propose that we actively consider Option 1 for the
Summit, while recognizing that there will be strong pressures pushing
us toward Option 3.

An interagency High Level Group on the Water Decade was previ-
ously established by Lucy Benson and would now be chaired by Matt
Nimetz. If you wish to pursue an initiative on potable water for the
Summit, I’d be glad to suggest to Matt that he call a meeting of the
HLG. It would be useful if you could attend such a meeting, but, in any
case, the meeting would help to clarify the US position on the Water
Decade.
sued at the end of the Summit on June 23 did not specifically mention water resources.
For the full text of the Declaration, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pp.
Foreign Economic Policy.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues

333.

Memorandum From the Director of the International
Development Cooperation Agency (Ehrlich) to the Special
Representative for Economic Summits (Owen)
Washington, March 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Summit Discussions on Population
Henry
As we discussed, I think it would be helpful if the importance of
family planning is discussed, at least informally, at the Summit. I as-
sume that the issue would not be included in the communique. But it
would be a major step forward if, in informal discussions, the need for
population control were expressly linked to the issue of food security.
The link is obvious: no amount of additional food will solve the world’s
hunger problem unless population growth is brought under control.

334.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Denmark
82530. Please pass Deidre Ryan, ICA. Subject: World Conference
UN Decade For Women. Ref: Vienna 2874.
1. Received your note and will begin to share preparation develop-
ments with you on a weekly or bi-weekly basis.
2. U.S. preparations being conducted in three phases. Phase I was
initial briefing to over 250 women in small group sessions. Briefing fo-
cussed on history of UN Decade; UN conference preparation proce-
dures of regional conferences and the Prepcom; and U.S. outreach
efforts.
3. Phase II, currently underway, is the bulk of our outreach effort.
This effort involves holding five regional conferences in Federal re-
gional headquarters cities throughout the U.S. to assess American
progress in the Copenhagen subtheme areas of education, employment
and health. The five two-day conferences will vary their emphases, but
each of the subthemes will be highlighted at various individual confer-
ences. Conferences scheduled and sponsored as below:
Limited Official Use. Drafted and approved by Derryck (M/WCW).
the February 25–March 5 meeting of the Commission on the Status of Women, noting that
the deliberations had “not significantly altered” the agenda for the upcoming World
Conference on the UN Decade for Women. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800122–0097)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Dallas
March
Denver
March
New York
April
10–11 Department of Education
Philadelphia
May
9–10 Labor—Women’s Bureau
San Francisco
June
6–7 Labor—Women’s Bureau
4. In adn, five one-day conferences are scheduled. These one day
conferences, sponsored by various NGO’s are scheduled as follows:
Minneapolis, Minn.

May 17
Boston, Mass.

May 17
Seattle, Wash.

Kansas City, Ka.

June 21
Atlanta, Georgia
June 28
5. Phase III will involve briefing and preparations of U.S. delega-
tion to Copenhagen.
6. Kika Molgaard Antonsen, Danish journalist, will attend our
Denver regional meeting as a part of her ICA sponsored U.S. tour.
7. CSW meeting in Vienna also addressed World Conference
agenda items and results being repeated in Vienna 2874 (repeated Co-
penhagen FYI).
8. Discussion of the political items women and apartheid, women
as refugees and the effects of Israeli occupation on Palestinian women,
are gaining considerable attention at our regional meetings. Detailed
coverage in my next communication.
9. Packet of US Secretariat materials distributed at each conference
has been pouched to you.

Vance

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues

335.

Memorandum Prepared in the Policy Planning Staff
Washington, April 1, 1980
MEMORANDUM ON THE UN WATER DECADE FOLLOW-UP
This memorandum
—reports what went on at the Water Decade follow-up meeting
convened by Mr. Nimetz on 1 April 1980,
—and is to serve as a background report for the N/S Task Force.
An interagency agreement to aim for bilateral U.S. support of the
UN Decade on Drinking Water and Sanitation to the extent of $2. bil-
lion over the 1980’s, subject to certain conditions, has been held in abey-
ance for more than a year. The funding target was never publicly an-
nounced because, after it was agreed to by AID and T and the program
content blocked out, the time never seemed ripe to go to OMB for ap-
proval of a long-term commitment involving some new money. Since
the budget situation has grown worse, the current question is what em-
phasis the U.S. should give to the Decade and how that emphasis
should be expressed.

Mr. Nimetz called a meeting of the High-Level Group on Follow-

336.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
85747. Inform Consuls, for Ambassadors and heads of U.S. pro-
grams. Subject: Worldwide Status and Rights of Women. Message
From Secretary Vance. I deeply appreciate the response of posts to joint
cirtel State/AID/ICA/Peace Corps 1385882 on ways to advance the
status of women as an integral element of US foreign policy. Nearly 90
percent of posts responded with thoughtful and valuable proposals
which we have summarized below.

Posts submitted some 150 examples of ways they have already
found to encourage host countries to recognize the rights and advance
the status of women. These examples are particularly useful and timely
in view of the Second World Conference of the UN Decade for Women,
scheduled for July 1980 in Copenhagen, to which each UN member na-
tion will send a delegation to present its own national agenda. The
preparations for this conference now underway in each country offer
us an opportunity to raise the question of the local status of women.
I recognize that what we do in the United States is crucial to what
we can do or advocate abroad. I also recognize that the status of women
is a highly sensitive issue in many countries. Furthermore, there may
arise or now exist extraordinary circumstances, such as marked polit-
classified. Drafted by Joyce, Good, and Baer; cleared by Maynes, Bleakley, Schwebel,
Cheshes, Overly, Fleisher, Rizik, Seitz, Phyllis Oakley, Wales, Goott, Benedick, Barbara
Thompson, Lollis, Hanley, Arvonne Fraser, Becker, Reinhardt, Jennone Walker, and Ce-
leste; approved by Vance. The Department reprinted the telegram in an April 16 Depart-
ment Notice for State, AID, USICA, and ACDA employees. (Department of State, Bureau
Women 1980)
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
ical instability or anti-US sentiment, when an active pursuit of en-
hanced women’s rights by the Country Team is not appropriate.
Recognizing these limits, there is still a wide range of opportu-
nities for discussion, action and Country Team planning. I look to you
to assure personally that your staff and relevant members of your mis-
sion consider these proposals in Embassy activities and in preparing
country programs.

A. Summary of general conclusions of post responses
1. In most countries there has been at least modest and, for some,
considerable progress over the last decade in advancing the rights and
status of women. These rights are now widely recognized under law
and by internationally approved instruments. More women are being
educated and are coming to occupy more positions of influence, espe-
cially in the professions and government. New government (or private)
machinery has been established in many countries to address women’s
interests and responsibilities.
2. However, the implementation and enforcement of laws ex-
tending human rights to women are generally lax. In many countries,
the laws themselves fail to provide women with equal civil, political
and economic rights, such as those involving property, divorce, and in-
heritance. Inequitable rates of pay for the same work are universal,
even in highly developed countries. Women everywhere predominate
in menial or lower status jobs. Women are generally under-represented
in such powerful bodies as labor organizations as well as cabinets, par-
liaments, national councils, the higher courts and large business. Even
in highly modernized Western countries, traditions of male dominance
persist. Rural conservatism and even conservatism of the women them-
selves in many countries perpetuate unjust conditions and make
progress painfully slow. These attitudes are not easily eradicated, yet
forces for change are reported at work almost everywhere.
3. The process of modernization, however, often affects women in
adverse ways. In many LDCs women—particularly the low-income
and rural women—are the primary victims of pervasive unemploy-
ment, urban migration, rapidly advancing technology, overpopulation,
and the widening gap between the educated and the illiterate poor. As
Embassy Ankara writes, “pressures associated with the rapid shift to
an urban society have been especially acute for rural women . . . while
the rise of urban middle and upper-class women have masked their
problems.” The consensus is that it will take the constant, informed at-
tention and support of host governments and citizens, of international
and private organizations, to insure that women share equally in the
benefits and not just the burdens of development and modernization.
4. A significant number of US missions have made sustained ef-
forts to advance women’s status. Our joint cirtel has strengthened their

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
position; and has sparked, renewed interest in, and generally advanced
the concept of equality for women. As presented here, the number and
quality of examples of success from posts and post proposals for US ac-
tion should reinforce work underway and stimulate new efforts. We
expect and hope that many of these initiatives will become standard
practice and a foundation for policy in missions generally.
5. The following proposals and examples for Embassy action can
be applied, without additional funding, by most posts, wherever lo-
cated (section B). Additional proposals for developing countries are de-
tailed separately (section C).

B. Embassy examples/proposals for diplomatic ways to encourage
host countries to advance the status of women:
1. Put “our own house in order”, specifically, put more women of-
ficers in visible, responsible positions at US Embassies. As Embassy
Abidjan notes: “We must first demonstrate that we have confidence in
our own women officers. When host countries see a higher percentage
of women in decision-making positions in our Embassies abroad, not
only are they likely to imitate us, but we ourselves will stand on
stronger ground in our advocacy of women’s rights.” Posts widely ac-
knowledge the positive effect of US women in senior positions. As a
Near Eastern Embassy reports, “We are a public demonstration of the
equality of women, having for years past had women as diplomatic of-
ficers on our staff in a part of the world where women are unthinkable
as diplomats.”
2. Show the US commitment to human rights and equality of op-
portunity by increasing the number and responsibility of women na-
tionals hired locally. According to Embassy Abu Dhabi: “Assignment
of women officers, as well as secretaries, and employment of Arab and
non-Arab third-country women nationals in the Embassy are more ob-
vious examples of US use of women power.”
3. Assure that the Embassy is at all times in contact with the host
country’s (A) women leaders; (B) government-established bureaus/
directorates of women’s affairs; (C) appropriate women’s organiza-
tions. A significant number of Embassies report designation of a special
“women’s affairs officer”. From Bonn, the Ambassador writes, “I have
specifically asked a member of my professional staff to follow and re-
port on issues of importance to women as they develop here . . . and in-
structed my staff to express strong US support for the significant steps
taken by the German Government in recent years to improve the status
of women.”
4. Reassess Embassy’s own attitudes toward women nationals
(A) by reviewing Embassy’s contact lists carefully “to make sure our
own unconscious biases or an assumption of local biases hasn’t led us
to leave out possible useful contacts because they are women” (Em-

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
bassy Santiago); (B) by substituting “working dinners and luncheons
for men and women” to replace “stag” functions where these are still
practiced (Embassy Pretoria); and (C) inviting local women leaders to
Embassy functions “for serious discussions”, not merely for social oc-
casions (Embassy Brussels).
5. Arrange more exchanges between US and host country women
individually and in groups, emphasizing the selection (A) of more
women IVs (international visitors); (B) of more “top” US women as
“American participants” to come to speak on US political, social and
cultural issues to mixed, repeat, mixed audiences at universities,
unions and at Embassy luncheons/dinners.
6. Encourage greater exchange of information on women and on
women’s issues in all posts by: (A) having standard Embassy reporting
include data on the local situation of women and their material contri-
bution to host countries’ basic needs and GNP; (B) having the Ambas-
sador take the lead in using interviews, speeches and articles to discuss
US women’s status; (C) disseminating information on US women
through more USICA exhibits, seminars and enlarged library collec-
tions on women, including material on women’s civil/political/
economic rights, population control, child care, legal reforms, etc., and
(D) stimulating cross-cultural support by putting host country
women’s organizations in touch with US organizations, public and pri-
vate institutions, and individuals concerned with the advancement of
women.

C. Specific Embassy recommendations for developing countries.
1. Encourage host countries to arrange more training for women.
Use all possible means—AID, USICA, Peace Corps, local or foreign
PVOs, UN or third country agencies, private foundations. Lack of
training continues as the predominant factor in women’s continued
low status. Specifically, (A) expand training programs to non-
traditional areas, including administration, law, labor, cooperative
management; (B) make a major effort to see that women farm workers
are included in all training in agricultural extension and in new farm
technologies and processes; (C) to offset the frequent practice of
training already advantaged women, encourage more non-formal
training of low-income rural and urban women in income-producing
skills.
2. Support/encourage local governments’ collection of statistical
data on women—income, migration, employment/unemployment,
family patterns—for use in planning development projects and in Em-
bassy economic reports. Many LDC posts advise that lacking such data,
country and US planners can make serious mistakes in program design
and allocation of priorities.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
3. Support/encourage surveys of women’s contribution to na-
tional food production (Embassy Bamako). Estimates indicate that
from 70 percent to over 90 percent of rural women in most Third World
countries engage in agriculture. However, few objective factual assess-
ments exist of women’s material contribution to the host country’s total
food supplies and GNP. Sharper studies would “raise the level of gen-
eral awareness that many projects and techniques designed to increase
agriculture production are based on the false premise that men do most
of the agricultural work, and encourage rural development innovations
designed to be implemented by women”. (Embassy Brazzaville).
4. In planning development projects, identify felt needs especially
of rural women—a “rule too often neglected” (Embassy Djakarta). Em-
bassy Bamako reports that perhaps the greatest needs include better
access to wells, pumps, potable water, carts to carry water. Hauling
water, often exclusively “woman’s work”, may alone take two to four
hours per day. Embassy Accra concurs: “The most important single
(US) step could be providing piped water or wells for each
community.”
5. Encourage and where feasible plan for arranging women’s
access to credit through cooperatives or otherwise, especially women
farm workers, market women and artisans in handcrafts.
6. Use more effectively—and expand—Ambassadors’ self-help
funds. These discretionary funds, now available to Ambassadors
posted in developing countries, have “exceptional potential”, involve
“minimal paper work, and (produce) speedy action” of self-help
projects. Embassy Dakar urges that these funds be “constructively ex-
panded and supplemented with additional funding especially ear-
marked for small projects of immediate impact on enhancing the status
of women.”
7. Encourage funding of more self-help or projects by local and for-
eign PVOs, private foundations, UN agencies, especially where host
country may be sensitive to US funding. Teaching income-earning
skills is repeatedly stressed as a priority for self-help projects for both
urban and rural low-income women.
8. Encourage involvement of more Peace Corps volunteers in de-
sign of development projects.
9. Use all available assistance programs of US Government. Ex-
amples: Use PL 480 funds for self-help projects; channel more Food for
Peace to maternity/child care centers.
10. Help call attention to possible negative aspects of some “mod-
ernization” development programs, e.g., Embassy Banjul is attempting
to help its own and host country officials “understand the social conse-
quences” of a new river development project which will soon open
vast, new areas to rice cultivation, which is traditionally women’s

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
work. The Embassy asks: “Will men assist women in the larger rice
fields, or will already overburdened women cultivators simply face a
much heavier burden?” “What will be the effects on social, family
structure?”
These thoughtful proposals show that many Embassies have de-
veloped a variety of diplomatic and practical strategies for encouraging
the advancement of women. Although the major responsibility for car-
rying out some of the proposals rests ultimately in Washington, where
coordination with USICA, Peace Corps and AID is already underway,
Embassies and other posts clearly have a role to play. The issue of
women’s rights and status is an integral part of the human rights equa-
tion. As such, it is integral to US foreign policy. The Copenhagen Con-
ference lends new urgency and relevance to the US role.
Vance
337.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs (Pickering) to Secretary of State Muskie
Washington, May 19, 1980
SUBJECT
Release of Global 2000 Study
The Global 2000 Study, which the Council on Environmental
Quality and State jointly carried out at the request of President Carter,
is now being printed. (A description of the study and principal findings
is attached.) We anticipate that the study will be ready for release in
July. Still unknown, however, is the degree of publicity the White
House might wish to accord it—and also the timing of the public re-
lease—since the nature and severity of the population, resources and
environmental problems the study identifies may be viewed as more
“bad news” at the wrong time.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
I will be participating with Gus Speth (CEQ) Tuesday (May 20) in a
briefing for key White House advisers, expected to include Zbig Brze-
zinski, Stu Eizenstat, Frank Press, John White, Hedley Donovan, and
Anne Wexler. We plan to describe the conclusions of the study, and to
identify various options with respect to timing, level and type of public
release. This is an extremely important study, and there is widespread
public knowledge of its existence and great interest in it. I believe that it
can be used in a positive manner by the Administration to demonstrate
its leadership in anticipating future global challenges and also in
mounting important responses to the problems. On this basis Speth
and I will recommend to the White House that the President, himself,
participate in a well-publicized release of the study; and also that a pro-
gram of extensive briefings be conducted for the Congress, U.S.
non-governmental organizations, and foreign embassy officials.
Given your past involvement in critical issues addressed by the
study, and the considerable foreign policy implications involved, I
hope you will be able to become involved in the release of the study.
The Global 2000 Study has already been discussed during preparations
for the forthcoming Venice Summit, and the draft Summit Commu-
nique calls for a similar report to the Summit of 1981.
We plan to arrange an (early June) internal State Department
briefing on Global 2000, with emphasis on its international implications
and follow-up. We will work closely with your staff to ensure that you
are apprised of the status of such issues as the White House release
strategy, and are in a position to decide on your own role.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Attachment
Summary Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, May 1980
THE GLOBAL 2000 STUDY
Background
The Global 2000 Study responds to a directive by President Carter
in his 1977 Environmental Message. It is an attempt to project world-
wide trends and conditions with respect to natural resource avail-
ability, population and environmental quality to the end of this cen-
tury. It is based on extensive data collection and the application of the
Government’s current modeling capability. The Study, according to the
President, is also to serve as the foundation of the Government’s future
long-term planning.

The Global 2000 Study is different from all previous U.S. studies of
population, resources and environmental trends in that this task ex-
amines these closely related topics as a whole, rather than as separate
and independent topics. In addition to describing trends and high-
lighting potential future global problems, the Study assesses the Gov-
ernment’s capabilities for carrying out projections and analyses of this
type.

Findings
The Study concludes that: if present trends continue, the world in
2000 will be more crowded, more polluted, less stable ecologically and
more vulnerable to disruptions than the world we live in now. Serious
stresses involving population, resources and environment are clearly
visible ahead. The Study acknowledges the existence of greatly height-
ened worldwide awareness of potential problems in these areas, and
also the wide spectrum of new policies and programs which are being
implemented to cope with them. Nonetheless, barring revolutionary
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
advances in technology, life for most people on earth will be more pre-
carious in 2000 than it is now—unless the nations of the world act deci-
sively to alter current trends. Some of the individual findings of the
Study follow:
World population will increase some 50 percent by 2000, reaching
LDCs, which will mean that 75 percent of the people of the world will
live in the poorer nations.

Gross National Product is projected to increase in proportion to pop-
ulation increases on a world average. Economic growth in LDCs will
increase somewhat, while it will slow in the industrialized nations rela-
tive to past decades.

This assumes a doubling of food prices, continued increase in fish pro-
duction, and ability to expand irrigation and use of fertilizers signifi-
cantly (since amount of cultivated land will expand only 4 percent).
However, world-marine fish catches are not projected to increase sig-
nificantly beyond current levels. Food consumption (nutrition levels)
will be increasingly skewed between “haves” and “have nots”.
Energy will be an increasingly difficult problem, and it is unclear
how demand will be met. Problems of uneven geographical distribu-
tion, and economic and environmental constraints, will influence use
and acceptability of coal, oil, gas, oil shale, and nuclear sources. The
real price of energy will double by 2000; and the LDCs will increase en-
ergy use only slightly.

Non-fuel minerals will be generally sufficient to meet projected de-
mands through 2000. However, production costs will rise rapidly.
Water will become increasingly in short supply on local and re-
gional levels, as population and economic growth combine to affect
both quantity and quality (through pollution).

Forests will continue to disappear rapidly, principally in the
tropics, where 40 percent of remaining cover will be lost by 2000. Asso-
ciated problems of erosion, siltation, erratic water supplies, loss of
wood and wildlife and (possibly) regional and global climate change
will intensify.

Agricultural soils will continue to degrade due to erosion, loss of or-
ganic matter, desertification, salination and waterlogging. Annually,
an area of cropland and rangeland the size of Maine is becoming
wasteland.

Upper atmosphere pollution, principally by carbon dioxide and fluo-
rocarbons, is expected to increase at rates which (by 2000) may lock us
into potentially serious problems of climate change and ozone deple-
tion for the next century.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
U.S. long-range projection capabilities need significant improvement
if we and other governments are to have an adequate basis for factoring
long-term trends into policy planning. There are gaps and inconsis-
tencies in the data and methodologies used by the Federal agencies,
along with important differences in assumptions.
Organizational Structure
Fifteen Federal agencies participated in the Study:
Council on Environmental Quality
State Department
Agency for International Development
Bureau of the Census
Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Civil Preparedness Agency
Department of Agriculture
Department of Energy
Department of the Interior
Energy Research and Development Agency
Environmental Protection Agency
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
National Science Foundation
Office of Science and Technology Policy
In addition, numerous officials and technical experts from a broad
range of nongovernmental institutions participated in the Study de-
sign, development and review.

Mr. Gus Speth, Chairman of the Council on Environmental
Quality, and Ambassador Thomas Pickering, Assistant Secretary of
State for Oceans and International Environment and Scientific Affairs,
co-chair the Executive Group overseeing the Study.
The Study Director, Dr. Gerald O. Barney, and a small central staff
report to the co-chairpersons of the Executive Group, are housed at the
Council on Environmental Quality. Ms. Story Shem represents the State
Department as Executive Assistant on the Study.

338.

Memorandum From the Chairman of the NSC Ad Hoc
Group on Population Policy (Pickering) to the Members of
the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy
Washington, May 21, 1980
SUBJECT
Population Factors and U.S. National Security
On April 21, the NSC Ad Hoc Group met to discuss the relation-
ship of demographic trends to U.S. national security interests. There
was general agreement that several key countries and areas where the
United States has important national security concerns are experi-
encing significant population pressures. It was also agreed that there is
a lack of analysis relating to the effects of population growth on social
unrest and political instability. Such analysis could be useful to the Ex-
ecutive Branch in foreign policy and development strategy formulation
regarding specific countries, and to the Congress in its consideration of
AID population funding.

Ambassador Marshall Green, consultant to the State Department,
initiated the discussion. He admitted the difficulty in analyzing how
excessive population growth affects national security, but emphasized
that it is necessary to show how population interacts with other poten-
tially destabilizing factors in a society. He noted that the “arc of crisis”
tends to coincide with the arc of countries where there has been little
success in dealing with the population problem. He suggested that the
political observers in our overseas missions should be brought fully
into a new evaluation of the population/national security linkage in
key countries.

Several members observed that there is decreased donor interest,
while at the same time there is increased interest on the part of under-
developed countries in dealing with their population problems. There
is a need for “hard” evidence about the results of population growth,
which would be of use in convincing Congress of the importance of
population in national security terms.

The members concluded that a core group of analysts should pro-
duce a pilot study, focusing on a specific country, in order to gain a
better idea of the dimensions and possibilities for research in this new
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
area. Such a core group would be interdisciplinary in nature, involving
analysts from CIA’s Office of Geographic and Cartographic Research
(OGCR) and State/INR, and drawing, as appropriate, on the Census
Bureau, AID, Defense, and possibly other agencies. Egypt, Mexico, and
Kenya were mentioned as possible initial countries for study.
As a next step, I am attaching a preliminary outline for such a
study, and would much appreciate your comments and suggestions,
which can be addressed to Richard E. Benedick, Coordinator of Popula-
tion Affairs, OES/CP, Room 7825.

I am also attaching for your information, as requested at the
meeting, a study by OGCR on Turkey, which appears to contain some
elements of what we are aiming at. I might also cite a book which has
come to my attention, Population Dynamics and International Violence,
(MIT, Lexington Books, 1974), by Nazli Choucri, for its discussion of
the issue.

We look forward to hearing from you in the near future on the pro-
posed outline, on possible initial countries for study, and on whether
and how your agency might be able to participate in the analysis.

339.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts
143816. For Chief of Mission from Deputy Secretary. Subject:
World Population Growth.
1. The eighteen-agency NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy,
chaired by the Department of State, has just released its fourth annual
report, copies of which will shortly be pouched to you.
2. Because of the important implications of world population
growth for U.S. foreign policy, and the growing urgency for concerted
and expanded national and international efforts to address this
problem, I hope that you and your senior staff will give careful atten-
tion to the report.
3. The report notes that, during the nineteen-seventies, much of the
economic gains and increased food output of the third world were can-
celled out by population growth. Even allowing for continuing slow-
down in the rate of growth, world population is likely to increase from
only two decades which is almost as much as the entire world popula-
tion as recently as 1930. This is the equivalent of adding more than
twenty new countries the current size of Bangladesh.

Much of this increase—90 percent—will occur in low-income
countries. The proportion of industrialized countries’ population in the
by 2000.

Many developing countries of importance to U.S. security are ex-
periencing some combination of fast population growth, high and
classified. Drafted by Benedick; cleared by Pickering, Houdek, Lamberty, McNutt, Laase,
NEA/RA, and Bremer; approved by Christopher. Pickering distributed a draft of the
telegram and copies of the report of the NSC Ad Hoc Group, executive summary, and
conclusions section to Christopher under a May 22 action memorandum. According to
stamped and handwritten notations on the May 22 memorandum, Christopher indicated
his approval of the telegram on May 30. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P800080–0383)

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
growing population density relative to arable land, massive rural-
urban migration, and high unemployment/underemployment—par-
ticularly among urban youth. These factors add up to an increasing
potential for economic and political instability, social unrest and ex-
tremism, mass migrations, and possible international conflicts over
control of land and resources.

U.S. international population policy is predicated on the premise
that, while the demographic situation is obviously serious, it is not
hopeless. China, Indonesia, Thailand, Colombia, and Mexico are
among countries which have brought birth rates down through con-
certed policies. Yet, further fertility reduction will require considerably
more intensive, and expensive, efforts in terms of education, motiva-
tion, and expansion of family planning services.

By virtue of experience and resources, the U.S. cannot relinquish
the leadership role in this area. Notwithstanding current budgetary
stringencies, the report renews the 1975 NSC recommendation for a
“major expansion” of U.S. funding for both bilateral and multilateral
population programs and for biomedical research, and recommends
high-level diplomatic support for population programs.
4. Action requested: (A) I urge you to consider ways in which you
and your Country Team can support national and international efforts
to address the problem of excessive population growth. Those of you in
donor or potential donor countries should seek ways to encourage ex-
panded assistance to multilateral agencies such as UN Fund for Popu-
lation Activities and through bilateral aid programs, as well as a greater
priority for biomedical research in human reproduction. Chiefs of Mis-
sion in developing countries experiencing excessive population growth
should seek appropriate ways of supporting and encouraging effective
local efforts, especially in cooperation with other multilateral and bilat-
eral donors.

(B) Department would welcome comments on the report, ad-
dressed to the Coordinator of Population Affairs. We would also ap-
preciate regular reporting by missions of important local develop-
ments, including analysis of policy changes and statements by national
leaders, parliamentarians, opposition leaders, religious leaders, etc.
Muskie

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II

340.

Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple
Diplomatic and Consular Posts
146120. Subject: UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women.
1. The Department is presently coordinating a review by the Exec-
utive Branch of the subject Convention which was adopted by con-
sensus and opened for signature by the UN General Assembly on De-
cember 28, 1979, in order to determine whether the U.S. will be able to
participate in a signing ceremony scheduled during the UN Mid-
Decade World Conference to be held in Copenhagen from July 14–30,

1980.
2. Informal consultations are also underway with the U.S. human
rights community and with feminists, and women’s nongovernmental
organizations and other interested groups, and private citizens. The
Department has received a number of communications from the pri-
vate sector expressing support for U.S. signature and ratification of the
Convention as a means of eliminating sex discrimination in this
country and elsewhere. While the U.S. fully supports the general thrust
and underlying principles of the Convention, certain preambular para-
graphs contain objectionable political rhetoric. The majority of the pro-
visions in the Convention are consistent with U.S. law and policy, and
the remainder can be dealt with by means of U.S. reservations, declara-
tions, or understandings.
3. Sweden, Poland, Rwanda, Cuba, Portugal and Guinea have al-
ready signed. The Department learned informally that the following
countries are considering signing the Convention at Copenhagen: Fin-
land, Denmark, Austria, Belgium, and the Netherlands. The U.S., along
with Canada and Australia’s federal system of government will un-
doubtedly require a “federalism” reservation to the Convention.
4. Prior to a final determination as to whether the U.S. will sign the
Convention, the Department would appreciate posts querying the ap-
propriate host country office to determine whether a final decision has
been made to sign the Convention at Copenhagen.

Muskie
classified. Drafted by Good; cleared by Thomas Johnson (L/UNA) and in M/WCW; ap-
proved by Creekmore. Sent to Ankara, Belgrade, Bonn, Brussels, Canberra, Copenhagen,
Geneva, Helsinki, Lisbon, Luxembourg, Madrid, Mexico City, New Delhi, Oslo, Ottawa,
Paris, Rome, Stockholm, Tel Aviv, The Hague, Tokyo, Vienna, and Wellington.
December 18, 1979.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
341.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for International Organization Affairs (McCall) to Secretary
of State Muskie
Washington, June 30, 1980
SUBJECT
Personal Message from the Secretary of State to all Chiefs of Mission Reaffirming
Policy on Worldwide Status and Rights of Women
Issues for Decision
In May 1979 Secretary Vance announced a new foreign policy di-
rective on worldwide status and rights of women (Attachment 1) to
make this issue a part of our total diplomatic effort.
As a contribution to the World Conference of the UN Decade for
added stimulus to our efforts at home and abroad, we believe it is im-
portant for you to reaffirm this policy as one of your first acts after
taking office. Given the short lead time before the Copenhagen confer-
ence, this request is urgent.

Essential Factors
This directive has received both national and international acclaim
at regional preparatory conferences around the world and also at U.S.
regional outreach meetings involving American women in prepara-
tions for the Copenhagen conference.

Already responses from worldwide U.S. diplomatic posts indicate
strong support and approval for the policy on women and tell of
helpful initiatives developed to carry it out.

Recommendations
1. that you send this message to all our Chiefs of Mission
(Attachment);
2. that this message be made available to participants at the Copen-
hagen conference along with the full texts of the May 1979 policy state-
ment and the Percy Amendment;3
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
3. that a Department Notice on this subject be distributed to all em-
ployees in the foreign affairs agencies.

Attachment
Draft Telegram
Washington, June 27, 1980
All Chiefs of Mission
The events of the past year have made us all more conscious of the
risks of war, and therefore more committed to the tasks of peace.
The traditional threats to peace—violation of national borders, sei-
zure of hostages, civil strife, terrorism—are easy to recognize. But there
are other threats to the health and well-being of people and nations
which can erode and ultimately destroy the chances for a peaceful and
prosperous world. The condition of hungry, frustrated people, many of
them torn from home, family, or country; inflation; energy shortages;
drought; lack of economic opportunity—all are problems which de-
mand our urgent attention. Discrimination against women must, I be-
lieve, be placed among these threats. It is clearer today than ever before
that the advancement of women’s status is an indispensable aspect of
the overall development and social and economic well-being of
nations.

The United States has given prominent attention to the role of
women in developing nations. The 1973 “Percy Amendment” to the US
Foreign Assistance Act requires that US foreign aid programs en-
courage and promote the integration of women into the national econ-
omies in the developing countries. The United States was the first
country with such legislation governing its overseas aid and encour-
aged OECD–DAC donor countries to take similar positions. Some of
them now have adopted similar language governing their foreign aid
programs. But the issue extends far beyond that of the developing na-
tions. In May 1979, the US Department of State announced and issued
as a joint directive to its missions in every country that “a key objective
of US foreign policy is the advancement worldwide of the status and
conditions of women.”
At this midpoint in the UN Decade for Women, marked by the Co-
penhagen conference, it is extremely important to reaffirm our strong

342.

Editorial Note
The World Conference of the UN Decade for Women took place in
the International Women’s Year, held in Mexico City from June 19
through July 2, 1975, delegates adopted a World Plan of Action, re-
quested that the United Nations proclaim 1976–1985 the UN Decade for
Women and establish a voluntary fund for the decade, and called for a
mid-decade conference in 1980. UN General Assembly Resolution 30/
and called upon member states to examine the World Plan of Action
and pursue the adoption of national strategies, plans, and programs in
furtherance of women’s economic, political, and social equality. For ad-
ditional information concerning the General Assembly’s actions, see
nally slated to take place in Tehran, Iran, during the summer of 1980.
Following the Iranian Revolution in January 1979, the Government of
Iran withdrew its offer. Eventually, the United Nations selected Copen-
hagen as the conference location. The Mid-Decade Forum, sponsored

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
by a variety of non-governmental organizations, ran concurrently with
the UN conference.

In November 1979, in preparation for the conference, the Depart-
ment of State established the Office of the U.S. Secretariat for the World
Conference of the UN Decade for Women. Headed by Deputy Assist-
ant Secretary of State for Equal Employment Opportunities and Civil
Rights Vivian Lowery Derryck, the Secretariat conducted an expansive
national outreach program by partnering with the Departments of
Education, Labor, and Health and Human Services; the Environmental
Protection Agency; and women’s organizations to coordinate and host
meetings throughout the country to discuss conference agenda items
and gain insight on problems facing American women. (Department of
State Bulletin, April 1980, page 69)
The Department also hosted Copenhagen 80: The Washington
Conference for Women, June 12–13, featuring addresses by Under Sec-
retary of State for Political Affairs David Newsom, Assistant Secretary
of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Patricia Derian,
and Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs
Richard McCall. Derryck summarized the speeches in a memorandum
of conversation transmitted via telegram 169422 to Copenhagen, June
27: “Assistant Secretary Patt Derian keynoted the Conference on a posi-
tive note when she commented on the power of public opinion and the
strong influence of informed citizens on policy formulation. Assistant
Secretary Richard McCall won many new supporters by addressing the
group on two separate occasions. Under Secretary Newsom in his ad-
dress outlined the foreign policy issues facing the US in mid-1980 in a
comprehensive factual way that impressed the participants and indi-
cated the seriousness and the respect that he held for the audience. In
corridor conversations participants continued to discuss the receptivity
and accessibility to high-level Department officials.” (National Ar-
According to the final Report of the United States Delegation to the
World Conference on the UN Decade for Women: Equality, Development, and
Peace, the Secretariat prepared various scope, position, and contin-
gency papers for use by the delegation on such topics as North/South
economic issues, job segregation, reproductive health, pay equity,
illegal substances, and refugees. It also assisted Department and White
House officials in selecting the delegation. U.S. Ambassador to the
United Nations Donald F. McHenry and Presidential Assistant Sarah
Weddington served as the delegation co-chairmen. Representatives in-
cluded Lowery Derryck, Director of AID’s Women in Development Of-
fice Arvonne Fraser, Director of the Department of Labor’s Women’s
Bureau Alexis Herman, U.S. Representative to the Commission on the
Status of Women of the UN Economic and Social Council Koryne

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Horbal, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and
Social Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Sarah
Goddard Power. The full 37-member delegation also included advisers
drawn from Congress, other government agencies, women’s organiza-
tions, and labor unions. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
Material, Office File, Unfiled Files, Box 153, Women: World Conference
Prior to the conference, the Department provided background in-
formation and objectives in telegram 166222 to all diplomatic and con-
Policy File, D800305–0146) The telegram explained the dual purpose of
the conference: “(A) To review and assess progress and obstacles in im-
plementing the World Plan of Action; and (B) to revise the World Plan
as necessary by designing a program of action for the second half of the
decade.” As a result of earlier preparatory meetings and UN General
Assembly action, employment, health, and education had been se-
lected as conference subthemes and three political issues—women and
apartheid, the effects of Israeli occupation on Palestinian women inside
and outside the Occupied Territories, and women and refugees—had
been added to the agenda. Although Department officials did not op-
pose the “women and apartheid,” and “women as refugees” agenda
items, they did object to the Palestinian item as it would have an iso-
lating effect on the Israeli delegation. The telegram listed nine confer-
ence objectives:
“—Keep the focus on the central themes of the conference rather
than on divisive political issues. We hope this can be achieved in part
by adhering strictly to the established organization of work for the con-
ference. It is contrary to the interests of all women that the work of this
unique U.N. conference be undermined by politicization;
“—Develop a strong program of action for the second half of the
decade that refines the World Plan of Action by outlining concrete
targets and measurable objectives;
“—Identify and support specific measures of assistance to women
in South Africa and Namibia without, however, creating any new
funding mechanisms in addition to those to which the U.S. already con-
tributes (UNDP, Institute for Namibia, the Trust Fund for South Africa,
U.N. Educational and Training Program for South Africa);
“—Develop and upgrade specific programs of assistance to
women refugees;
“—Oppose efforts to use the conference as a forum for unfairly
criticizing Israel, and oppose inflammatory resolutions on the Pales-
tinian women’s issue;
“—Provide the conference with an accurate and balanced picture
of U.S. progress in implementing the World Plan of Action;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“—Add a section to the draft program on women and access to po-
table water to encourage women’s participation in planning and imple-
menting water technology and to highlight a linkage between the
Women’s Decade and the Decade on Drinking Water and Sanitation;
“—Work for recognition of the economic value of women’s work
not traditionally renumerated or counted in national statistics;
“—Work to assure that women and women’s organizations play
an active, recognized role in the development process.”
In advance of the departure of the U.S. delegation on the evening
of July 11, President Jimmy Carter issued a statement in which he noted
that the conference “will provide a constructive opportunity to review
the progress of women throughout the world during the past 5 years
and to establish a meaningful plan of specific actions to benefit women
for the coming 5 years. The work of this Conference to improve the con-
ditions of women’s lives everywhere in the world can make a major
contribution to the enhancement of human rights, a goal which has
been a vital element of my administration’s policy. The United States is
deeply committed to eliminating all forms of discrimination and will
continue to work for equal rights at home and abroad.” The President
also indicated that he had authorized Weddington to sign the Conven-
tion on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women,
which had been adopted by the UN General Assembly in December
Following the opening plenary session on July 14, delegates estab-
lished two committees for the purpose of reviewing the draft Program
of Action. In briefing materials prepared for Secretary of State Edmund
Muskie’s July 18 breakfast meeting with President Carter, Department
of State Executive Secretary Peter Tarnoff outlined the administration’s
position:
“Our objective at the Conference is to keep the focus on women’s
problems and to avoid contentious unrelated political issues. The US
Delegation is attempting to steer the proceedings toward three sub-
themes of the conference, ‘employment, education and health’ for
women, and to avoid political exploitation of the three main agenda
items: ‘The Effects of Israeli Occupation on Palestinian Women Inside
and Outside the Occupied Territories,’ ‘Women and Apartheid’ and
‘Women as Refugees.’
“A speech by Sarah Weddington, Co-Head of the US Delegation,
July 15 urging a spirit of compromise and describing the progress of
women in the US was well received. Ms. Weddington also announced
that the US would sign the Convention Eliminating All Forms of Dis-
crimination Against Women.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
“There are, however, political issues at the conference that could
lead to confrontation if moderate forces do not rally to prevent this.
Cuba is attempting to include language which links Zionism with rac-
ism, apartheid, colonialism and other evils in proposed G–77 amend-
ments to the Action program for the conference. There are also G–77
draft submissions which blame women’s inequality on neo-colonialism
and an unjust world economic order. Our Delegation is working hard,
with support from the conference leadership, to remove such objection-
able issues from Action program drafts. Our Delegation is not author-
ized to threaten withdrawal from the conference if our concerns are not
met unless authorized to do so from Washington. If these unacceptable
political issues threaten to disrupt permanently the work of the confer-
ence, you might then want to consider recommending to the President
that our Delegation withdraw. Thus far there has been no challenge to
the credentials of the DK (Pol Pot) Kampuchean delegation at the con-
ference. There have been reports that a rival PRK (Heng Samrin) dele-
gation might attempt this.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the
Bkfasts Jul, Aug, Sept 1980)
Ultimately the U.S. delegation was unsuccessful in its attempt to
remove what it considered inflammatory language antithetical to U.S.
foreign policy from the draft Program of Action. During the first week
of the conference, the Indian delegation proposed an amendment, ulti-
mately supported by the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO), to
the Program of Action designed to channel financial assistance to Pales-
tinian women through the auspices of the PLO. (Telegram 4763 from
Copenhagen, July 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
sion to the United Nations, July 18, termed the language proposed by
the Indian delegation “unacceptable” and instructed the U.S. delega-
tion to “oppose any mention of the PLO as a conduit for assistance to
Palestinian women.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800346–0418)
dington reported that the Indian delegation had presented a revised
amendment that deleted reference to the channeling of financial assist-
ance through the PLO and substituted language that called for funds to
be disbursed in “consultation and cooperation with the PLO, the repre-
sentative of the Palestinian people.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P870058–0371) The Department instructed the dele-
gation “not to accept any language calling for assistance to or through
PLO,” adding, “Nor can we agree to any language referring to PLO or
implying that PLO is the representative of Palestinians.” (Telegram

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
eign Policy File, P870058–0397) According to a situation report Na-
tional Security Council Staff member Lincoln Bloomfield sent to Presi-
dent’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbignew Brzezinski the
evening of July 25, the Committee approved the revised Indian amend-
ticipate. Bloomfield noted, “Sarah [Weddington] is going to say pub-
licly that the Conference is being subverted from the task at hand and
that U.S. Del will be trying to get things back on the track.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Unfiled
penhagen, July 26, the Embassy reported that the United States, Israel,
and Canada voted against the revised Indian amendment, adding,
“Second Committee vote breaks a tradition dating back to Mexico City
Conference of proceeding by consensus on Plan of Action. The question
for WEO del is now whether inclusion of the Indian amendment in the
Draft Program will preclude their support of the Draft Program as a
whole.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
The Department further instructed the delegation to vote against
the final draft of the Program of Action following the acceptance of the
Indian/PLO amendment and due to other political considerations.
voted to approve the Program of Action. Delegates also approved 48
additional resolutions. The United States, Canada, Israel, and Australia
voted against adoption of the Program of Action on the basis of three
paragraphs that included references to UN documents questioning the
Camp David Accords; equated Zionism with imperialism, colonialism,
neocolonialism, and racism; and incorporated the Indian/PLO resolu-
tion language. As the U.S. delegation’s final report, which Muskie
transmitted to Carter on January 16, 1981, stated:
“However, the challenge to our foreign policy on the State of Israel
was one that could not be ignored. Any other action by the United
States at the World Conference would have been construed as a major
change in Middle East policy; and that would have been incorrect and
misleading. Our continued commitment to Israel is a long-standing
matter of integrity and principle. It is very unfortunate that our nega-
tive vote has been characterized as an either/or situation, it was not
and is not.” (Report of the United States Delegation to the World Conference
on the UN Decade for Women: Equality, Development, and Peace, page 140;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Un-
In summarizing U.S. accomplishments during the July 30 plenary
session, Weddington noted:

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
“Sadly, our mutual efforts have fallen far below their potential ac-
complishments. Those efforts have been subverted by those with a dif-
ferent agenda. The focus on women here was pushed aside and became
a victim of those who choose instead to focus on the political polemics
of the Middle East situation. We are denied a consensus not by ques-
tions of how to help women in developing areas, not by questions of
what education women need, not by questions of how to support
women who are discriminated against on the basis of race and sex, not
by any question uniquely pertaining to women or issues viewed from a
woman’s perspective. We are denied a consensus by those who want to
focus a statement against Zionism, by those who want to advance their
special interests in the Middle East—knowing full well that a special
session of the U.N. General Assembly is already working on the highly
complicated and difficult problem involved. They have not compro-
mised as they claim; they have denied women whatever their race, reli-
gion, or national origin a unique opportunity to contribute solutions to
their own issues in their own way. And the intemperate and abhorrent
attacks against Israel and the Camp David process are completely false
and regrettable.” (Department of State Bulletin, November 1980, page
64)
The text of the Program of Action, entitled “Programme of Action
for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,” is printed in ibid., pages 64–85.
On October 28, 1980, the White House released a statement indi-
cating that Carter intended to send the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women to the Senate in early
November. (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, November 3,
1980, page 2477). Weddington circulated copies of the White House
statement under cover of an October 29 memorandum, noting that
“The President and I hope the Senate will give early and favorable con-
sideration to the Convention. I am heartened by this positive step by
the United States to move the equality of women to the forefront of in-
ternational issues.” (Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and
1980) The Senate received the Convention on November 12, and re-
ferred it to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee by unanimous con-
sent. Although the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held hearings
ratified by the full Senate.

343.

Memorandum From President Carter to Secretary of State
Muskie, the Director of the Office of Management and
Budget (McIntyre), the Chairman of the Council on
Environmental Quality (Speth), the President’s Assistant for
Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat), and the Director of
the Office of Science and Technology Policy (Press)
Washington, July 24, 1980
SUBJECT
Task Force on Global Resources and Environment
Among the most urgent and complex challenges before the world
today is the projected deterioration of the global environmental and re-
source base. Unless nations of the world take prompt, decisive action to
halt the current trends, the next 20 years may see a continuation of se-
rious food and population problems, steady loss of croplands, forests,
plant and animal species, fisheries, and degradation of the earth’s
water and atmosphere.

To increase our capability to respond to these problems, I am es-
tablishing a Presidential Task Force on Global Resources and Environ-
ment. I am asking you to serve as members of this Task Force and am
asking the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality to serve
as Chairman.

The objectives of this Task Force will be:
• to ensure that high priority attention is given to important global
resource, population, and environment problems;
• to assess the effectiveness of Federal efforts in these areas; and
classification marking. Attached to a July 31 memorandum from Speth to Bergland re-
questing that the USDA identify “problem areas” relating to global issues. The White
House released the resultant three volume report entitled, The Global 2000 Report to the
President: Entering the Twenty-First Century, on July 24, which the Department summa-
rized and transmitted in telegram 195667 to all diplomatic and consular posts, July 24.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
• to assess ways to improve the Federal government’s ability to
project and analyze long-term resource, population, and environment
trends.

The Task Force will report to me as soon as possible with recom-
mendations for problem areas needing priority attention by the Task
Force. It will report to me within six months and periodically thereafter
on its progress and on ways in which Federal programs in these areas
can be strengthened and improved.

The Task Force will carry out its responsibilities in consultation
with and with the assistance of the Department of Agriculture, the De-
partment of Commerce, the Department of Defense, the Department of
Energy, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Depart-
ment of the Interior, the Department of Transportation, the Department
of Justice, the Central Intelligence Agency, the International Develop-
ment Cooperation Agency, the National Science Foundation, the Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration, and my Assistant for National Security Affairs.
Jimmy Carter

344.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs (Pickering) to Secretary of State Muskie
Washington, July 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Letter from Secretary to U.S. Ambassadors on Global 2000
Issue for Decision
The State Department has important Global 2000 follow-up respon-
sibilities. President Carter has mandated our participation in the Task
Force on Global Resources and the Environment; and directed us to
raise the global issues internationally. For these reasons, and because
of the intrinsic importance of the issues for U.S. foreign policy, the per-
sonal involvement of our Ambassadors in the next stage is essential.
The proposed letter from you (Tab 1) asks the Ambassadors to en-
sure that the report is discussed with key host country officials; and so-
licits their ideas on how we can best use the report internationally and
also respond to Global 2000 issues in the planning and conduct of U.S.
foreign policy.

Along with the letter we will transmit one copy of the Volume I
Summary Report; the statements that the President, you and Gus Speth
presented; and the President’s directive establishing a Task Force on
Global Resources and Environment. Additional copies of the report
(Volumes I and II) have been pouched to each Embassy.

Recommendation:
That you approve the attached letter that we will then send to each
Ambassador.
classified. Sent through Nimetz. Drafted by Long; cleared by Rose and Eckholm and in
T. Long initialed for Rose and Eckholm. A notation on the memorandum indicates that
Muskie saw it. A stamped notation indicates that it was received on August 4.
dent noted: “I am also directing the State Department to raise the issues and problems
identified in the Global 2000 Report in all appropriate international meetings, and I myself
will raise them as well.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

345.

Memorandum From Hazel Denton of the National Security
Council Staff to the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen)
Washington, August 26, 1980
SUBJECT
Proposal for Summit Follow-Up on Population
Three initiatives are proposed. The background for each is set out
in the following pages.
1. Increase Resources. Propose that all Summit countries make a
commitment to provide significant population assistance.
Goal. To double contraceptive usage among women in developing
countries, from 25% to 50%.
2. Appoint Population Coordinators. Recommend that a senior policy
level coordinator of population affairs be appointed by each Summit
government to carry the responsibility for Summit follow-up.
Goal. To coordinate efforts to increase international assistance; to
highlight population issues in communication with embassies and with
international organizations; to stimulate action by their governments
and by the international organizations of which they are donor
members.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
3. Intensify Family Planning/Contraceptive Research. Propose that the
United States, working with other international agencies, establish a
series of centers in developing countries for research into family plan-
ning methods.

Goal. To take the contraceptive techniques developed in the United
States to the field, and to undertake detailed operations research into
acceptability and adaptability in differing cultural and economic
environments.

Background Information
1. Increase Resources
We are proposing an increase from the current $1 billion to
$2 billion.

Funding for Population
Current
Proposed
(1980)
(1984)
(million)
(million)
DAC Population Aid to LDCs
US Share
(200)
(400)
Others
(150)
(500)
World Bank
LDC Expenditures on Population
Private Contributions
$1,000
$ 2 billion
The Summit countries contributed around $250 million for popula-
tion assistance in 1979, with 75% coming from the United States.
Population Assistance from
Summit Countries
(million)
Canada
$ 10
Germany
Japan
United Kingdom
Italy
France
United States
$245
*less than $200,000

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
For tactical reasons, we probably should not mention the specific
target of doubling resources because this will raise technical questions of
why double (rather than some other multiple, for what, for where). In-
stead the emphasis should be on the unmet demand, the opportunities,
and the current low level of support from Summit countries. Suggested
goals could be along the lines of a minimum contribution of $25 million
each per year, reaching $100 million each by 1985.
2. Appoint Population Coordinators
To support the call for increased resources it is important to in-
crease awareness of the need. This awareness can be stimulated and
maintained by a high-level flow of information to embassies, and by in-
creased pressure from donors on the international organizations.
The embassies are important in that population planning is still a
sensitive subject and the establishment and/or expansion of programs
is effected by good communication on needs and supplies. Promotion
of an international consensus will facilitate the efforts of national
leaders to support population planning.

The international organizations currently place little emphasis on
population. (The World Bank is lending less than 1% for family plan-
ning and related activities.) The coordinators could inform and support
their representatives in pressing for more.

International organization funding is as follows:
(million)
UNFPA
$ 112 (using contributions mainly from
DAC countries)
World Bank Group
IPPF
IDB
ADB
AFDB
The coordinators would also be tasked with follow-up on the pop-
ulation issues in Brandt Commission Report4 and Global 2000.
Because some of the major donors to population assistance are not
Summit countries (i.e., Sweden $28 million, Norway $31 million, Neth-
erlands $15 million), the coordinators would work with them to en-
courage their efforts and increase cooperation among the group.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
3. Intensify Family Planning/Contraceptive Research
There is a need for increased funding for biomedical research; one
weak link in the chain is the acceptability of contraceptive methods in
different cultural and economic settings.

We propose the establishment/upgrading of research centers in
the developing countries. Their focus would be operational research
into usage of differing methods. A model for this type of operation is
CGIAR.

The centers would work in cooperation with established opera-
tions by other international organizations (such as WHO) where pos-
sible, and be specifically linked to research efforts in the Summit
countries.

Because the United States is the only Summit country with a signif-
icant bilateral population program, the US would take the lead. These
centers would be located in countries which already have an interest in
family planning assistance from the United States, such as Kenya,
Egypt, Nigeria, Indonesia, India, Philippines, Thailand, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico. (Three such AID-funded health-oriented
efforts already exist.)

We would suggest that as all Summit countries have population
and biomedical research programs, they should consider either joining
the US in this effort, or establishing similar centers.
In order to upgrade and expand international efforts in biomedical
research, a mechanism, perhaps under the guidance of the population
coordinators (or IDCA, the DAC, UNFPA, or the World Bank) would
be established. This coordination would encompass these research
centers.

346.

Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council on
Environmental Quality (Speth) to the Members of the Task
Force on Global Resources and Environment
Washington, September 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Problem Areas Needing Priority Attention by the Task Force on Global
Resources and Environment
You will recall that the President directed the Task Force to report
to him as soon as possible with recommendations on problem areas
needing priority attention. As you know, we have solicited the views of
all affected agencies, of informed people in the Congress, and of
thoughtful private citizens on this subject. We have discussed these
areas at length with interested Task Force members. The enclosed draft
memorandum to the President2 represents our considered distillation
of views on the subject.

You will note a number of changes from our earlier suggestions,
both adding areas thought by agencies to be of significant importance
and modifying the scope of others previously identified. In describing
these priority areas, we have held extensive discussions with those
within the government who can be expected to lead efforts to develop
recommendations in the particular areas. In some areas there are ex-
isting groups who have agreed to use their organizations and resources
to assist us with recommendations (e.g., NSC Working Group on Popu-
lation; Interagency Task Force on Tropical Forests). In other areas per-
manent coordinating organizations are being formed which will assist
us (e.g., interagency committee cochaired by State and Interior on en-
dangered species). In others, efforts are under way on which we can
capitalize (e.g., State’s preparations for 1981 U.N. Conference on New
and Renewable Forms of Energy; IDCA’s chairing of government effort
to respond to Brandt Commission). In still others we have discussed
problem areas with agencies who may be expected to have the lead on
an ad hoc basis using their particular expertise (e.g., EPA—toxics and
pollution; USDA—food and agriculture; Commerce—conservation of
marine resources; WRC and Interior—water supply).
classification marking. Speth was Chairman of the Task Force.
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
What we have tried to do is to identify the best informed, willing
people within the U.S. Government whom we may charge with the task
of assembling the best, most responsible recommendations within their
areas. In some areas (e.g., population, deforestation) we can anticipate,
based on work that has been done so far, fairly comprehensive sets of
action recommendations. In others our present lack of knowledge will
result in identifying a research agenda. Therefore, the identification of a
problem area as one deserving of priority means it is important (and
that its absence would create a noticeable gap), but the types of recom-
mendations which ultimately emerge will differ markedly from area to
area.

We have limited our listing of problems for the President to sub-
stantive areas, each subsumed under the overall resources, environ-
ment, and population focus that was the basis of the Global 2000 Report.
We have been acutely aware, and the agencies in their submission have
made us more aware, of the need to address generic, cross-cutting
problems. We intend to address these institutional issues as well and
will shortly be in touch with you regarding them. Cross-cutting issues
include the government’s data gathering, analysis and forecasting ca-
pacity; international institutional mechanisms (including the roles of
the existing international organizations and U.S. policy towards them);
the promotion and sharing at the international level of scientific re-
search, data, environmental planning expertise and technology; and
U.S. institutional capabilities for addressing global problems on a pri-
ority basis.

Please contact me not later than Friday, September 19 if you have any
suggestions for the proposed memorandum to the President.
Thank you.

347.

Memorandum From the Chairman of the Task Force on
Global Resources and Environment (Speth) to
President Carter
Washington, September 22, 1980
SUBJECT
Global 2000 Follow up: Problem Areas Needing Priority Attention
When you established the Task Force on Global Resources and En-
vironment to recommend policy and program responses to the Global
address specific problems in which immediate and long-term action is
necessary and possible.
• Rapid Population Growth
• World Food Supply (including agricultural land conservation)
• Energy Conservation and Alternative Sources
• Tropical Deforestation
• Species Extinction and Loss of Genetic Diversity
• Environmental Contamination
• Water Supply
• Conservation of Coastal and Marine Resources
• Underdevelopment and Poverty
classification marking. Sent for information only. Attached to Pickering’s October 24
briefing memorandum to Muskie, printed as Document 348.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
Responding to the Global 2000 Report also requires addressing two
other issues that cut across the range of population, resource and envi-
ronmental problems, and that will greatly influence our ability to cope
with them successfully over the long term.
• The Government’s Capacity for Long-Range Forecasting and
Analysis
• U.S. and International Institutional Capabilities and Arrange-
ments for Addressing Global Problems on a Priority Basis
The Task Force is mindful of the need to keep in the forefront of its
analyses and subsequent recommendations a principal theme of Global
2000: the close interrelationships and interactions which exist among
the population, resource and environmental problems, and the collec-
tive challenge they pose for sustained economic and social develop-
ment. In this context the Task Force intends to draw on a variety of re-
cent reports and studies which impinge on Global 2000, in particular the
Brandt Commission Report, the World Hunger Commission Report,4
and the World Bank’s World Development Report, 1980.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
348.

Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs (Pickering) to Secretary of State Muskie
Washington, October 14, 1980
SUBJECT
Global 2000 Follow-Up: Status and Issues (Information)
Summary: State is deeply involved in what has emerged as a major,
multi-faceted USG effort to follow up on the Global 2000 Report. The
following reviews our activities in direct support of the Presidential
Task Force on Global Resources and the Environment (of which you are
a designated member); our own international initiatives; and a number
of key unresolved issues.

Discussion:
1. Presidential Task Force: The Task Force has identified eleven “pri-
ority problem areas”, and State has been tasked with lead agency re-
sponsibility for developing policy and program responses in three of
them: population, energy, and strengthening international organiza-
tions (Tab 1). We share the lead with the Forest Service on tropical de-
forestation and with Interior on species extinction. There will also be
one State representative on each of the other groups. The U.S. develop-
ment assistance program is being examined within the “Underdevelop-
ment and Poverty” context, with IDCA in the lead. Plans call for the
Task Force to receive the separate sets of recommendations by No-
vember 7, and to submit a Decision Memorandum to the President be-
classified. Sent through Nimetz. Drafted by Long; cleared by Hoinkes, Benedict, Hollick,
and Eckholm, and in IO and T. Long initialed for Benedick, Hollick, Eckholm, and the
clearing officials in IO and T.
that the Department and CEQ had released the 250-page follow-on report, entitled Global
Future—A Time to Act, based on the Global 2000 recommendations, on January 14. (Na-
lease, Speth noted: “Our basic conclusion is that the United States must respond to these
global challenges with concerted and vigorous action because our longer-term political
and economic security, as well as that of other nations, is at stake.” (Philip Shabecoff,
“U.S. Calls for Efforts to Combat Global Environmental Problems,” The New York Times,
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
fore Christmas. Gus Speth, Task Force Chairman, expects the President
to respond “via a major speech or special message.”
2. State Department Strategy: An in-house task force, chaired by OES
Deputy Assistant Secretary Hoinkes, is planning and coordinating ad-
ditional Department activities. All major Department components are
represented. We are focusing on (a) raising international awareness of
the Report and its implications; (b) beginning a dialogue with other
countries on how to attack the problems; and (c) improving our
in-house capabilities for integrating long-term G–2000 issues into for-
eign policy.

(a) Report Distribution: Copies of the Global 2000 Report have been
sent to virtually all countries and international and regional organiza-
tions through Embassy, AID and ICA channels. We have prepared
Spanish and French versions of the summary volume; and are consid-
ering Arabic. Japan and Brazil are also preparing their own transla-
tions. Unofficial foreign reaction, in the press and from government of-
ficials, has been quite positive; complimentary of the U.S. effort and
supportive of the call for action.

(b) International Forums: State/IO has identified a wide range of in-
ternational fora in which we will publicize Global 2000 and emphasize
our support for and commitment to the alleviation of these problems
raised G–2000 in the ESCAP Committee on Natural Resources; and we
are planning to draw on it extensively in the ongoing UNESCO General
Conference.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
(c) Special Consultations: We are hosting today (Tuesday) a meeting
of Summit country representatives to discuss G–2000 in relation to sim-
ilar studies and perspectives of the other nations. This follows up on a
decision at the Venice Summit to keep these issues “under review”. Bob
Hormats (USTR) and I will co-chair the session. Henry Owen and Gus
Speth will be the other U.S. participants. You will be receiving a sepa-
rate report on this event. Our plan is to work toward consensus on pri-
ority problems and the development of recommendations for coopera-
tive action to be submitted to the Ottawa Summit next year. As a
general matter, it is our intention to take advantage of each appropriate
opportunity to focus attention on Global 2000 issues. In particular, we
are now undertaking to arrange a series of meetings specifically de-
voted to G–2000 as proposed in response to your personal letter to our
Ambassadors requesting their views on how to build on the Report.
These include briefings in Geneva for representatives of the UN spe-
cialized agencies, a meeting of representatives of Latin American coun-
tries in Panama, and a bilateral discussion with Mexican officials.
(d) Congressional Relations: We and CEQ have briefed an array of
Congressmen and major committee staffs associated with foreign af-
fairs and population/environment/resources matters, and have re-
ceived uniformly strong expressions of interest and support. I also tes-
tified on September 4th before the Subcommittee on International
Economics of the Joint Economic Committee. Discussions are now cen-
tering on possible additional joint Congressional hearings and a major
symposium under Office of Technology Assessment auspices.
(e) Public Affairs: Media interest remains high. In consultation with
State/PA, ICA and CEQ, an integrated series of activities, publications,
films, etc., is being planned to promote greater understanding and dis-
cussion of the Report and its implications (Tab 3) for both domestic
and foreign audiences.

(f) State Department Capabilities: FSI is engaged in modifying in-
structional materials and courses to include a focus on G–2000 issues in
the Department’s training and educational programs (Tab 4). Under
International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
consideration is a 2–3 day seminar for Department officials (possibly
with an initial Latin American focus) to explore how G–2000 issues will
affect conditions, and hence, U.S. foreign policy decisions, at the re-
gional and country levels over the next several decades.
3. Unresolved Issues: The following are key issues of both near and
longer term significance that we are working to address.

(a) What will be the scope and thrust of the Task Force recommen-
dations to the President? We are concerned about a possible lack of
focus in the Task Force efforts as they currently are being orchestrated
by CEQ, and by what appears to be an attempt to do too much all at
once with the Report, thereby jeopardizing appreciation of the
long-term follow-up that is required to address the issues effectively.
We are also concerned that the two “cross cutting” issues (the Govern-
ment’s long-range forecasting and analysis capability, and the institu-
tional ability to integrate Global 2000 issues in decision-making proc-
esses) may not receive sufficient attention by the Presidential Task
Force. Our internal State Department Task Force will concentrate on
the latter issue as it relates to foreign policy decision making. I will be
meeting with Gus Speth this week to discuss and attempt to clarify and
resolve these questions.

(b) How can the LDCs, and other nations, be brought into an ex-
panded international effort to address the problems? While we have re-
ceived some positive feedback to the Report, we do not yet know how
other countries will react to U.S. calls for accelerated action to actually
address the problems.

(c) Can the USG mobilize the funding necessary to maintain U.S.
leadership and back up our calls for action? Can public opinion be
swayed to support greater foreign aid investments, and longer [larger]
contributions to UN specialized agencies, on the basis of G–2000 argu-
ments? Or, should funding channels other than AID be suggested to
avoid association with a “give-away” image?

(d) How can we effectively engage the U.S. private sector in the
follow-up? We and CEQ are putting this question directly to leaders of
the business community, academia and private foundations.

349.

Paper Prepared in the International Development
Cooperation Administration
Washington, October 17, 1980
INTERNATIONAL POPULATION/HEALTH INITIATIVE
Rationale
Even allowing for continued moderate slowdown in the rate of
growth, world population is almost certain to exceed 6 billion by the
year 2000, an increase in only two decades equal to the entire world
population as recently as 1930. Ninety percent of this growth will occur
in low income countries. With present trends, the two-child family will
not occur world-wide until the year 2020, and the world’s population
billion.

The demographic situation is serious but not hopeless. Worldwide
population growth rates are no longer rising. Growing evidence from
disparate cultures and economies demonstrates that fertility can be re-
duced by determined efforts to provide family planning services and
information—in conjunction with efforts to build community and
family support for family planning, particularly by
improving
women’s opportunities outside the home. Over the past decade, under-
standing of the seriousness of the population problem has grown, and
many countries have begun to address population issues. Indeed, for
the first time LDC government requests for population assistance sub-
stantially exceed the existing contributions of population donors. The
U.N. World Population Conference in 1974, Conference on Primary
Health Care in 1978, and International Women’s Conferences in 1975
and 1980 all called for provision of family planning services and infor-
mation to all countries. The International Development Strategy also
does.

Providing family planning also improves maternal and child
health. The principal threats to health in developing countries are mal-
nutrition and common infections, particularly among young children.
These threats are exacerbated by close birth spacing. Maternal mor-
tality (and abortion) is also very high.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
The Initiative
Given (1) urgent population pressure and related health needs in
many areas, (2) growing LDC requests for assistance; and, (3) the
ability of the major population donors to mount effective and comple-
mentary population programs that respond to country-specific oppor-
tunities, IDCA and State propose an initiative to:
a. extend high-quality family planning and closely related ma-
ternal and child health services as a first step toward primary health
care;
b. promote programs that build motivation for small families, par-
ticularly by improving opportunities for women and by giving recogni-
tion to couples that limit their family size;
c. strengthen political will by clarifying the extent and seriousness
of the population problem at both leadership and community levels.
The initiative aims primarily at doubling family-planning practice
in the developing countries by 1985, as a step toward lower birth rates.
(It also aims at improving basic primary health care, particularly in ma-
ternal and child health.) It estimates roughly the expenditures on “pop-
ulation” needed to do this—assuming other development policies are
conducive to smaller families and assuming adequate expenditures for
other aspects of health.

At present, total spending for population is approximately $1 bil-
lion, of which $450 million comes from international donors. Of this,
the United States now provides about half. At this level of spending, we
use some form of contraception, and that birth rates in the developing
countries (outside China) are roughly 35 per 1,000. To reduce birth
norm) contraceptive user rates must at least double; roughly 1/2 of
couples must practice family planning. This will only happen when
most couples have access to safe, effective and affordable family plan-
ning services, and when they are motivated to use them. A doubling of
population resources is the minimum necessary to achieve these impor-
tant targets. This would imply about $2 billion in total spending (real
dollars), including at least $1 billion in assistance. (Doubling resources
may not quite achieve a doubling of practice, if programs hit dimin-
ishing returns. We have already reached some of the “easier” acceptors.
But programs get more effective as they go along. On balance, the mar-
ginal cost per acceptor may rise, but modestly.)

This initiative, which accords with the recent Declaration of the In-
ternational Parliamentarians’ Conference sponsored by UNFPA and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
with a resolution just passed at the U.N. Mid-Decade Conference on
Women, would require a concerted international effort supported by
UNFPA, WHO, UNICEF, the World Bank, country donors, and the
concerned LDCs.

Other donors interested in increasing population assistance may
wish to consider making or increasing contributions to the following
institutions:
—UNFPA
The United Nations Fund for Population Activities, active in over
120 countries, has a current budget of about $150 million and a substan-
tial backlog of projects needing support. It primarily funds government
of which 1,135 has been completed.
—IPPF
The International Planned Parenthood Federation, a private orga-
nization also active in many countries, has a budget of about $50 mil-
lion annually and also a substantial backlog of projects. Like other pri-
vate organizations, it specializes in innovative ways of initiating and
extending family planning services, particularly where open gov-
ernment support is not yet appropriate. (But IPPF often works with
government health programs.)
—Other private organizations such as the Population Council ac-
tive in this field.

Of course several donors, e.g., the Scandinavians, Canada, and the
UK, have bilateral programs they may wish to expand.

FYI ONLY: Strategic Program Objectives for I.D.C.A.
1. Sharply increase A.I.D.’s level of funding from about $200 mil-
lion in FY 1979–80 and continue pragmatically on a country-by-country
basis, emphasizing its strongest areas: combining supply of family
planning services with support of programs aimed at building demand
for those services. Such efforts principally include policy work particu-
larly to increase LDC national leadership commitment; training espe-
cially of outreach workers from local communities, and other methods
of community involvement; provision of commodities; management
support; and biomedical and operations or policy research which tests
practical combinations of population, health, and other development
measures affecting fertility. We will press other donors—bilateral and
multilateral—to support other fields of population assistance. On that
basis when AID proposes efforts in those other fields, it will obviously
bear a stronger burden of persuasion.
2. Within the above framework, develop and emphasize AID’s ca-
pacity for innovation and evaluation activities.
3. Infuse population concerns into all AID health activities while
maintaining AID’s health initiative focusing on primary health care.

International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
4. In other development sectors, emphasize those policies and pro-
grams that build motivation for smaller families (especially by ex-
panding women’s employment and education opportunities). This
should be a major effort of AID (required by Section 104 (d)), but it
should be pursued at the UN, the MDB’s and elsewhere.
5. Encourage the World Bank to expand its projected budget for
population faster, given the Bank’s strong public calls for more atten-
tion to population. Recognize that the Bank has demonstrated a strong
interest in population/health infrastructure. Continue to support the
Bank’s efforts to broaden the range of its population activities and to
exert more leadership in consortia and Consultative Groups on
population.
6. Support higher budgets for UNFPA, especially via other donors
(who now channel most of their population assistance through
UNFPA). Recognize that UNFPA has demonstrated a strong interest in
policy development, information, and demographic activities, a sensi-
tive issue; urge UNFPA to give greater and more effective support to a
full range of family planning activities (including family planning
services) wherever possible; encourage UNFPA to be responsive to op-
portunities in countries where other donors do not have population
programs; and encourage UNFPA to help press other UN agencies to
consider the effects of their programs on population.
7. Encourage co-financing of projects among AID, UNFPA, and the
World Bank.
8. Press the regional development banks to initiate substantial
population assistance. (IDB expects a proposal from Brazil; ADB is
interested.)
9. Encourage the NGO’s to give more attention to family planning
and to the effects on population of their other programs.
10. Continue to press for more attention to population through the
IDS, GA, Special Session, OECD, and such.
