Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 411 87. Address by President Carter1 Annapolis, Maryland, June 7, 1978 [Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks.] Today I want to discuss one of the most important aspects of that international context—the relationship between the world’s two greatest powers, the United States of America and the Soviet Union. We must realize that for a very long time our relationship with the Soviet Union will be competitive. That competition is to be constructive if we are successful. Instead it could be dangerous and politically disastrous. Then our relationship must be cooperative as well. We must avoid excessive swings in the public mood in our country—from euphoria when things are going well, to despair when they are not; from an exaggerated sense of compatibility with the Soviet Union, to open expressions of hostility. De´tente between our two countries is central to world peace. It’s important for the world, for the American public, and for you as future leaders of the Navy to understand the complex and sensitive nature. The word “de´tente” can be simplistically defined as “the easing of tension between nations.” The word is in practice however, further defined by experience, as those nations evolve new means by which they can live with each other in peace. To be stable, to be supported by the American people, and to be a basis for widening the scope of cooperation, then de´tente must be broadly defined and truly reciprocal. Both nations must exercise restraint in troubled areas and in troubled times. Both must honor meticulously those agreements which have already been reached to widen cooperation, naturally and mutually limit nuclear arms production, permit the free movement of people and the expression of ideas, and to protect human rights. 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 1052–1057. The President spoke at the Naval Academy commencement exercises at 10:42 a.m. in the Navy-Marine Corps Memorial Stadium. His address was broadcast live on radio and television. On the evening of June 4, the President met with Vance, Brown, Brzezinski, Jordan, Mondale, Young, and Turner to discuss the address. He recalled that they read through the individual paragraphs he had written: “There were no material changes, and we decided to put the paragraphs in the most effective order. I think it will be a good speech, tough but well-balanced.” (White House Diary, p. 199) In his diary entry for June 7, the President noted: “Reaction to the Soviet speech [at the Naval Academy] was good. It will provide a benchmark for our decisions in the future, and we’ve sent a copy of the speech to the State Department and all our embassies with the points to be emphasized. Most reporters played it tough, which is good. If it’s tough at home and the Soviets consider it mild, that’s perfect.” (Ibid.)
