774 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement have included applications to the Development Loan Fund, a request for grant military assistance, and recently a request to negotiate an air transport agreement. Haiti may believe that the best way to stimulate more urgent and sympathetic United States action is to make an open show of discontent with the present program. Despite the difficulties posed by the present situation, we believe every effort must be made to salvage the development program and restore a satisfactory working relationship. Economically, Haiti has more problems and poorer prospects than any other Western Hemisphere republic. Financially, Haiti faces another critical shortfall in foreign exchange receipts in 1961 due to rain damage to next fall’s coffee crop during the recent flowering stage. Fiscally, a serious shortfall in government revenues will accompany reduced coffee exports next winter and spring. Politically, the Duvalier administration would be severely strained by a reduction in United States assistance. From the United States point of view continued economic progress and political stability in Haiti are of special importance at this time due to mounting political tension else where in the Caribbean. In order to probe the Haitian Government’s attitude more deeply and determine the outlook for carrying on an effective assistance program, we plan to send a special mission to Port-­au-Prince about June 2 to consult with Ambassador Drew and to hold frank discussions with President Duvalier on the development program—­its objectives, problems, and ways and means of enhancing its effectiveness. Ambassador Harry R. Turkel3 will head the special mission, accompanied by Mr. Rollin S. Atwood, Regional Director for Latin American Operations of the International Cooperation Administration.4 Recommendation: That you sign the attached memorandum to the President recommending that he send a letter to President Duvalier concerning the forthcoming visit of a special mission to consult on the cooperative development program in Haiti.5 3 Turkel was the United States representative on the Inter-American Economic and Social Council of the Organization of American States, with the personal rank of ambassador. 4 Edmund Hutchinson of the Development Loan Fund also accompanied the mission. 5 Turkel, Atwood, Hutchinson, and Drew participated in conversations with President Duvalier on June 3 and 4. Eisenhower’s letter, which introduced Ambassador Turkel and requested President Duvalier’s cooperation in frank discussion, was delivered at the June 3 meeting. As a result of these discussions, on June 7 Rollin Atwood and Haitian Secretary of State Gerald Philippeaux signed an agreement providing for the resumption of work on the Poté Colé project and joint administration of personnel matters. The Embassy at Port-­au-Prince transmitted the text of the agreement to the Department of State in telegram 294, June 8. (738.5–MSP/6–860)
