1204  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
elections would be convened in November or December of this year, 
or in January or February of 1959. He thought it likely that if elections 
were held in 1958, the elected government might be installed in office 
on January 23, 1959, the one-­year anniversary of the revolution which 
ousted the Perez Jimenez Government, instead of on April 19, the tradi-
tional date in Venezuela for presidential inaugurations. He considered 
it important, as a means of insuring stability and continuity, that the 
new government take office as soon as possible after the elections. In 
reply to a question from Mr. Bartch, he stated that he had forgotten to 
inquire last week in Caracas whether the date for the elections would 
be announced on May 23.
Mentioning the incidents that had occurred during the Vice 
President’s visit to Venezuela on May 13 and 14, Dr. Santaella empha-
sized that they had taken place in a politically effervescent atmosphere 
resulting from ten years of repressive dictatorship. He recognized that 
freedom implies responsibility if complete chaos is to be avoided, and 
thought it imperative that such responsibility be developed. At the same 
time, however, the Ambassador and the leaders of the political parties 
were opposed to outlawing the Communist Party; he felt Communist 
activities would be best held in check by other means. The Government 
had made a number of arrests as a result of the violence that occurred 
during the Vice President’s visit, and had launched an investigation 
of the activities of supporters of Perez Jimenez. Ambassador Santaella 
expressed great admiration for the Vice President and Mrs. Nixon and 
the manner in which they had conducted themselves in Caracas. Not 
only had the Vice President exhibited real courage, he had demon-
strated inner qualities of greatness; he had calmly and objectively 
appraised the situation, revealing a wisdom of judgment and a depth 
of understanding found only in great men.
Ambassador Santaella characterized the anti-American demon-
strations that took place during the Vice President’s visit as the work 
of a very small minority, not at all representative of the sentiments of 
the Venezuelan people, whom he described as being unusually friendly 
to the United States. He said relations between our two countries 
remained very good, despite the incidents.
Dr. Santaella asked Mr. Rubottom’s opinion on the developments 
that might be expected in Washington as a result of the Vice President’s 
visit to South America. Mr. Rubottom told him that he was an eternal 
optimist; he was gratified by indications that Congressional inquiries 
into our policies might be constructive rather than in the nature of a 
post mortem. Mr. Rubottom stated that it is only natural that tempo-
rary problems in our relations with Latin America will arise from time 
to time, just as we as individuals have disagreements with our fami-
lies and neighbors. But as long as our mutual relations are based upon
