1956 781 Further repetition is necessary in present situation and you need not hesitate employ it. It is incumbent upon Chinese Communists to act both on our draft proposal on renunciation of force and on implemen­ tation Agreed Announcement. In absence new move by Wang, we must continue press our strong case for immediate affirmative action by ­Chinese Communists in both fields. 2. Draw attention to frequent Communist statements last meeting which dealt with substance disagreement between US and ­Communists in Taiwan area, such as “US has used force against ­Taiwan and has attacked China,” and Communists “have full right to expel present occupation of Taiwan by US forces.” Point out all these are one-­sided Communist contentions which demonstrably false and involve the very points at issue between us. Problem at this stage is not to debate these contentions, but simply for each side to declare that it will not use force to impose its will. 3. Remind Communists that latest revision renunciation of force declaration was presented by US in effort arrive at acceptable formulation. 4. Remind Communists that we presented list detained Americans at outset of talks and that thirteen these Americans still held in ­Communist jails, despite Communist pledge September 10 take appro­ priate measures so they could return expeditiously. We did not demand or use any Chinese Communist list of Americans nor did we at any time agree to provide any list Chinese in US. Such demands are beyond scope Agreed Announcement. Latter provided that civilians both sides enti­ tled return and that individual who believed he was being obstructed might appeal to representative of third power. US has scrupulously carried out all its commitments contained in Agreed Announcement including provision for wide publicity in US. No case of individual claiming obstruction has been brought to US Government’s attention by Indian Embassy or anyone else, despite publicity given Announce­ ment. Specific US obstruction alleged by Wang regarding only one of thirty-­one Chinese named in recent Communist lists and information given this case so meager that US government unable trace or identify. Other names obviously supplied as part of propaganda effort to gloss over Communist failure carry out their part Agreed Announcement and to hide from world unpalatable fact that most Chinese in US do not wish to return Communist China. (FYI Believe position outlined above will be sufficient reply to Communist pressure for information regard­ ing Chinese in prisons and names Wang has submitted. No Chinese alien in prison has applied for repatriation and we do not wish to open up any hypothetical question in this regard. Discussion could preju­ dice release imprisoned Americans, even though latter held on political
