North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
969
nomic support (security supporting assistance) for the same country.
The bill passed by the House repeals this prohibition. A floor amend-
ment in the Senate to repeal this prohibition would avoid the likelihood
of Senate Foreign Relations Committee insistence on its retention when
the bill goes to conference. This would increase our ability to respond
to immediate economic needs without foregoing longer term develop-
ment projects. Some members are certain to oppose this amendment as
a “politicization” of aid.8
2. Contingency Fund.
Economic Assistance:
The House security assistance bill authorizes $10 million for the
Foreign Assistance Act’s economic assistance contingency fund. The
Senate bill authorizes only $2.5 million. Unless the Senate bill is
amended on the floor, a compromise in conference (probably $3 to $5
million) is likely. We would need to explore with the Congressional
leadership whether a major increase in the contingency fund (of up to
$50 million) could be achieved without incurring a reduction in some
other program. However, strong opposition to an increased contin-
gency fund can be expected, based on Congressional reluctance to pro-
vide funds without a specific intended use in mind. Those who work
most closely with the Congressional Committees believe that we would
be fortunate to achieve $10 million.9
Military Assistance:
The Foreign Assistance Act authorizes the President to draw on
Defense Department stocks for emergency military assistance needs in-
volving vital U.S. security interests. Grants up to $67.5 million may be
made in any fiscal year under this authority, subject to the same con-
straints as apply to other military assistance. However, the availability
of this authority in any year requires appropriation act language. This
latter requirement, added in 1976, has never been met because of Ap-
propriations Committee opposition and, therefore, you cannot exercise
this authority. Some members would strongly oppose a floor amend-
ment to permit the use of this authority. They would argue that it
is a form of a contingency fund and is also a possible opening for
the resumption of grant military assistance programs Congress has
terminated.10
8 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
9 Carter underlined the phrase “achieve $10 million.” He indicated his approval of
the recommendation.
10 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
