Afghanistan
467
We are talking not about a transient commitment. We value our
relations and are aware of our interest in Southwest Asia. Our position
on nuclear explosives is clear and I hope you will relay our concern
to President Zia. Movement on this is not a prerequisite for cooperation,
but our long-term relations will be substantially affected by the question
of nuclear explosives. We hope that you could promise not to test
during the administration of President Zia. Such a pledge could be
kept confidential; we would share it only with a few Congressmen. It
could, however, be a prerequisite to the granting of aid. A future
explosion by Pakistan would be a matter of deep concern to the United
States. The nuclear question, then, is no longer an insurmountable
obstacle, but it remains important. (S)
Agha Shahi thanked the President for taking time to see him, and
for reaffirming the American commitment under the 1959 Agreement.
Mr. Shahi said that no matter how difficult the situation might be, it
was always a pleasure to deal with Secretary Vance. (S)
Mr. Shahi agreed that there was a need to continue the discussion
between the two sides. He referred to an Army-Air Force-Navy team
which would meet with American counterparts to review the threat
to Pakistan and discuss its requirements.6 He pointed out that the
Pakistani requirements were large because their Western Frontier is
nearly undefended. All the troops are in the East because Indian forces
are massed along that border. (S)
Mr. Shahi said he had received fairly explicit and satisfactory reas-
surances about our security guarantee. He noted that in the past there
had been some question of the applicability of these guarantees, and
wondered if an executive agreement would be as effective as a treaty.
He said that Secretary Vance had given him the benefit of his views
and that he was glad to hear from the President that the American
commitment to the region is permanent. He stressed that if Pakistan
does face up to the Soviet threat, and once again is left high and dry by
the United States, this would pose a great danger to the very existence
of Pakistan. Pakistan is now a front-line state; its concerns are legitimate
and its demands are not exaggerated. He hoped for some possible
strengthening of the 1959 Agreement, particularly one that would be
binding on future administrations. (S)
6 A meeting on this topic between senior officials of the Pakistani military and the
Department of Defense took place earlier in the Department of State. A cable summarizing
the meeting is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX,
South Asia.
