3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
533
182.
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter1
March 19, 1979
Dear Mr. President,
I consider it necessary to write to you on the question of the situa-
tion in the Middle East. In the past I set forth more than once my con-
siderations on this matter. What makes me return once again to this
question is the situation emerging now in connection with the steps
taken by the United States to push forward a separate agreement be-
tween Israel and Egypt.
Our principled attitude to attempts to solve the Middle East
problem on the road of separate deals is known to you. We have ex-
pressed this assessment of ours both through diplomatic channels and
publicly, in particular in connection with the US-Israeli-Egyptian
meeting in Camp David last year.
So far we do not know yet all the details of the agreement being
prepared, and the fact that they are kept secret is symptomatic in itself.
But whatever these specific details might be, the main thing is already
clear.
This agreement is not designed for and cannot lead to a just and
thus a lasting peace in the Middle East. No matter what statements are
made, what explanations are given we are deeply convinced that the
prepared separate deal is advantageous only to Israel. Not only does it
fail to resolve fundamental issues underlying the Arab-Israeli conflict
but it does not even bring us closer to their solution.
I will tell you with all frankness, Mr. President: what is said in your
oral message of March 14,2 has by no means shaken that conviction of
ours, rather on the contrary.
Let us face the truth. All what is happening now means an actual
departure from a solution of the Palestinian problem. It was simply
drowned in various political manoeuvres which may appear subtle to
someone but in fact are not in any way tied—neither from political nor
from humane viewpoints—to the legitimate demands of the Arab
people of Palestine. What kind of peace is that if more than three mil-
lion people who have the inalienable right to have a roof over their
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 4,
USSR (Brezhnev Drafts/Letters), 4/77–9/80. No classification marking. Printed from an
unofficial translation. Carter’s first initial is written in the upper right-hand corner of the
letter with the request “Susan [Clough] file.”
2 The text for Carter’s March 14 statement about the Egyptian-Israeli peace negotia-
tions is in Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 432.
