720  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
DETAILED MINUTES
Harold Brown presented a summary of how the defense budget 
increases in the proposed 5 Year Defense Program (relative to the FY 
80 real spending level) are allocated among major mission areas. The 
$116B cumulative increase over these five years that results from the 
“basic” budget real rate of increase of between 4 and 4½ percent, would 
provide $34B additional dollars for Naval forces, $30B for improve-
ments to NATO, $29B for strategic forces, $16.3B for the rapid deploy-
ment force and $6.2B for intelligence. (S)
In response to questions by Dr. Brzezinski, Secretary Brown noted 
that his assessments of the effects of these defense increases assume 
that our NATO Allies will match our defense spending rates of increase 
or decrease. He also noted that he has not attempted to accelerate the 
MX program in this proposed defense plan. (S)
Gen. Jones remarked that there are few new programs in this bud-
get, outside the RDF, but that he was not looking for new starts, pre-
ferring to place emphasis on improvements in readiness. Jim McIntyre 
supported this emphasis and remarked on how infrequently programs 
are stopped once started. Several remarks were made to the effect that 
Congress tends to reduce defense budgets by making cuts in readiness 
funding rather than in acquisition, and that the effect of arbitrary cuts 
in defense spending can often only be accommodated with cuts in read-
iness related purchases. (U)
In response to questions by Secretary Brown, all agreed that the allo-
cations of increased dollars among the various mission areas seems cor-
rect, particularly given the fact that some funding counted under naval 
forces and NATO yields capabilities that are applicable to the RDF. (C)
In discussing proposed improvements to the RDF, Secretary Brown 
pointed out that at the basic budget level he proposes to begin purchase 
of commercial ships that would be loaded with Marine equipment and 
forward deployed to increase the speed of response of the RDF. He also 
noted that in the basic level, the RDF would get 20 additional KC–10 
cargo tanker aircraft and initial development of a large new interthe-
ater transport aircraft (“CX”) would be begun. Russ Murray noted that 
enough of the new RDF ships would be available to support a brigade 
by 1983, with further additions coming shortly thereafter. He also noted 
that the RDF needs aircraft carriers and asked what we might do to free 
a few of them from their current commitments. (S)
David Aaron remarked on the importance of the various RDF pro-
grams that DOD proposed to buy at the enhanced level and even at the 
basic budget levels and said that these programs would be needed even 
if the budget were to come in at or somewhat below the basic level. 
He noted that programs such as reengining the KC–135 cargo tanker
