402
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Health and Customs Agreements in order to meet U.S. narcotics con-
cerns expressed in Berlin by U.S. Customs Director Corcoran and
Assistant Secretary Falco. Goodby said that we were not really inter-
ested in a Customs Agreement but would prefer to expand our narcotics
control cooperation on the current informal basis. He also said that
health matters are normally treated by us in scientific cultural agree-
ments. When Nier pointed out that a separate agreement would be
needed to satisfy the needs of the GDR’s separate Health Ministry,
Goodby promised to look carefully at the model that would be provided
by the GDR.
8. Also raised by the GDR in a perfunctory manner were MFN,
overflight rights, military attaches, fishery quotas, an agreement on the
return of cultural objects and a GDR film week in the U.S. On MFN
and fishery quotas, both sides repeated their standard positions. We
refused to discuss attaches and told Nier to expect a negative response
to the GDR’s note on overflights. He accepted this with equanimity.
He was told that, with regard to a film week, ICA has already been
in touch with the “appropriate American institution”, the American
Film Institute, which would be pleased to establish contact with the
GDR’s Cultural Attache. On the return of cultural objects, Nier pre-
sented us with a draft note, which would require the two sides to
return objects listed in an unattached annex and to “repatriate to each
other cultural property which may be found henceforward and which
has its permanent and rightful repository in the territory of one of the
two nations.” We promised to examine this proposal carefully and, in
this context, renewed our plea for the return of the Feininger paintings.
9. Nier also proposed exchanging notes agreeing to regular political
consultations at “senior levels”, stating that this could be Goodby-Nier
level. While viewing this in a dim light, we agreed to examine the
proposal. Without specifying individuals, Goodby proposed receiving
a GDR delegation this summer for CSCE consultations followed by a
political level U.S. trip to Berlin in the fall and a higher level CSCE
consultation in Berlin in the spring. Nier expressed general agreement.
10. With regard to CSCE, Goodby gave Nier a new list of divided
family cases and protested restrictions on journalists. Our protest, he
said, would be made public in President’s report to the CSCE
Commission.
11. Claims were only touched upon briefly, with Goodby turning
over copies of fifty cases mailed earlier by USFCSC and making a
strong pitch for settlement of the Jewish claims.
12. Nier met for ten minutes with Deputy Secretary Christopher,
with both assessing positively the resolution of the Consular Conven-
tion nationality issue. In other meetings, Assistant Secretary Derian
elaborated on human rights issues, Under Secretary Newsom did so
