Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 241 He does not propose to be an observer or arbitrator; neither do I. He likes to take initiatives; in my own area of responsibility, so do I. We have learned that we cannot mold the international environment at all precisely to our preferences, however altruistic those preferences may be. But we can still try to help create a world that accepts and respects certain fundamental rights of nations—rights such as national sovereignty, territorial integrity, and freedom from unprovoked attack. We may not have a grand design—and I certainly don’t want to propose a pentagonal model—but we can still seek a reasonably peaceful and stable international environment. If that is our goal, as I believe it is, then we must pay attention to the major issues and trends I have noted. The peaceful settlement of disputes is to our interest; it is to everyone’s interest. At the same time, we must adapt to where necessary, and control if possible, the trends which could threaten the nation’s security. A strong national defense is part, but only one part, of that process. Short-term diplomacy and longer run programs to create a more benign international environment must have equal priority. Once that is understood, the outlines of our strategy and posture should become evident. Our actions can be the more restrained, the greater our strength. The glove may be velvet, but friends and foes will find that there is— and will continue to be—a firm hand inside it. The Approach to Issues and Trends As we come to grips with current issues and provide support to our diplomacy, it is essential that we in the national security community abandon old stereotypes. Lord Keynes once claimed that: “Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. . . .” Where one issue in particular is concerned, some of us give the impression of becoming the slaves, if not to a defunct economist at least to some strategist from a bygone age. I refer to the Panama Canal. On this issue, in this day and age, it is surely unreasonable to cling to obsolete asserted rights and outmoded claimed privileges at the risk of losing everything—or of preserving our position only at a terrible cost in blood, treasure, and long-term hostility. The issue of the Panama Canal is not the sanctity of treaties or the maintenance of essential U.S. security interests; we have successfully insisted on both. Successful completion of negotiations will result in the United States and the Republic of Panama signing a new treaty binding the two parties until the year 2000. The treaty will guarantee the neutrality of the canal, the access of all U.S. ships to it in peace and war, and U.S. protection of it in collaboration with Panama.
