1955  193
152.	 Telegram 658 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 31, 1955, 2 p.m.
658. From Johnson.
Following is text “agreed announcement” which Wang now 
appears prepared accept. Believe it contains none of undesirable fea­
tures mentioned Deptel 654 and that we should be able accept it.
“The Ambassadors of the USA and the PRC have agreed to 
announce the measures which their governments have adopted with 
respect to return of civilians to their respective countries.
With respect to Chinese in the US, Ambassador U. Alexis John­
son, on behalf of the US Government, has informed Ambassador Wang 
Ping-nan that:
1. The US recognizes that Chinese in the USA who desire to return 
to the PRC are now entitled to do so and declares that it has adopted 
and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can expedi­
tiously exercise their right to return.
2. The Government of the Republic of India will be invited to assist 
the return to the PRC of those Chinese who desire to do so as follows:
A. If any Chinese in the USA believes that contrary to the declared 
policy of the USA he is encountering obstruction in departure he may 
so inform the Indian Embassy in the USA and request it to make repre­
sentations on his behalf to the US Government. If desired by the PRC 
the Indian Government may also investigate the facts in any such case.
B. If a Chinese in the US who desires to return to the PRC has dif­
ficulty in paying his return expenses, the Indian Government may ren­
der him financial assistance needed to permit his return.
3. The Government of the US will give wide publicity to the forego­
ing arrangements and the Embassy of the Republic of India in the USA 
may also do so.
With respect to Americans in the PRC, Ambassador Wang, on 
behalf of the PRC, has informed Ambassador Johnson that:
1. The PRC recognizes that Americans in the PRC who desire to 
return to the USA are now entitled to do so and declares that it has 
adopted and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can 
expeditiously exercise their right to return.
2. The Government of the UK will be invited to assist in the return 
to the US of those Americans who desire to do so as follows:
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–3155. Confidential; Niact.
