should be taken up, mutually discussed, and settled. The present situation, from the standpoint of many, is intolerable and until settled will continue to be a source of serious grievances.” Eleventh paragraph, “That the question of extraterritoriality which compels the Chinese people in his [sic] relation with the foreigners and in all of his [sic] disputes with them in which, he [sic] is the aggrieved party to submit to foreign law more or less, should speedily and without delay be mutually discussed and settled. There exists a basis of settlement which would be fair and reasonable to all parties.” Twelfth paragraph, “That the alleged grievance on the part of the Chinese people relating to the loss of sovereignty and territory in the region of the city of Shanghai is also a question which those in authority should not overlook. It is a serious one and its speedy settlement would greatly allay much of the trouble now existing.” Thirteenth paragraph, “That the grievance of the Chinese people concerning unjust treaties negotiated with selfish and perhaps dishonest officials is another question which should be carefully considered, mutually discussed and justly settled by all of the friendly nations of the Chinese people [sic].” Fourteenth paragraph, “That the foreigners in China have failed to take into account the principles of liberty and independence which they themselves have by precept and example spread abroad throughout China, concerning which the young and rising generation have been apt students.” 5. The following three recommendations conclude the report. “First. That after some of the suggestions made in my conclusions above enumerated have been put into effect that the powers and duties and responsibilities of the governing body of Shanghai be more definitely and precisely defined. Second. That considering the knowledge which the commissioner of police, Mr. Kenneth John McEuen, had concerning the excited condition of a large portion of the Chinese population within and immediately without the International Settlement, as evidenced by his daily reports signed by himself as commissioner of police from the 11th day of January last up to and including his report for the 30th day of May last, the daily report furnished by Chief Inspector Givens in his ‘summary of labor, student and Bolshevik activities and diary of events leading to the shooting incident on the Nanking Road near the Louza station on May 30 last’, considering his own admissions in his evidence adduced during the hearing in
