46
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
16.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 18, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights Proposal
As I reported in yesterday’s evening report2 the President has di-
rected that we proceed on his initiative to sign and urge the ratification
of: The International Covenant on Economic and Cultural Rights; the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the Genocide
Convention; and the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Ra-
cial Discrimination.3 Lipshutz and I agreed to meet with Pat Derian
who has been appointed Commissioner of Human Rights and Humani-
tarian Affairs at State, and Jim Fallows to discuss what should be done.
I mentioned to him that I thought that the UN might be the best pos-
sible forum for such a speech.
In the course of the past few days I have been doing some reading
and a lot of talking with different people on the subject of human
rights, and have come up with a proposal which I think merits some
consideration. In brief, it is that President Carter use this opportunity
(announcement of the four treaty actions) to make a major speech at the
United Nations.
Here are the reasons why, and some thoughts on what such a
speech might include.
—One of the problems that comes up again and again is American
hypocrisy in this area. Our protracted failure to ratify the Genocide and
Racial Discrimination Conventions and even to sign the international
covenants, has in large part prevented us from using the United Na-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: Policy Initiatives, 1/77–10/78.
Confidential.
2 The NSC Global Issues Cluster’s February 17 evening report is in the Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield
Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 2–4/77.
3 See footnotes 7 and 8, Document 4. The Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination committed signatories both to condemning racial segre-
gation and apartheid and undertaking a policy designed to eliminate racial discrimina-
tion in all forms and promote understanding of all races. On December 21, 1965, the UN
General Assembly adopted the Convention and opened it for signature. For the U.S. posi-
tion on the Convention at the time of its adoption, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968,
volume XXXIII, Organization and Management of U.S. Foreign Policy; United Nations,
Document 375.
