390
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
erans policy, pensions, the volunteer army, military challenges of the
next decade, and even SALT.
What is your advice?4
4 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote: “No—See
Zbig re my opening statement to JCS yesterday at lunch. Strength of U.S.-Regional alli-
ances—Mil/Pol/Econ interrelated. Also above theme can be included. List many indi-
vidual ideas & items & then see me—J.” In a May 23 memorandum, Fallows provided the
President with detailed suggestions from a variety of “authorities” who were contacted
in order to obtain their advice on the Annapolis address. (Carter Library, Hertzberg Do-
nated Historical Material, Speech Files, Box 5, Annapolis, June 7, 1978)
81.
Editorial Note
On May 28, 1978, reporters Bob Abernethy and Bill Monroe of
NBC News, Elizabeth Drew of The New Yorker and Carl T. Rowan of
Field Syndicate interviewed President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski on the NBC television and radio public af-
fairs program “Meet the Press.” Responding to a question as to the via-
bility of de´tente in light of recent Soviet actions and U.S. criticisms
thereof, Brzezinski asserted:
“As far as de´tente is concerned, I think it is terribly important for
all of us to understand what it is and what it is not. There is a tendency
to assume that de´tente is the equivalent of a comprehensive, indeed,
total accommodation between the United States and the Soviet Union.
That has never been the case.
“De´tente really is a process of trying to contain some of the com-
petitive aspects in the relationship, competitive aspects which I believe
still are predominant, and to widen the cooperative aspects. In that
process at one time or another either the cooperative or the competitive
aspects tend to be more predominant.
“I would say today the competitive aspects have somewhat sur-
faced and I would say categorically that this is due to the shortsighted
Soviet conduct in the course of the last 2 or so years.”
Referring to Brzezinski’s use of the word “shortsighted,” one of
the reporters asked Brzezinski if he had any reason to believe that So-
viet conduct “would cease” to be shortsighted. Brzezinski responded:
“I think that if the Soviet Union realizes that there are genuine re-
wards in accommodation and genuine costs in unilateral exploitation
of the world’s troubles, then the cooperative aspects will expand.
