3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
159
quent “downs”, during which Brezhnev on occasion has been de-
scribed as “in a daze” and out of touch with his surroundings. On other
occasions he has been very mechanical in his presentations, and ap-
peared to be heavily dependent on those around him in getting
through his audiences.
2. The reported health pattern is strongly suggestive of an aging in-
dividual whose reserve strength is essentially depleted, and who there-
fore tolerates very poorly the recurrent onslaughts of a host of medical
ailments. Occurring alone, or in a younger stronger individual, such
ailments would usually not lead to the erratic performance pattern ap-
parent in Brezhnev’s case. Ultimately, however, and as is apparently
the case with Brezhnev, even non-life threatening conditions can lead
to rather profound short-term functional incapacitation. Brezhnev
probably continues to be plagued with intermittent facial neuralgia
which may now be associated with more prolonged episodes of severe
pain requiring strong medications for control. Recent reporting also
raises the possibility that he has early pulmonary problems. These are
all in addition to his more well known and long standing problems—
most notably heart disease.
3. The prognosis associated with this view of Brezhnev’s health is
that it remains statistically unlikely that he will suffer a fatal episode
within the next year or so. His performance, however, will continue to
be as uneven—occasionally alarmingly so—as it has been this past
spring. His multiple health problems will continue to require con-
tinuous treatment. He will require considerable rest, but following ex-
tended breaks will probably appear vigorous and to be in relatively
good health. Sustained periods without a break will probably lead to a
rapid—but reversible—decline in his performance to the marginal
levels reported several times this spring. This general pattern is ex-
pected to continue, with a slow overall decline, for the next few years or
until some acute episode such as a heart attack or stroke proves fatal or
totally incapacitating.
4. Medical analysts would appreciate your observations on several
points related to recent collateral reporting: (A). Did Brezhnev show
any signs of a pulmonary problem, such as labored or deep breathing,
cough, expectoration, etc.? (B). Did he eat or drink anything during the
one hour forty minute session? (C). What time of the day was the
meeting? (D). Was there any suggestion of a tremor in Brezhnev’s
hands? Particularly, we are interested in a tremor that gives the appear-
ance of rapidly rolling a small pill between the thumb and index finger
(associated with Parkinson’s disease). (E). Brezhnev was recently re-
ported to be wearing make-up. Was any of this in evidence? Where?
Vance
