exportation of raw materials is in the general interest of all countries, and
makes for the reduction of friction between countries. Such a freedom of
exports is clearly contemplated by Articles 1 and 2 of the convention.
The same considerations apply to the reservations made at the time of the
convention, under paragraph 2 of Article 6, by Italy on the exportation of
iron ores, and by Rumania on the exportation of ores or iron, copper and
manganese. The fact that the countries in question may not be predominant
suppliers of the commodities concerned does not change the situation; once
it has been recognized that a country under the convention may reserve the
right to impose restrictions on the exportation of raw materials from its
territory, it would be difficult to prevent the major producers of the same
materials for the world’s markets from claiming the same privilege. In view
of the position taken by Italian representatives in favor of freedom of access
to raw materials at other international conferences, e. g., the Economic
Conference of 1927,25 it is possible that the Italian representatives may not
insist on this exception.
The conditions under which Rumania’s reservation regarding crude oil was
allowed to stand last November might be recalled. The subject came up as
the conference was about to end; the delegates, eager to leave for home, are
reported to have interposed no objection (with the exception of the
representative of the United States), not because the reservation seemed
warranted, but rather because a refusal of the request would re-open the
whole controversy and prolong the sessions. The Polish request for a
similar reservation was obviously encouraged by that decision. The
necessity for acting upon the Polish reservation gives logical occasion for
the re-consideration of the hasty and inconsistent decision last fall regarding
Rumanian oil.
Referring now to the reservations presented under paragraph 1 of Article 6
of the convention, whereby various Governments desire to maintain import
or export restrictions for a temporary period, it appears to the United States
Government that a good many of these reservations represent essentially
attempts to afford domestic industries economic protection by restrictions
rather than by duties, and are therefore contrary to the spirit and purpose of
the convention unless justifiable on the same grounds as led the delegates to
