Arms Control and Disarmament 1407 352. Memorandum From Bromley Smith to Gray1 Washington, August 14, 1958 SUBJECT Disarmament Working Group Meeting The Disarmament Working Group met this morning to review the State and Defense proposals for revision of the U.S. position regarding the suspension of nuclear tests, as stated in para. 8 of the first phase of disarmament. State presented a draft (copy attached). Defense presented a revi­ sion of its earlier draft (copy attached). AEC representatives did not attend because they were engaged in attempting to reach agreement on an AEC draft revision. The Defense Department has reorganized its proposal in such a way that the Working Group was unable to marry the State and Defense drafts using either brackets or parallel columns. Thus it will be neces­ sary to prepare an additional paper summarizing the policy differences between the two drafts. In summary, the major differences in the proposed revisions are as follows: a. State rejects the Defense concept of agreeing to refrain from such nuclear weapons testing as can be monitored by the agreed inspec­ tion system. State believes we should refrain from testing if we obtain agreement for the installation of an “effective international system of inspection”. b. State rejects the Defense provision (8–a–(3)) which would add as a condition to acceptance of the suspension of testing an agreement to cooperate in the design of an effective international inspection sys­ tem to monitor the cessation of the production of nuclear materials for weapons purposes, and to seek agreement on the installation and operation of such a system. State believes the Defense condition is so close to existing policy that to make an offer to suspend testing on this basis would be inadequate to meet the political situation. State would introduce the concept of arrangements for the cut-­off of production of nuclear materials for weapons purposes as one of the conditions to agreement to refrain indefinitely from nuclear tests at the termination of the 24-­month period. c. Defense has deleted from its draft the State provision which would permit the continuation, under international auspices, of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes. 1 Source: Record of the Disarmament Working Group meeting. Secret. 2 pp. Eisen­ hower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Suspension of Nuclear Testing.
