Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 393 82. Letter From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, May 29, 1978 Dear Mr. President: I would like to put before you some reflections on the current and future state of our relations with the Soviet Union, and some suggestions on how these relations might best be managed in the coming months. The matter is urgent, because I believe we face the prospect of a serious deterioration of these relations in coming months. It is extremely important, I believe, that we work through a clear set of guidelines on this issue that can be used to instruct all levels of the government and to provide a basis for explaining our policies to the American people. For our public, our allies, and the Third World, it is important to dispel any impression of uncertainty or unresolved conceptual differences. My thoughts on the subject follow: I. BACKGROUND US Opinion An intense mood of exasperation and hostility toward the Soviet Union is rapidly building up in this country. In part, the mood draws its intensity from a reaction to the complexity and difficulty of many problems in international affairs and from the aftermath of Vietnam. But there are also elements more directly related to the Soviet situation: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Outside the System File, Box 50, Chron: 5/78. Secret; Nodis. There is no indication that the President saw the version of the letter printed here. Vance sent the letter to the President under a May 29 memorandum indicating that he had prepared it prior to “the events and public statements of this weekend.” Presumably Vance is referring to both the talks he and the President had with Gromyko concerning strategic arms in Washington May 27–28 and Brzezinski’s denunciation on “Meet the Press” of Soviet behavior (see Document 81). Brzezinski later commented that Vance was “deeply upset” by the “Meet the Press” appearance and had called Brzezinski to insist that the administration had to “speak with one voice,” noting that Brzezinski’s remarks “were making it less clear who was articulating the position of the Administration.” Brzezinski continued: “I pointed out to Cy that I felt that I had spoken in keeping with the President’s position, but I knew that he was not mollified. I subsequently learned that he had written to the President and complained to him.” (Power and Principle, p. 221) In his memoirs, Vance characterized Brzezinski’s remarks as “provocative,” commenting: “Along with my most senior and experienced advisers, I was convinced that loose talk about ‘playing the China card,’ always a dangerous ploy, was a particularly risky move at a time when we were at a sensitive point in the SALT negotiations.” (Hard Choices, p. 116) The President noted that Vance had met with him on June 1 to “express his deep concern, in a very friendly way, about the relationship between him and Zbig and the fact that we had too many voices speaking on foreign policy—myself, Jody, Zbig, Andy, and him—and it was creating confusion.” (White House Diary, p. 198)
