January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1101 5. Crown Prince Fahd telephoned Special Counselor Isa Sabbagh afternoon of February 12 requesting that Ambassador tell President Carter that Saudi patience and restraint were wearing out in view of continued attacks by President Sadat and Egyptian press on members of the royal family, specifically the King and Crown Prince. In fact, one attack, by innuendo, retells the late King Faysal’s assassination in such a way as to incite, in the words of Fahd, a similar crime against the present King. 6. Article referred to in reftel therefore assumes special significance, especially that portion charging Fahd with conspiracy to depose King Khalid. Fahd’s conversation continued as follows: “His Majesty King Khalid several times every day asks me why don’t we respond in kind. Are we afraid of anything or anybody? Can’t we frankly go ahead and destroy him (Sadat) morally and informationally?” Fahd added that SAG had refrained for two reasons: first, “our own good manners, and, secondly, our friend President Carter’s constant urging and advice not to retaliate.” 7. Fahd then said he was having difficulty restraining answers which would not necessarily be given by members of the royal family. He also stated that the responses may well include attacks of an extremely personal and scandalous nature on President and Mrs. Sadat. He concluded by requesting that Ambassador inform President Carter that unless these attacks ceased, especially those involving personal attacks on the royal family, he could no longer keep “the friends of Saudi Arabia” from responding in kind, although he personally did not want members of the royal family to “come down to the gutter of recrimination.” He concluded with the Arabic phrase, translated, that (for the U.S.) “forewarned is forearmed.” 8. Ambassador’s comment: I was out of the Kingdom at the time Fahd passed this message, but I am not surprised at the continuing pressure on Fahd to allow some answer to be made to the Egyptian attacks. King Khalid has expressed, on at least one occasion, his strong personal feelings about the Egyptians. Accusations that Fahd and Abdallah have been plotting to overthrow him are bound to be disturbing to him in his present state of mind. 9. The answers which would probably appear in the Saudi press and otherwise would probably include revelations that Mrs. Sadat was involved with the Arab arms industry. (It was rumored that she held a ten percent interest therein.) Fahd, in his conversation with Sabbagh, referred to information furnished by Ashraf Marwan, the now deposed head of Arab arms. Saudi principal in this venture was Kamal Adham, now out of favor here. We are afraid to estimate the amount and extent of rumors which may well be published growing out of the Marwan- Adham departures from their respective governments under less than favorable circumstances, all reflecting unfavorably on Sadat.
