Peru territory which Ecuador in the Treaty of 1916 had recognized as
Colombian. I told him I could see no ground for charging Colombia with
violating the treaty provisions in this transaction unless there was
something in connection with the 1916 Treaty of which I was not informed.
I told him that on the face of it, it would appear to be similar to our
ownership of Alaska. Alaska had been sold to the United States by Russia78
and if the United States should now wish to sell or cede Alaska to Canada it
would appear to be a matter between the United States and Canada, and a
matter to which Russia could not object. The same would appear to apply to
the territory which Colombia had now ceded to Peru. Señor Barberis
referred back to the Treaties of 185679 and 186280 and the Protocol of 1910
between Ecuador and Peru81 and to certain minutes of negotiations
preceding the conclusion of the Treaty of 1916. I told him that it was my
understanding that the previous treaties had been superseded by the Treaty
of 1916 and that I was not informed, of course, regarding the minutes of
negotiations of the 1916 Treaty. However, the memorandum he had handed
me itself appeared to admit that Colombia had not violated any treaty
provisions and was legally entitled to conclude the Peruvian Treaty of 1922,
ceding this territory to Peru; the memorandum mentioned only a moral
obligation on Colombia.
The Chargé admitted that that was the case; that Colombia had not violated
any treaty provision but that by giving up this territory to Peru Colombia
had very seriously prejudiced Ecuador’s position vis-a-vis Peru in the
settlement of the Peruvian-Ecuadoran boundary dispute.
I told Señor Barberis that I could see the position of Ecuador in the matter
and appreciate fully their point of view, but it appeared to me, nevertheless,
that here were two different questions and that there was nothing in the
Colombian-Peruvian Treaty to prevent Ecuador from immediately
attempting to come to an agreement or understanding with Peru over their
boundary difficulties. In other words, they were two entirely separate
matters the same as the Peruvian-Colombian boundary dispute was entirely
different from the Peruvian-Chilean dispute over Tacna-Arica. The Chargé
stated that Peru and Ecuador had agreed, as I knew, in 1924 to submit to the
arbitration of the United States the points in their boundary litigation on
which they were unable to agree.82 I said that I fully understood that and
