Afghanistan
787
with the resistance now could also retard China’s effort to improve
ties with India, a major goal.
—Beijing may also believe that, on the one hand, its own resources
do not allow a larger effort, and, on the other, the insurgents are not
capable of effectively utilizing anything more than small arms anyway.
Some Chinese officials have criticized the insurgents as disorganized
and unsophisticated.
—It is conceivable China never intended to do more than it is at
present. In Beijing’s view of “labor sharing” with the West in the global
anti-Soviet struggle, China’s main effort should be in Southeast Asia.
Because of its strained military resources, geographic limitations, and,
perhaps, because of Islamabad’s failure to cooperate, China may have
decided that the task of thwarting the Soviets in Afghanistan belonged
to the West and countries of Southwest Asia. Its own frequent expres-
sions of support for the insurgents and assertions that it is rendering
aid are thus tactics meant to arouse more tangible support from
other sources.
—The Chinese have been discouraged by Pakistan’s reluctance
to assist them in aiding the insurgents. [3½ lines not declassified] The
Pakistanis, however, have recently claimed that they are willing to
cooperate with China in aiding the insurgents.
—China lacks an easy direct supply route to the insurgents. The
Chinese-Afghan border is extremely rugged and the main trail through
the region (the Wakhan Corridor) passes close to Russian border posts.
Undetected use of this route would be difficult, if not impossible, and
the trail seems ill-suited for the transport of significant amounts of arms.
Comment
On balance Beijing may have been willing initially to make a signifi-
cant effort to aid the rebels on the assumption that it would do so in
cooperation with Pakistan and the West. After signs that Pakistan and
the West did not respond as forcefully as hoped, China may have
embarked on a small scale program to support groups in the northeast,
perhaps by sending supplies through the Wakhan corridor or northern
Pakistan. Now, with some experience in aiding the insurgents, Beijing
may have concluded that the risks involved in a more ambitious pro-
gram outweigh the potential benefits.
