1978 503 108. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 18, 1978 SUBJECT Sorting out the ICBM Vulnerability Issue (U) Background Another year has gone by and we still aren’t ready to resolve the issue of how to deal with the decreasing survivability of the Minuteman force. Harold has pursued MAP—­but it hasn’t worked out. Harold therefore proposes to carry out a 90-­day final examination of MAP and the air-­mobile concept, make a decision on both the missile and its basing mode at the end of that period, and go into full-­scale development by means of funding in both the FY 80 budget and the FY 79 supplemental. OMB, on the other hand, proposes to keep both the missile and its basing mode in advanced development until the end of FY 79, make both choices then, and proceed with full-­scale development in FY 80. (S) Both proposals have serious problems—DOD’s because it will seem like a rather hasty decision, given the newness of the air-­mobile concept; OMB’s because adequate support for SALT II ratification will require a more solid commitment to solving the ICBM vulnerability problem—­before the vote gets taken. (S) As I see it, you have four basic questions to resolve— —Should you authorize full-­scale development of a new missile before a basing mode has been chosen?2 —When should the basing question be resolved?3 —If the basing modes are to be examined further, which modes deserve attention? —What should be done to bridge the early ’80s gap when MM will be highly vulnerable but our long-­term solution not yet deployed? (C) Proceeding with a Missile The virtue of making a separate missile decision now is that it would seem to demonstrate the kind of commitment to modernizing the ICBM force that is probably needed if we want to get the SALT II 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 43, Missiles: 11/78–4/79. Secret. Sent for action. The date is handwritten. 2 Carter wrote “no” in the right margin next to this point. 3 Carter wrote “spring” in the right margin next to this point.
