658
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
consist of prompt and complete Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan,
coupled with agreement by all interested parties that such a govern-
ment be installed in Kabul. (S)
The key to a settlement must be the stopping of assistance to the
rebel forces, Bessmertnykh countered. Once such assistance has ceased,
we will be able to resolve this problem quickly and satisfactorily. (S)
The problem does not arise because of outside forces, I rejoined,
but rather because of the Soviet invasion. A genuine national liberation
movement exists within Afghanistan. In fact, it is not one movement
but several, with roots in different regions within the country. Resist-
ance arose through spontaneous combustion, not outside help, and
Afghanistan was aflame before the world knew anything about it.
There were 300,000 refugees in Pakistan less than a year ago. Today
there are more than 600,000. These people left their country because
they could not support the government which existed there. It is their
determination to carry on the struggle which makes a long and bitter
war inevitable unless some means is found of installing a government
in Kabul which is to some degree responsive to their wishes. If your
aim is to establish in Kabul a government that is completely under the
thumb of Moscow, a government similar to the one that exists, for
example, in Ulan Bator, then it is difficult to foresee anything other
than great difficulty in Afghanistan itself and a downward spiral in
US-Soviet relations. And if we are to avoid confrontations, it seems to
me essential that we come to some agreement as to rules of superpower
behavior in the coming decades. We have signed several agreements
on mutual behavior, but the USSR does not seem to abide by such
agreements. (S)
The people of Mongolia are very satisfied with the government
they have. And you should know that the Soviet Union always abides
by agreements which it signs, Bessmertnykh replied. (S)
At that point I read him the following from the Agreement on the
Prevention of Nuclear War:
“The parties agree . . . to proceed from the premise that each party
will refrain from the threat or use of force against the other party,
against the allies of the other party, and against other countries in circum-
stances which may endanger international peace and security.”3
Afghanistan is far away from you, and we do not think that what
has happened there may endanger international peace and security,
Bessmertnykh replied, smiling faintly. In any case, we have to live with
each other and something will be worked out. But I do not see how
3 The U.S.-Soviet Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War was signed in
Washington on June 22, 1973. (24 UST 1478, TIAS 7654)
