Chinese proposal: “The Government of the Republic of China agrees to the
abolition of likin simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese
National Tariff Law,” and inquired with whom the Chinese Government
agreed unless with the Delegates who were sitting at the Conference. In
other words, if China was going to abolish likin and did it in her own way,
and at her own pleasure, there certainly was not any agreement about it. His
recommendation was that the subject should be set aside for discussion at a
subsequent meeting of the Committee if it was not agreeable to discuss it
then. Dr. Wang then admitted that it was not the purpose of the Chinese
Delegation to decline to discuss the question of the abolition of likin, but to
have all the Delegations recognize this problem as one of domestic concern.
Mr. Strawn agreed with Dr. Wang on this point, saying that the foreign
powers were going to furnish the wherewith to enable China to solve this
domestic problem. He considered, however, that the amount wherewith,
when and how it would be furnished, how it would be safeguarded in the
interim were subjects for discussion. Dr. Wang said that on that point there
was no disagreement, to which Mr. Strawn replied that he was glad to be so
informed. The colloquy ended by the Chairman suggesting that the question
of surtaxes be discussed, together with the ways and means necessary for
the abolition of likin, and inquired whether that was agreeable. After an
affirmative answer had been given Mr. Yoshizawa inquired whether the
question of tariff autonomy would be excluded, whereupon Dr. Wang
replied that he thought tariff autonomy had been recognized, since all the
Delegations had made their declarations. Mr. Yoshizawa said that he had
made the inquiry because a few minutes before it had been suggested that
Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the British agenda should be discussed together and
now the Chairman had said that they were going to discuss the question of
surtaxes, together with the ways and means for the abolition of likin and not
including the tariff autonomy question. Dr. Wang said that he did not mean
that and that the question of Tariff Autonomy could be further discussed if
the Delegates so desired.
At this point Colonel Peel pointed out that the British Delegation had made
a definite proposal to support the immediate imposition of the 2½% surtax
and 5% surtax on luxuries, which proposal had been supported by the
American Delegation. He said that at least two Powers, therefore, had made
a distinct promise to do what they could for China immediately and he
