1010
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tions. We need policies which are more sensitive to Allies’ energy
needs, are consistently and predictably implemented, and are neither
unilaterally derived nor based on threats of denial.
There is virtually no support for a “throw away” fuel cycle, aban-
doning the energy value of the plutonium and uranium in spent fuel.
We should recognize that regrettably R&D and pilot scale reprocessing
plants are a prudent near-term step to nations with medium or long-
term interest in reprocessing for energy purposes, and that technical
fixes we once thought to have promise do not now appear viable.
It is illusory to believe we have much leverage to force our views
on foreign nations when other supply sources are available and it is we,
not the recipients, who are seeking to alter existing terms of nuclear
trade.
IV
What leverage we do have has been undercut by i) the ambiguity
of American government policy on nuclear power as an energy option,
ii) the divisions in the country on this issue, and iii) our speaking on
non-proliferation with different voices—those of the Administration,
the NRC and the Congress. In particular, with the export licensing
function residing in the NRC, other nations lack confidence that under-
takings of the Executive Branch will be fulfilled in a timely and predict-
able manner. Our unilaterally established policy and legislative re-
quirements have generated concerns about security of supply and have
driven foreign nations to increased fuel cycle independence, further re-
ducing any residual leverage for our supply position. A policy of ex-
port restraint can succeed only if suppliers act in concert. It is not likely
that all supplies will accept our policies. Measures to enhance security
of supply are likely to be more effective in inducing nations to forego
reprocessing and enrichment technology and breeders than threats of
denial or highly restrictive conditions.
V
I recommend that we:
1. Consider proliferation problems primarily as international secu-
rity issues;
2. Center non-proliferation efforts on problem countries—those
where early explosive acquisition seems probable;
3. Increase flexibility in dealing with major Allies (EURATOM and
Japan);
4. Recognize that reprocessing will occur and
—support an international plutonium storage system,
—rely on economic factors rather than U.S. pressures to dissuade
nations from adopting thermal recycle,
—urge other suppliers to condition new nuclear supply commit-
ments on full-scope safeguards, and
