500  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
sentiment, especially as news of the prisoners’ mistreatment leaked 
out. At this juncture, the Church issued a strongly-­worded pastoral let-
ter on January 31 condemning violation of civil liberties and calling for 
release of the prisoners. Trujillo, unwilling to back down or to cross the 
Church, adopted a temporizing stance. The Church, however, remains 
adamant and has issued a second forceful pastoral letter.
The Generalissimo is thus at an impasse: any real concessions on 
his part could be regarded as a sign of weakness and encourage fur-
ther demands; yet only some degree of real political freedom will now 
remove the opposition feeling which threatens his regime. Although 
it is probably even now not too late for the self-­styled “Benefactor” to 
resolve this political tension by making a grand gesture of renuncia-
tion, his pride and stubbornly unyielding nature, typical of the dictator, 
militate against any such solution. The current impasse will thus prob-
ably continue until Trujillo’s regime suddenly shatters from the strain 
of its own inner tensions. While neither the date nor the manner of such 
collapse can be predicted, it is clear that the regime’s prospects have 
materially declined since last December, when the belief was expressed 
in a National Intelligence Estimate that Trujillo would remain in power 
through 1960.2 An increasing number of local observers claim that the 
nation will soon experience a total economic collapse. According to 
recent reports, as yet unconfirmed, members of the Trujillo family have 
made massive withdrawals (one report sets the figure at $46 million) 
from the government Reserve Bank although it is not considered likely 
that the Generalissimo himself will flee.
In typical strong-­man fashion, Trujillo has not permitted the devel-
opment of any alternative leaders. The military does have its share of 
ambitious men, but none with the reputation or personal following 
to lead a one-­man government. It will, however, remain the locus of 
power in the Dominican Republic and will be the key to success for any 
new regime—­unless the services are torn by an armed factional strug-
gle, in which case there may well be no effective government at all. The 
attitude of the military in general, or of its key leaders, is not definitely 
known. Many of the younger officers and at least some senior officers 
are reportedly sympathetic to the opposition, although the bulk of the 
military is probably loyal. However, the military will not follow Trujillo 
blindly to self-­destruction. At some time in the not-­too-­distant future, 
Trujillo’s cause may well appear lost and he could be turned out with 
his family in relatively bloodless fashion by his Generals.
The nature and viability of a successor administration are dif-
ficult to predict. Dissident sources have proposed a predominantly 
2 Reference is to SNIE 80/1–59, “The Situation in the Caribbean Through 1960,” 
December 29, 1959. See Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, American Republics, 
Document 126.
