1980 783 Harold Brown has sent us a JCS analysis that is somewhat more elaborate in its attempt to be militarily realistic (Tab C). [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified] Omitted Factors Neither static nor dynamic analyses provide a confident basis for predicting the outcome of a conflict. At best they are artificial comparisons which yield limited information about the possibilities for war outcomes. Taken alone, they could be very misleading. This caveat has much greater significance when forces on both sides are near parity than when one side has vast static advantages. As noted at the bottom of the chart at Tab B, all the military intelligence chiefs dissent from this analysis. They do so because they believe that such abstract comparisons understate U.S. weakness in C3I, civil defense, and other factors critical to conflict dynamics. Although their argument is cogent, static and dynamic comparisons have become a net assessment practice, not only in the U.S. Government but also by private defense analysts like Paul Nitze. Thus, they have become part of the basis for public perceptions and public debate. (TS/U) Soviet Programmatic Intentions The NIE judges that the Soviet purpose in this comprehensive buildup in strategic forces is to provide “a more favorable backdrop than before to the conduct of an assertive foreign policy and to the projection of Soviet power abroad.” The evidence from Soviet programs leads Stan to believe that the Soviets are striving to acquire capabilities to: —­launch crippling counter force strikes; —­survive large-­scale nuclear attack; —­be employed flexibly against a wide range of targets; —­limit damage substantially to the USSR. (TS/U) He sees growing counterforces capable weapons (improving accuracy), improving survivability, added capability for flexible employment (C3I, hardness, mobility, exercises), and strategic defense which contributes to limiting damage (civil defense, ABM research, ASW, and ASAT activities). (TS/U) Conclusion 1. The military intelligence chiefs’ dissenting viewpoint seems concerned more with who has the authority to make “net assessments” than with the actual intelligence estimate of Soviet forces. They hold that only DOD can render judgments on U.S. capabilities. (TS) 2. Both the balance and the trends reported in the NIE make it clear that we have serious problems in the early and mid-1980s. (TS/U)
