March 1952–February 1953 275 89. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, July 19, 1952, 3 p.m. 265. 1. I opened conv with Qavam this morning by congratulating him on his appt, stating that I was sure that he was accepting it for patriotic reasons since he must be aware heavy responsibilities which he was incurring. His name was familiar to American Govt and American people as Iran statesman who had always supported coop between our respective countries and I sure I speaking for them when I wished him success in accomplishment difficult tasks awaiting him. He replied he had accepted new post reluctantly. He had been Primin so many times that position had no (rpt no) attractions for him. He had accepted in hope he might be able render some services to Iran even in old age. He had always considered US as disinterested friend of Iran. In his younger days under Qajar dynasty when Iran was in difficult position, he had appealed to US for aid and US had saved country by arranging for loan of $2 million. On occasions too numerous to list US had proved to be true friend to Iran. He therefore was encouraged again to ask for US aid. He need not (rpt not) describe finan situation of country. No (rpt no) public funds available. Past due and current govt wages and salaries as well as other urgent bills against govt must be paid at once. He hoped within few months restore Iran’s credit and solvency but country must have immed foreign finan assistance if it was not (rpt not) to move into chaos. US was only country to which he cld turn. He had sent msg to me yesterday re Iran’s urgent needs and he understood that I had already telegraphed Wash. He hoped that his request for help was being recd with sympathy and that he wld have favorable answer in immed future. 2. I told Qavam I quite sure US Govt fairly well informed Iran’s finan situation and that his request for help wld be recd by US Govt with understanding and sympathy. I had no (rpt no) idea, however, whether US Govt wld be in position to extend such assistance urgently, particularly now that Congress was adjourned. First question to which US Govt must find answer was whether it had funds available without Congressional legis to use for aid this kind. Second question was whether it wld be possible in case such funds were available to extend 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.13/7–1952. Secret; Security Information. Repeated to London. Received at 11:53 a.m. Telegram 265 was transmitted subsequent to telegrams 263 and 264, but is a fuller report on Henderson’s initial meeting with Prime Minister Qavam.
