214
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Secretary Vance said the alternative was to seek sanctions at the
UN. That way it would not be just the West, but an international body.
There was the possibility of a Soviet veto.
The President could foresee calling for sanctions and unilateral
acts by our allies at the same time. Public opinion will work for us.
He noted that Sadat and Clark were ready to go an extra mile. The
others were not so sure.
Secretary Vance said that he thought it would be better to reverse
the order. We should call for Chapter Seven sanctions and ask them
to join in. Get a debate in the Security Council, especially if the World
Court’s order has been ignored.
Dr. Brzezinski said that Secretary Vance’s idea had merit. We want
to avoid a clash between Islam and the West. We want to build collective
responsibility, which we could do by calling on the UN, even if there
were a veto, which he hoped the Soviets would avoid.
The President said he did not want a six month debate which
would leave the hostages there until after Easter.
Dr. Brzezinski said we could seek Chapter Seven sanctions next
week.
Secretary Vance said he wanted to review briefly up to 20 steps
which are available to us from now on. Some we are already taking,
others would be helpful if the negotiations do not go well.
The President returned to the question of the teams and said they
should go directly.
Secretary Miller noted that there was not much time, since pressure
on the dollar was growing. The Europeans would be tough, that was
why he wanted the teams.
Dr. Brzezinski summarized that the teams would go immediately,
that Vance would go early next week,6 and that a Presidential message
would go tomorrow.
The President said the message should simply say that the teams
were coming and that Vance was coming. It should not pressure them.
Secretary Vance noted that we were completing our Security Coun-
cil action. Now we will be bringing together a number of strands which
will hopefully bring the release of the hostages.
The President wondered if we should tighten up more in the United
States to bring more pressure on Iran.
6 Cooper and Solomon visited Bonn, Zurich, and Bern December 6–7. Carswell and
Vest visited London, Rome, and Paris on the same dates. (Memorandum from Vance
to Carter, December 5; Carter Library, Plains File, Box 15) Vance traveled to London
(December 10), Paris (December 10–11), Rome (December 11–12), Bonn (December 11–
12), and Brussels (December 12–14).
