Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1119
451.
Intelligence Cable
IN 2896699A
Washington, August 7, 1979
[Source: National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency, Office of the Director, Lot 81D155, Box 9,
Treaty of Tlateloloco—1979–1980. Secret. 5 pages not declassified.]
452.
Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, August 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Canadian Heavy Water Technology to Argentina (C)
Canada’s recent decision to transfer heavy water technology to Ar-
gentina without a requirement that the Argentine reprocessing pro-
gram be deferred represents a serious defeat for the position we have
consistently taken on this question.2 The impact upon our more general
position with respect to national reprocessing plants is likely to be mag-
nified because Canada has been such a close partner with us in non-
proliferation matters. (C)
It would be extremely difficult for the Canadian Government to re-
verse this decision, but there is a fall-back position they could adopt
which would still maintain substantial control over reprocessing activ-
ities in Argentina. If Canada were to require an understanding that any
heavy water produced in Argentina following the transfer would be
presumed to be based upon Canadian technology, and that any special
nuclear material irradiated through the use of such heavy water re-
quired prior Canadian consent before reprocessing, substantial con-
trol would be maintained while permitting Argentina the option
of building its proposed facility. The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Pastor Country File, Box 1, Argentina: 8–12/79. Confidential. Copies were sent to
Schlesinger and Seignious.
2 Telegram 5842 from Buenos Aires, July 19, reported that press reports from the To-
ronto Star indicated that the Government of Canada had renewed its pledge to sell a nu-
clear reactor to Argentina as well as a heavy water plant “without additional clauses or
safeguards.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790329–0999)
