Peru 1073 Mr. Rubottom and to convey the latter’s reactions to Lima. General Van Oordt said he planned to leave for Lima on or about August 11. Mr. Rubottom congratulated the General on his important assignment. Ambassador Berckemeyer said that some time ago, through his Air Attaché, he had asked his Government to review its request for aircraft. Immediately after his conversation with Mr. Rubottom of August 4,3 he had again asked for a review of the matter, and he and his Air Attaché had just received replies – ­the latter from the Air Ministry – ­asking them to press the existing request without any reduction. The Ambassador then asked General Van Oordt to explain the matter more fully. General Van Oordt expressed the opinion that this request was not extravagant. He argued that the planes were necessary to keep the Peruvian Air Force in existence and that they were the minimum needed for defending Peru’s frontiers, not to speak of hemispheric defense. He claimed that this request conformed to the views of the U.S. Air mission to Peru. He then went into the details of the request as follows: 12 T–37’s—These jet trainers were needed to replace obsolete T-34’s which were uneconomical to maintain, and to provide necessary jet training for Peruvian pilots. General Van Oordt estimated that the planes would cost about $1.5 million. (While the General did not make this clear in his talk with Mr. Rubottom, he explained to Mr. Poole afterwards that the Peruvian Government’s request for T–34’s in its note of June 94 was incorrect and that it should have read T–37’s. He said that on his return to Lima he would see to it that Ambassador Berckemeyer received the necessary amending instructions. Thus, he said, the total cost of the Peruvian Government’s request was actually considerable higher than originally estimated. He stated that the Peruvian Government wished to purchase these T–37’s on three-­ years credit.) Eight F-86-F’s—These would be strictly replacements. The Peruvian Air Force originally had 14 F–86–F’s, of which eight had been wrecked. General Van Oordt said that these were nearly obsolete in the U.S. and hence available. He estimated the total cost at $200,000. When Mr. Rubottom asked for a clarification of the June 9 Aide Memoire which simply said “acquire” without specifying terms, General Van Oordt 3 In a memorandum of the August 4 conversation, Assistant Secretary Rubottom asked that the Peruvian Government reconsider its request for aircraft in view of Prime Minister Beltrán’s plan to reduce military expenditures. (723.5622/8–549) 4 A copy of the Peruvian Embassy is aide-­mémoire of June 9 is in file 723.5622/6–959.
