Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
175
And fifth, we are attempting, even at the risk of some friction with
our friends, to reduce the danger of nuclear proliferation and the
worldwide spread of conventional weapons.
At the recent summit, we set in motion an international effort to
determine the best ways of harnessing nuclear energy for peaceful use
while reducing the risks that its products will be diverted to the making
of explosives.
We’ve already completed a comprehensive review of our own
policy on arms transfers.5 Competition in arms sales is inimical to peace
and destructive of the economic development of the poorer countries.
We will, as a matter of national policy now in our country, seek to
reduce the annual dollar volume of arms sales, to restrict the transfer of
advanced weapons, and to reduce the extent of our coproduction ar-
rangements about weapons with foreign states. And just as important,
we are trying to get other nations, both free and otherwise, to join us in
this effort.
But all of this that I’ve described is just the beginning. It’s a begin-
ning aimed towards a clear goal: to create a wider framework of inter-
national cooperation suited to the new and rapidly changing historical
circumstances.
We will cooperate more closely with the newly influential coun-
tries in Latin America, Africa, and Asia. We need their friendship and
cooperation in a common effort as the structure of world power
changes.
More than 100 years ago, Abraham Lincoln said that our Nation
could not exist half slave and half free.6 We know a peaceful world
cannot long exist one-third rich and two-thirds hungry.
Most nations share our faith that, in the long run, expanded and
equitable trade will best help the developing countries to help them-
selves. But the immediate problems of hunger, disease, illiteracy, and
repression are here now.
5 References are to PRM/NSC–12, issued on January 26, which called for a review
of U.S. policy regarding the international transfer of conventional arms and PD/NSC–13,
“Conventional Arms Transfer Policy,” issued on May 13, which outlined the implemen-
tation of the administration’s policy of conventional arms restraint. PRM/NSC–12 is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVI, Arms Control. PD/
NSC–13 is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January
1977–August 1978, Document 33. For the President’s May 19 statement regarding PD/
NSC–13, in which he indicated that the United States would now perceive arms transfers
as an “exceptional foreign policy implement,” see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp.
931–932. See also Congress and the Nation, vol. V, 1977–1980, pp. 40–41.
6 Reference is to Lincoln’s “House Divided” speech, which he delivered in Spring-
field, Illinois in June 1858, upon accepting the Illinois Republican Party’s nomination for
the Illinois U.S. Senate seat. Lincoln subsequently lost the election to the incumbent,
Democrat Stephen Douglas.
