National Security Policy 1173 System in the Philippines. In addition, the Naval communication facil­ ity at San Miguel, Philippines, provides a circuit to inter-­connect Naval units afloat with the world-­wide communications network. (2) Planned Expansion of Southeast Asian Strategic Communications. During fiscal years 1962–64, the high-­frequency circuits which link Clark Air Force Base with the countries of Southeast Asia will be expanded to provide additional reliability and an increased traffic handling capability. This will be accomplished by the utilization of fixed-­station types of equipment in place of transportable equipment. The fixed-­stations will have increased power and transmitters with a greater circuit capacity. To provide for communications westward from Southeast Asia, the Department of Defense has under consid­ eration a request for an Asian Gateway Communications Station in Karachi which, if authorized, will furnish high capacity communi­ cations between Karachi and Bangkok. Within the Southeast Asian countries, an expanded communications circuit is planned between Bangkok and Saigon. (3) Contingency Communications. West of Hawaii, air-­transportable equipments which may be used on point-­to-­point communications cir­ cuits are located at Clark Air Force Base, in Okinawa and Japan, and in Seoul. These equipments represent a reasonable additional commu­ nications capability to augment existing circuits into Southeast Asia and will be supplemented by improved air-­transportable equipments which are under procurement for delivery during the current fiscal year. It should be understood, however, that the technical teams which are necessary for the operation and maintenance of supplementary communications must, except on a very limited basis, be provided from the continental United States. (4) Tactical Communications. The U.S. Military Services do not main­ tain in being tactical communications systems in Southeast Asia. Each Service provides tactical communications for the control and direction of Service forces within an area of tactical operations. These tactical sys­ tems consist of transportable communications equipments which are deployed into an area by tactical forces. Coordination for joint oper­ ations is the responsibility of the area commander. Tactical communi­ cations systems are, therefore, organic to military units, connect into strategic networks, and are not required prior to the movement of mil­ itary forces. (5) Actions which could be taken to improve Strategic Communications. (a) Existing strategic communications connecting into Southeast Asia, together with planned improvements, will provide a minimal capability for limited war operations. Fixed communications sys­ tems are dependent upon high frequency circuits designed essentially for teletype operation with only a comparatively few voice circuits available.
