National Security Policy  1173
System in the Philippines. In addition, the Naval communication facil­
ity at San Miguel, Philippines, provides a circuit to inter-­connect Naval 
units afloat with the world-­wide communications network.
(2) Planned Expansion of Southeast Asian Strategic Communications. 
During fiscal years 1962–64, the high-­frequency circuits which link 
Clark Air Force Base with the countries of Southeast Asia will be 
expanded to provide additional reliability and an increased traffic 
handling capability. This will be accomplished by the utilization of 
fixed-­station types of equipment in place of transportable equipment. 
The fixed-­stations will have increased power and transmitters with 
a greater circuit capacity. To provide for communications westward 
from Southeast Asia, the Department of Defense has under consid­
eration a request for an Asian Gateway Communications Station in 
Karachi which, if authorized, will furnish high capacity communi­
cations between Karachi and Bangkok. Within the Southeast Asian 
countries, an expanded communications circuit is planned between 
Bangkok and Saigon.
(3) Contingency Communications. West of Hawaii, air-­transportable 
equipments which may be used on point-­to-­point communications cir­
cuits are located at Clark Air Force Base, in Okinawa and Japan, and 
in Seoul. These equipments represent a reasonable additional commu­
nications capability to augment existing circuits into Southeast Asia 
and will be supplemented by improved air-­transportable equipments 
which are under procurement for delivery during the current fiscal 
year. It should be understood, however, that the technical teams which 
are necessary for the operation and maintenance of supplementary 
communications must, except on a very limited basis, be provided from 
the continental United States.
(4) Tactical Communications. The U.S. Military Services do not main­
tain in being tactical communications systems in Southeast Asia. Each 
Service provides tactical communications for the control and direction 
of Service forces within an area of tactical operations. These tactical sys­
tems consist of transportable communications equipments which are 
deployed into an area by tactical forces. Coordination for joint oper­
ations is the responsibility of the area commander. Tactical communi­
cations systems are, therefore, organic to military units, connect into 
strategic networks, and are not required prior to the movement of mil­
itary forces.
(5) Actions which could be taken to improve Strategic Communications.
(a) Existing strategic communications connecting into Southeast 
Asia, together with planned improvements, will provide a minimal 
capability for limited war operations. Fixed communications sys­
tems are dependent upon high frequency circuits designed essentially 
for teletype operation with only a comparatively few voice circuits 
available.
