1130
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said (to the Ambassador) that Cy Vance had done
well at the hearing.3 The problem concerns how we could have voted
for it.
Ambassador Linowitz said that that is the key point.
The President said that Cy has been very stubborn on this. He had
Zbig call him this morning, and wrote a note. In a political campaign,
you can’t go for a week before you know that you shouldn’t answer all
questions. You can get pinned down by hypothetical questions. He is
glad to see Ambassador Linowitz, and to go over where we are. He
knows that the Ambassador was a bit reluctant on the Sadat and Begin
visits. But he needs to indicate the resolve of the Administration and its
interest in the Middle East talks. There is an impression—reflected also
in the Ambassador’s talks—that we are not supporting the talks
enough. He wants to let the world know that the talks are not dead.
Austria, Portugal, Greece, and to an extent Germany are reacting as
though the talks are dying away, and they want to fill a vacuum. He
had urgent messages from Sadat, including through Khalil and to Mrs.
Carter,4 that Sadat wants to see him (the President) urgently. He talked
with Cy and asked him to sleep on it, that he (the President) had to let
Sadat come. Then he also had to see Begin. When he (the Ambassador)
is in the Middle East, he should keep in the back of his mind what the
major obstacles are. On Israel, he wants to be blunt with the Ambas-
sador: he wants to come up with a position we can take, and get ac-
cepted by himself, Sadat and the majority of Israelis and its political
leaders—probably with the exception of Begin, but preferably with
him. He needs to bring the talks to a head, probably in June. He can’t let
this thing continue through the Convention5 and the election period.
He is prepared to resolve the issues. If this can’t be done, then our posi-
tion will be clear to American Jews, to the community here, to Sadat
and others. He feels there will be a repetition of past negotiations in
leading to a showdown with Begin, who wanted to do nothing, and
was willing to let the process breakdown. Yet Begin is constrained, first
by his sense of his historical and Biblical place in Israel’s history—this is
3 On March 20, Vance appeared before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to
explain the March 1 U.S. vote on Israeli settlements. (See Document 345) In his testimony,
Vance acknowledged that the U.S. vote in favor of the resolution had been made in error
and accepted responsibility for the “failure of communications” which led to it. At the
same time, The New York Times reported, Vance “made it clear in two hours of frequently
argumentative testimony that the United States continued to regard Israeli establishment
of settlements in occupied Arab territory as illegal and an obstacle to peace.” (Terence
Smith, “Vance Rebuffs Call for Full Disavowal of U.N.’s Israel Move,” The New York
Times, March 21, 1980, p. A1)
4 Neither of the referenced messages has been found.
5 The 1980 National Convention of the Democratic Party was held at Madison
Square Garden in New York City August 11–14.
