760
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Dr. Brzezinski asked if the Arab League measures would not have
the effect of economic sanctions. (All said no.) He noted that we are
launching ourselves on an effort to help the area. We intend to help
Egypt militarily, and other damage to Egypt would hurt us. We might
as well be frank about it.
Prince Saud said that the measures stipulated by the Arab League
are not to be taken as punitive measures against Egypt or the United
States.
Mr. Christopher said that he was heartened by the indication that
Saudi Arabia will not take unilateral direct steps to interfere with the
peace process. We are anxious to report that to President Carter. In the
candor of our friendship it should be pointed out that the U.S. people
and the Congress may not distinguish so clearly between acts taken
unilaterally or collectively with Arab friends. If you do make efforts to
persuade others, it would be desirable if this became known, even if it
fails, and I hope that it does not. We have asked Congress to do some
extraordinary things in our mutual interest so it is very desirable to be
able to explain to Congress the acts that have been taken.
Crown Prince Fahd said that the point was well taken with regard to
your attempts to bring Congress around. He hoped that you would
bear with me when he says that in this part of the world we know best
how to make friends. Some things are better done quietly.
Dr. Brzezinski said we are not asking you that, and not giving you
advice on how to conduct your relations. We wonder what is behind
the words used by Prince Saud. We do not want to surprise you and we
do not want to be surprised by you. We understand the Foreign Min-
ister says that collective actions will not prevent Saudi cooperation.
This is really important to us. We are going to the Congress to ask
money for Egypt, to undertake measures to enhance security for the re-
gion as a whole to promote moderation, and to prevent the Soviets
from gaining a position. So we need to know what you will be doing.
Prince Saud said the measures to be taken would consist of three
categories. (The interpretation of what might be harmful to the bilateral
relationship between Egypt and Saudi Arabia would depend on the na-
ture of those relations.) These actions will stem directly from the Arab
League and the Mutual Defense Pact. In the event the Egyptians sign a
treaty, the automatic results or the measures to be taken will be based
on the regulations and charter of the Arab League: First, suspension of
membership in the Arab League; second, moving the headquarters
from Cairo elsewhere; and, thirdly, to apply Arab boycott regulations
to Egyptian companies or institutions dealing with Israel. This means
changing the relationship not only between Egypt and Saudi Arabia
but between all the members of the Arab League. They will change the
responsibility of Egypt to the Arab League and vice versa. It is some-
