548
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
stani problems, etc.4 The Soviets may have seen this array of problems
and decided that this was the moment to act, but we must be aware
of the objective consequences of their actions. What the Saudis did in
Islamabad is of historic significance. It is the first time that a group of
nations has confronted the Soviets apart from the United States. The
Islamic states represent a greater challenge to the Soviets than the
United States. You represent a revitalized religious renaissance which
is on the move. There are sixty million Moslems in the Soviet Union
who are increasingly aware of their identity and who are experiencing
an intense feeling of Moslem identity. This makes the Soviets fearful.
Prince Saud said that’s true. In the region there is a feeling that the
Soviets did not act due to reasons of self-defense. These were offensive
intentions, not defensive. They are going to try to consolidate Soviet
power and gain back lost ground. The timing was determined by their
need to capitalize on the present situation. He noted that in Lebanon
we may have reason to expect some sort of conflict perhaps like 1967.
The Soviet military posture in the Middle East is not an attempt to
resolve the Israeli problem but to bring contradictions between United
States and the Arab world more to the front. The regional nations see
the Soviet aims; even Iran does, though not the students. The regional
states want to oppose the Soviets despite the immense dangers, such
as Pakistan. It was not an easy decision to help Afghanistan especially
since they were not sure of the backing they would have from the
United States and others. They took the decision since they are aware
that they are next. However, this situation should not be viewed as a
crisis rather it is something people in this region live with every day.
Dr. Brzezinski wondered if that same reasoning applied to Iraq
and Algeria.
Prince Saud said yes. They see the Soviets as aggressive and imperi-
alistic. Public opinion and government opinion in the region all oppose
the Soviet tendency to take what they want by force. The regional
states will do what is necessary and they are confident that the US will
help. They need to understand how the US will do it.
Mr. Christopher wondered what his views were on the results in
Pakistan. On the favorable side, Mr. Christopher thought that recent
talks were successful in standing up to Soviet aggression. However,
we had presented what we thought was a sound approach which
involved going to Congress and getting a firm commitment as well as
providing nearly half a billion dollars in assistance. We are not sure
4 The “Mecca problem” likely refers to the attack by Islamic dissidents on the Grand
Mosque in Mecca, November 20, 1979.
