Article XXI. Competency of consular officers to receive funds, etc. This
paragraph has been revised in accordance with the authority found on pages
16, 17 and 18 of Instruction 552. Note that the article as revised will read as
follows:
“A consular officer of either High Contracting Party may in
behalf of his non-resident countrymen collect and receipt for their
distributive shares derived from estates in process of probate or
accruing 
under 
the 
provisions 
of 
so-called 
Workmen’s
Compensation Laws or other like statutes, for transmission
through channels prescribed by his Government to the proper
distributees.”
Article XXII. Exemptions from duty on importations of consular supplies
and belongings of consuls. This article has been revised in accordance with
the authority accorded on page 18 of Instruction 552. The Austrian
negotiators discussed the possibility of having this article correspond with
the language found in Article XXVII of the treaty with Germany and
Article XXII of the treaty with Hungary. The Department of Finance,
however, preferred the more restricted phraseology which corresponds with
Austrian municipal law and practice.
Article XXIII. Definition of territories and nationals. This article has been
amended in accordance with the Department’s suggestion on page 21 of
Instruction 552.
Article XXIV. Treaty of August 24, 1921, establishing friendly relations. The
Austrian negotiators desire to incorporate the language “or to Austria or its
nationals” as authorized on page 21 of Instruction 552.
Article XXV. Duration and termination of treaty. This article has been
altered in conformity with the revision on page 23 of Instruction 552,
except that it is provided that eight years is substituted for ten years. The
reason for this is that while the Austrian Government does not oppose long-
term treaties, it has so far committed itself to no corresponding treaty
beyond the beginning of 1935. The Anglo-Austrian treaty of May 22, 1924,
mentioned on page 3 of Instruction 566 may terminate, in accordance with
its terms, in February, 1935. The Government may desire a general revision
