780 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI of cooperation with the UK. This is more serious, it would confront us with a choice that is not a choice for us—­breaking a major relationship with a major ally. Others would ask themselves, if we would do that to our English cousins, who wouldn’t we do it to. Karpov: The problem here is that Nazarkin did not fully appreciate the domestic political dimensions to the problem. When people in Moscow got into it and heard it, the reaction was that this was indefensible in front of the Supreme Soviet. Bartholomew: You know this is not a real problem. You know Great Britain will not be turned into a nuclear superpower now or in the future. We have gone further than ever before. You must decide whether to turn something not a problem into a Soviet position that will leave us no choice and no START. Karpov: The view in Moscow is you can’t have your cake and eat it too. Bartholomew: We are not talking about doing that. There is a thin slice that concerns our existing pattern of cooperation with the UK. This is not negotiable. I must make sure there is no confusion about our seriousness on this one. Karpov: I understand. Bartholomew: On Backfire, don’t play games and link this to other issues. (Karpov smiled) Bartholomew: If you think you are offering something—­no upgrade and a number that does not include naval Backfire—­that would only make the problem worse. People will say naval SLCMs should be out. Karpov: This deals with naval aircraft, and we are willing to address them in naval negotiations. Bartholomew: Believe me, this is not the way to do it. Karpov: We can agree that we should not exceed the ceiling on the assumption that negotiations will begin on naval forces. Bartholomew: That won’t work either. No one will understand. You are dead wrong on this problem. If we are to argue about this, argue in CFE and not in START. If we could get the commitments on no intercontinental capability and 400 clean, including all Backfire, I am willing to recommend that we can settle for that, leaving the CFE issue to be fought in CFE. I want to be clear with you. I will recommend, I am not saying I will carry the day. You know how electric this issue is. There is no chance of a solution with naval aircraft out of the 400. Karpov: (nods) Backfire is not an intercontinental bomber. Bartholomew: I know that. That is not the issue. I was one of those who from the outset thought it was a medium bomber. The problem is that it has intercontinental potential. We need two assurances that
