454
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
rights in the Soviet Union, after the gestures at the beginning of the
Administration.
The Vice President: But are we strengthening the Soviet elements we
don’t like. Suslov must be arguing that Helsinki got them in a lot of
trouble and encouraged centrifugal tendencies in Eastern Europe and
in the Soviet Union. Now the U.S. is exploiting these tendencies to
weaken the Soviet Union. The Soviet reaction may be that we have to
get tough, we need leaders who will stand up to the United States.
The President: Our human rights stance aggravated the Soviets.
Some Allies think we did too much.
Page 25 of the NIE lists five goals of Soviet policy. I assume they
are still applicable today.
Brzezinski: The goal of movement into the Third World has higher
priority for the Soviet Union today.
The Vice President: The Soviets wish they had never signed Helsinki
but they are stuck with it. It is now a major factor in relations between
the Soviets and Eastern Europe as well as the West. We have to stand
on our position on the Helsinki accords. But some of the things we have
to say do strengthen the hard liners. It is a tricky road to walk. We have
to stand behind our position.
Warnke: This is partly the price the Soviets had to pay to get the rec-
ognition of the European status quo at Helsinki.
Brzezinski: It is a mistake to punish the Soviets for their actions on
human rights and not for their actions in the Third World. Unfortu-
nately, this is the impression that was conveyed by the efforts sur-
rounding Shcharanskiy, etc.6 The prevailing impression is that we are
penalizing the Soviets for how they conducted their internal affairs
rather than for their international behavior where we are on much
stronger ground.
The President: I don’t disagree. But both are part of the successful
arousing of world public opinion against the Soviets, both speaking out
on human rights and my statements on Africa. I feel that as a result
the Soviets have lost esteem in the non-aligned movement and in the
Western world. I remember when we used to be on the defensive on
human rights. We were the target and the Soviets were the great pro-
tector of human rights. We were seen as aggressors because of Viet-
nam. Now the Soviets have the onus of being intruders, especially in
Africa with the Cubans. We have done part of the job and have had a
net gain on this.
I sense in this meeting a special concern with the rate of the Soviet
military buildup and our response. But we stand well everywhere else.
6 See footnote 5, Document 91.
