1980  761
—The continuing success of the TRIDENT warhead production 
line, coupled with DOD’s decision to keep a seventeenth POSEIDON 
boat on-­line during the 1980s, will permit earlier retirement of POLARIS 
warheads than was anticipated last year. (S/RD)
—Production, technical or fiscal problems have caused some 
delays in modernizing the MINUTEMAN III warheads, as well as cer-
tain strategic and tactical bombs, tactical missile warheads, and artil-
lery shells, but the delays do not appear excessive and the “get well” 
schedules seem adequate. (S/RD)
—[3 lines not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified]
For the extended period FY 1983–87, however, there are some fairly 
substantial changes over last year’s projection. [4 lines not declassified]
—DOD and DOE display a sizeable number of older strategic and 
tactical bombs in the Stockpile after their modernized replacements 
appear. (C)
—New, approved warheads begin to appear in the inventory, 
including MX, ALCM, GLCM, and PERSHING II. (S/RD)
—New systems that have not been approved also appear, includ-
ing SLCM, HARPOON, the new 155mm artillery projectile, and the 
Navy’s Standard Missile II. (S/RD)
Ordinarily, we would pay scant attention to the out-­year projec-
tions for FY 1983–87 since: (1) they are provided for information only; 
and (2) they are unconstrained, and, therefore, probably inflated. How-
ever, this year for the first time the out-­year projections have had near-­
term impacts: DOE sought FY 1981 funding to begin reactivating the 
N-­reactor/PUREX plutonium production facility because they felt they 
would not have enough special nuclear materials (SNM) to build all the 
weapons in the out-­year projections. OMB turned down DOE’s initial 
funding request, and, although DOD lent its support to the request, 
DOE did not appeal the OMB decision. However, since the issue was 
raised, it will undoubtedly be a subject of debate during the forthcom-
ing authorization hearings. (The agreed interagency position on this 
matter is that we have sufficient SNM for the next five years, that pro-
jections beyond five years are difficult to make, but the Administra-
tion has long-­term SNM requirements under review and will act if and 
when necessary.) (S/RD)
The lack of coordination between DOD and DOE on the SNM issue 
and the fact that the White House was not drawn into the matter until 
after the FY 1981 Budget was finalized, are the latest manifestations of 
the rather serious communications problem that exists between DOD 
and DOE on nuclear-­related programs. We have held informal discus-
sions with DOD, DOE, JCS, OSTP and OMB in an effort to find ways to
