Chapter 5, May–June 1990 701 counting throwweight. He then proposed drawing attention to the issue during the next meeting with Undersecretary Bartholomew and Karpov. Burt expressed U.S. concern about the danger of undercounting potential throwweight. He opined that the Soviet approach did not take into account the testing of future missiles with less that the maximum potential payload. Nazarkin said the sides had basic differences on the issue, and the issue was very complicated technically. It would therefore be worthless to discuss the issue further in this forum. Burt noted that the issue was not just technical; it was conceptual—­whether or not to deal with potential rather than actual capabilities. Nazarkin concluded that he did not see any possibility for resolving the issue at that time. He then mentioned in passing that the Soviets were still considering U.S. proposals on PPCM, Backfire, and heavy ICBM testing, but that the subgroup could usefully do work on the draft statement on follow-­on negotiations. Soviet Inspection of U.S. Heavy Bomber — Nazarkin then raised a subject which he said had only emerged that day, the Soviet inspection of the U.S. heavy bomber at Grand Forks. Nazarkin asserted that Soviet experts conducting the inspection had expressed dissatisfation that they had not been given possibilities comparable to U.S. inspectors examining a Soviet heavy bomber. Specifically, the B1–B bomber was not shown with a full complement of weapons as the TU–95 had been. The United States had not given an adequate explanation of possible locations of ALCM pylons on the forward edge of the wings for over 24 ALCMs. Moreover, U.S. photos of the aircraft and agreed procedures did not allow adequate understanding of internal mounting procedures. Nazarkin said the Soviet side would like to discuss the issue in Geneva in more detail. Gen-Maj Peresypkin added that, while the operational B1–B shown was not officially equipped for ALCMs, Soviet experts determined it capable of carrying ALCMs externally without modification, and internally with only minor modification in the field. Burt said he understood what the Soviets had said; it would have to be examined in Geneva. — Peresypkin then provided an acknowledgment that the U.S. side had done what had been promised. Nonetheless, he explained that the visit did not remove Soviet suspicions that B1–B’s not equipped with nuclear ALCMs would not have adequate distinguishing features to show that they could not be so equipped. When Col Wheeler challenged Peresypkin’s complaint about the adequacy of U.S. photographs, Peresypkin responded that it was impossible to be fully confident of anything on the basis of photography; this was why experts on-­site were necessary.
