893.00/5945: Telegram
[Document 574]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 12, 1925—4 p.m.
[Received January 13—6:15 p.m.]
15. My 1, January 2, 3 p.m., paragraphs 8 and 9.39
1. According to telegraphic abstracts published January 8th in Peking
newspapers the North China Daily News Shanghai conservative, richest and
most influential foreign newspaper in China and best served with
correspondence from missionaries and others throughout the provinces,
published prominently January 7th an article declaring that a serious wave of
antiforeign and anti-Christian feeling is sweeping across China. The writer
attributes the causes to the failure of the present rulers who are attempting to
deflect the popular wrath from themselves to the foreigners, also to the large
growth of Christianity recently and the Bolshevist poison. In an editorial on
the subject the editor says that many men not given to asserting express the
opinion that an explosion is inevitable shortly and that the present
propaganda is part of a widespread movement working for general
repudiation of the treaties.
2. I telegraphed consul general, Shanghai, January 8th to convene group of
representative missionaries and educators and get their opinion on these
alarmist articles and also to consult heads of American concerns doing
extensive business throughout China and telegraph me the result.
3. In reply received January 11th consul general states that none of our
businessmen “have received any intimations from interior representatives of
anti-Christian move” but that—
“Missionaries and educators have received reports of anti-Christian
move from interior correspondents but the consensus of opinion at
present is that the move is but slightly more extensive than in 1922,
that it is as well organized but not so intelligently directed, that the
move is a natural sequence of the Chinese educators’ challenge of
mission education and that thus rivalry will likely continue over a
long period. It has elements that may cause’ antiforeign propaganda
