Comprehensive Test Ban
569
231.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Seignious) to Secretary of State
Vance, Secretary of Defense Brown, Secretary of Energy
Schlesinger, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Jones), and the Director of Central Intelligence (Turner)1
Washington, May 8, 1979
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Test Ban: The Review Conference Issue
Last round we proposed that the multilateral review conference
“consider the question of whether there should be future treaty ar-
rangements, taking into account all relevant factors.” However, the So-
viets continued to argue for a formula that referred to the possibility of
extension and that cited testing by non-parties (i.e., China and France)
as a factor affecting extension.
We must, of course, fully protect our option to resume testing after
three years if required for national security. In my view this option is
already well protected: the treaty will end automatically after three
years; we will have a veto over any review conference decision on fu-
ture restraints; the Senate will have to approve any follow-on treaty;
and we will make it clear to the Congress and American people that we
will resume testing if required for our security.
The problem, I believe, is that we have tried to use the review con-
ference provision as still another means of protecting our options. We
have chosen general terms like “future treaty arrangements” that were
designed to reflect the broad range of options we will want to choose
from in determining, within our own government, what should follow
after three years. However, I believe we have lost sight of the fact that
the review conference provision deals not with internal USG options
but with the role of a multilateral conference. I feel that role should be
very limited.
Clearly, it is not in our interest for the conference (and therefore a
large number of non-nuclear and non-aligned countries) to get in-
volved in decisions that vitally affect U.S. security—such as whether
the CTB will be followed by a threshold ban. Presumably, we would
not even want a multilateral threshold treaty, which would tend to legit-
imize low-yield testing by all parties. The most practical way of pur-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 153,
Folder 4, JEC IF and IFG 7901686–7903516. Secret. Copies were sent to Brzezinski and
Ambassador Herbert York.
