1350 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement of West included in academy report. Furthermore UN imprint of new study will give it world-­wide attention and sanction, directing official opinion more strongly to problem than before. 4. Examples of material included in report which we think may cause public reaction follow. We are afraid this material will be taken out of context and used without qualifications included in report. It may therefore be given great emphasis by press or, for political reasons, by other countries: A. Rice eaters (e.g. Asians) may get five times as great a “marrow dose” of radiation than milk drinkers (e.g. Americans and British). B. Children, foetuses and embryos are probably particularly sus­ ceptible to radiation and especially to radiation-­produced leukemia and bone tumor. C. Increased radiation may negatively affect intelligence level and life span. D. Even smallest amounts of radiation are liable to cause deleteri­ ous genetic, and perhaps also somatic effects. E. Because of delay with which somatic and genetic effects may appear, full extent of damage is not immediately apparent. F. Even slow rise in environmental radiation could eventually cause appreciable damage to large populations before damage could be identified as due to radiation. G. Continued tests could result in 2,000–30,000 cases of leukemia, 6,000–170,000 bone tumors and 1,000–120,000 major genetic defects per year under most disadvantageous assumptions made in report (on basis tentative figures in current draft). 5. We understand (Deptel 789) Dept feels Belgian draft para for conclusion (para 54, previously 45) best obtainable under circum­ stances in committee. We should be prepared, however, for probability that conclusion by saying “cessation of contamination of environment by explosion of nuclear weapons (is one of steps that would) act to ben­ efit of human health” will be regarded in and outside UN as calling for test suspension for medical and health reasons. 6. While understand we would be in position to say we were devel­ oping bombs which would not contaminate environment and that com­ mittee recognized factors other than health were relevant to decision, net effect undoubtedly be to increase pressures for test suspension. Nor do we think argument that some radiation danger is acceptable cost for Western defense likely make much progress against emotionalism on this issue, especially as we are regarded as more advanced in atomic field and because most military benefits necessarily not revealed to public. Similar comment would apply to argument pointing out ten­ tative and highly uncertain nature of conclusions in report, to which answer would be any error must be on safe side.
