World Hunger and Food Policy
757
jected for the next decade. These policies include the Generalized
System of Preferences (GSP), and the current MTN negotiations,9
aimed at reducing trade barriers generally and in particular for
products of importance to LDC’s. At the MTN, the United States will
continue to press for the multilateral reduction of tariffs and non-tariff
barriers—including agricultural products of particular interest to de-
veloping countries. In this connection, liberalization of trade barriers
by the LDC’s themselves would not only in many cases make agricul-
tural imports cheaper and more available, but could also in some in-
stances encourage policies more favorable to agriculture. We also
should consider whether additional agricultural commodities of partic-
ular interest to developing countries could be added to our GSP offer.
AID
In this area, the Administration has determined that a substantial
increase in our Official Development Assistance is required to meet our
international commitments and to contribute more effectively to devel-
opment. The “new directions” aid effort seeks to foster economic
growth with equity, and to meet Basic Human Needs of the neediest
members of society.10 Particularly high priority is being given to in-
creasing ODA flows to agriculture. In this connection, two areas for
possible additional emphasis are the following:
Developing the knowledge and techniques for greater agricultural pro-
ductivity world-wide. Agricultural experts have been troubled for some
time at the apparent slowdown in productivity gains in agriculture and
believe there is a strong case for greater government finance of basic re-
search in this area. (This was also a conclusion of the recent World Food
and Nutrition Study.)11 Delivering the research to LDCs. This involves the
time consuming task of adapting research improvements made in the
U.S. to conditions in individual countries or regions within countries
abroad. A number of LDCs do not even have the agricultural facilities
to undertake efforts at adaption. Perhaps the 1979 Science and Tech-
nology Conference could focus on improving the delivery of agricul-
tural technology to LDC’s and facilitate its adaption there.
United Nations Efforts
US support for United Nations and other multilateral institutions
operating in the area of food and agriculture is being increased. Partic-
ular attention is being focused on the FAO in view of the key role which
this institution plays in agricultural development efforts. The U.S. also
9 See footnotes 7 and 8, Document 234.
10 See footnote 10, Document 73.
11 See Document 212.
