Romania
745
to leave the country without official permission is a crime. The govern-
ment discourages emigration through social, economic and administra-
tive penalties. Nonetheless, the number of recent immigrants from
Romania to the U.S. has increased seven fold in the past five years,
exceeding 2,700 people in FY 1980. The large majority of these cases
involved family reunification.
The Romanian Government is willing to talk about human rights
violations, both bilaterally and within the CSCE context. Romania has
allowed some visits by international bodies to discuss human rights
abuses, including Amnesty International in early 1979, a group of
U.S. religious leaders, and a Congressional study group on the situation
of the Hungarian minority. It has stalled on the visit of the International
Human Rights Law Group. Romania has participated in a Human
Rights Roundtable in Bucharest in February with U.S. officials and
private citizens and is expected to repeat this in Washington in 1981.
HA Position:
Since our 1979 demarche and several follow-up discussions
between senior U.S. and Romanian officials on the human rights situa-
tion, there has been little, if any, improvement in the areas of greatest
U.S. concern. There are still reports of the abuse of psychiatry for
political purposes. Amnesty International’s 1980 Annual Report
describes several cases of psychiatric abuse which took place in 1979.
Political prisoners continue to be subjected to hard labor, and according
to the Amnesty Annual Report, political prisoners are beaten and mis-
treated with the tacit approval of prison authorities. The Hungarian
minority is subject to regular discrimination in the society at large.
This conclusion is supported by the Congressional staff study which
visited Romania this year. In our view, despite legislation to prevent
such discrimination, the government has failed to take effective reme-
dial action. Members of Evangelical groups have been jailed, harassed
or intimidated by the authorities when they sought to proselytize out-
side of church buildings or opposed highly restrictive laws which
curtail religious freedom. Romanian immigration to the U.S. has
increased, but only after each immigrant endures a year or more of
severe social, economic and administrative penalties. Potential dissi-
dents are often removed from Romania in this manner. There has been
progress in the status of so-called Jewish economic criminals—they
have received pardons. Despite an earlier commitment to allow the
visit of a U.S. private legal group (International Human Rights Law
Group) to look into allegations of human rights violations, the Roman-
ian government refused the group entry in 1980.
Amnesty International’s just published Annual Report (1980) docu-
ments continuing serious human rights violations in Romania in partic-
