Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 151 but for more subtle inspiration and cooperative leadership on a much wider front. The international community, in addition to the traditional dilemmas of war and peace, now confronts global problems never before faced by mankind. The need thus is not for a new anti-communist coalition, nor for an updated Atlanticism, nor for a policy focused only on the new nations, and certainly not for protectionism and isolationism. Rather, it requires a broad architectural process for an unstable world organized almost entirely on the principle of national sovereignty and yet increasingly interdependent socially and economically. In that process of widening cooperation, our relationships will have to involve varying degrees of intimacy: 1. With our closest friends in the industrial world—countries which share our values, have political systems similar to ours, and which because of their wealth have a special burden of responsibility to the rest of mankind—we will seek to deepen our collaboration; 2. With the emerging states, we will seek to develop close bilateral relations in some key cases, and to widen and to institutionalize arrangements for more genuine global cooperation; 3. With states with which we compete militarily and ideologically, we will seek through appropriate arrangements to reduce the chances of war and to codify more precise rules of reciprocal restraint. II. TEN CENTRAL OBJECTIVES With that basic concept as our point of departure, and in keeping with it, it is recommended that your foreign policy seek to attain during the coming four years these central ten goals (developed more specifically in the third part of this document): 1. To engage Western Europe, Japan and other advanced democracies in closer political cooperation through the increasing institutionalization of consultative relationships, and to promote wider macro-economic coordination pointing towards a stable and open monetary and trade system. Genuine collaboration with these states is the foundation stone of U.S. policy, and we must seek to intensify and to multiply our consultative links; 2. To weave a worldwide web of bilateral, political and, where appropriate, economic cooperation with the new emerging regional “influentials”—thereby widening, in keeping with new historical circumstances, our earlier reliance on Atlanticism or, more lately, on trilateralism. These regional influentials include Venezuela, Brazil, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, Indonesia, in addition to our more traditional friends; 3. To exploit the foregoing in the development of more accommodating North-South relations, both political and economic, through
