1146  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
that this action had been required to avert a dangerous social situa-
tion and to prevent prolonged unemployment. He stated that he had 
received a visit last November from Edward G. Miller, ex-Assistant 
Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs, then representing the 
interests of the packing plants. Mr. Miller informed him confiden-
tially of a decision taken by the Swift and Armour managements to 
close the plants the following month, December 14. Mr. Miller then 
stated that this decision had been taken without the knowledge of the 
Department of State—­that the companies operated freely and made 
their own decisions without the need of consulting the Department of 
State. Dr. Batlle stated that he had inquired of Mr. Miller whether this 
was an irrevocable decision or whether it might be possible to work 
out a mutually satisfactory solution. Mr. Miller’s response was that 
the decision was irrevocable. Dr. Batlle Berres felt very strongly that 
the decision had been taken without consultation with the local repre-
sentatives of the companies concerned and without any awareness of 
its significance in Uruguay. He then told the Vice President that in his 
opinion it would be a grave error for the U.S. Government to become 
involved in this problem. He pointed out that the company itself had 
emphasized the lack of consultation with the Department of State and 
that it correspondingly had no reason to request the intervention of the 
Department of State.
The Vice President stated that the U.S. Government had no 
intention of becoming involved in this problem. What did concern 
him, however, was the unfavorable impression already created in 
the U.S. tending to jeopardize the confidence of American investors 
in Uruguay’s traditional respect for private enterprise with equity 
and justice. He stated that he had a few hours earlier received a tele-
phone call from Senator Dirksen of Illinois, protesting against the 
action taken by the Uruguayan Government. The Senator proposed 
to make a formal protest to the U.S. Government against this act of 
“expropriation”. The Vice President was also aware of the great con-
cern of the meat packing companies involved and of the discourag-
ing effect of their experience in other financial and investing circles 
in the U.S.
Dr. Batlle responded that there were many Dirksens in Uruguay—­
that those were at least six Dirksens in the Chamber of Deputies and 
at least three of them in the Senate. These Dirksens spoke Just a vehe-
mently against the U.S. policies as did our Senator Dirksen against 
Uruguayan policies. He felt that we should not pay too much attention 
to them.
The Vice President smilingly remarked that the situation in the U.S. 
was somewhat more complicated than would appear. Senator’s alti-
tude did carry a considerable amount of weight in U.S. public opinion
