American and Japanese Delegations, whose views very largely coincided, felt that the British proposals did not adequately provide for the funding of the unsecured debt of China and that they favored unduly the service of the railway loans. The plan put forward by the American Delegates contemplated that the whole Customs revenue would be treated as a unit on which the first charge would be the loans and indemnities already secured thereon. The second charge should be whatever amount or percentage of the Customs collections on imports might be agreed upon as a fund for the abolition of likin. The third charge should be the full service of the interest upon the consolidated bonds, provided that, in any case, three-fourths of the remaining revenue should be reserved for the service of the consolidated bonds. The remaining one-fourth should be reserved for constructive and administrative purposes, subject to any amount that might be needed for the service of the interest upon the consolidated bonds. The American plan also accepted the British proposal for a railway contingent fund as a first charge upon the “one-fourth” for constructive and administrative purposes, subject to the reservation for interest upon the consolidated bonds. Details of the railway contingent fund were never definitely worked out. The discussion of these provisions of the Consolidated Plan led to a sharp division of opinion with the result that no definite decision as concerns the whole plan, could be reached before the departure of Colonel Peel and Mr. Stewart for England early in May. On May 3, at a meeting of the Technical Advisers, Mr. Stewart announced that he could no longer carry on the informal conversations that had been in progress on Debts because the British Delegation, as well as the British Government itself, believed it inadvisable to join in any definite program for presentation to the Chinese Government. He stated, further, that there was no Chinese Government to which a program could be presented and that, in any event, whatever the Conference might agree upon would become public and the foreign Powers would be held rigidly to that program in future negotiations. Mr. Stewart said that the British Government did not wish to be bound by any such restrictions in future negotiations with China, This attitude on the part of the British Delegation created a situation which made it impossible to continue the negotiations. The conciliatory attitude of the American Delegation towards the British
