222 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Secretary Dulles felt that this was a very useful concept. He pointed out that some years back a Volunteer Freedom Corps had been explored but abandoned because of practical considerations. For example, where would the forces be located? However, the Indonesia situation justified a restudy of this problem. Prime Minister Macmillan had raised this question with the President during his recent visit. He had in mind recruiting forces out of the North Atlantic alliance to function some­ what like a UN Emergency Force. Macmillan was keen for the idea and wanted to pursue it further with the President. If such a force was not a US national force, it would meet the type of problem we are going to have to face. Even though Secretary Dulles feels that our massive retaliation policy may be losing credibility, the fact is that it has stopped communist aggression and now the primary threat is subversion. The communists have great assets to carry out subversion. Secretary Dulles cited their control over various informational media. He pointed out that the communists can effectively assist revolts against legitimate governments. He spoke of their capability to manip­ ulate mass emotions. He referred to their participation in the Lebanon affair. In such a situation, it would be extremely valuable if we could turn to some international force. Another aspect of this threat is inherent in the world-­wide move­ ment toward self-­government. Actually this gives promise of being in some cases merely a transfer from one form of despotism to another. Secretary Dulles cited the slow evolution of American political democracy, pointing out how in the beginning only a small percent­ age of our governmental officials were directly elected by the people. Contrary to this experience, the new countries today are trying to go directly to an advanced form of democracy. The communists are capi­ talizing on this fact. Secretary Dulles spoke of Soviet professional capabilities in agita­ tion and subversive work, and the lack of capability of the US in this respect. He spoke of communist organization in Indonesia in labor groups and among teachers. The combination of the two above-­mentioned aspects of the sub­ versive threat in Secretary Dulles’ judgment is more serious than that of overt military aggression. The USSR believes our strategic doc­ trine even if our allies don’t. Massive retaliation still has a certain life expectancy, but in the case of civil wars we don’t have a good strategic answer. Perhaps the US will have to go in more for manipulation of government structures of other countries. These questions raise serious problems calling for original thinking. Secretary McElroy suggested that a joint State-DOD study of the “volunteer” problem be undertaken. Governor Herter pointed out that
