Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
553
have shown, peace remains a fragile thing, vulnerable to assaults from
all sides.
Disturbances in Iran, the Western Indian Ocean, and Southeast
Asia, are a challenge to our determination and our leadership. They
underscore the importance of strength in our national defenses,
wisdom in our diplomacy, and steadfastness in the pursuit of arms con-
trol and peace.
I want to speak to you today about America’s role and America’s
purpose in this world of change and turbulence.
Ever since the end of the Second World War, the United States has
been the leader in moving our world closer to a stable peace and gen-
uine security. We have the world’s strongest economy; we have the
world’s strongest military forces; and we share burdens of mutual de-
fense with friends abroad whose security and prosperity are as vital to
us as to themselves.
With our strong allies, we have succeeded in preventing a global
war for more than one-third of a century—the longest period of general
peace in modern times. And as President of the United States, I am de-
termined to keep our Nation at peace.
We help to sustain a world trading and monetary system that has
brought greater prosperity to more of the world’s people than ever be-
fore in history. We are working to resolve conflicts among other nations
so that each can develop its own future in independence and peace.
And we’ve helped to maintain the conditions in which more than 100
new nations have come into being, and in which human hope—and its
fulfillment—has taken a revolutionary leap forward.
In short, we in the United States provide the bedrock of global se-
curity and economic advance in a world of unprecedented change and
conflict.
In such a world America has four fundamental security responsi-
bilities: to provide for our own Nation’s strength and safety; to stand by
our allies and our friends; to support national independence and integ-
rity of other nations; and to work diligently for peace.
We do not oppose change. Many of the political currents sweeping
the world express a desire that we share—the desire for a world in
which the legitimate aspirations of nations and individuals have a
greater chance for fulfillment.
The United States cannot control events within other nations. A
few years ago, we tried this and we failed. But we recognized as inevi-
table that the uncertainty and the turmoil that come with change can
have its darker side as well. We saw this in a senseless act of violence
last week in Afghanistan, when a brave and good man—Ambassador
