342 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII defeat on the nationalist aspirations of the other Communist countries in the Socialist Bloc. —Potentially more dangerous than a simple defeat of the DRA would have been its defeat by forces of Islamic fundamentalism, which pose a threat to the Soviets not only in ideological terms but also in geopolitical terms. The outcome of the present turmoil in Iran is far from clear, and despite the loss of U.S. influence in that country the present trends are not necessarily favorable for the Soviet Union. The move into Afghanistan could have been intended to forestall similar chaos there. A prevailing tide of Muslim fundamentalism on the Soviet Union’s southern borders could well be perceived by the Soviet leadership as providing the catalyst for arousing at some future time nationalistic aspirations in the six Soviet Central Asian republics with their population of some 50 million Muslims. —The China factor must also be considered, given Soviet paranoia about the long-term threat from China. It seems to us that Chinese fears of a Soviet encirclement strategy are overdrawn, yet the concurrent strengthening of Moscow’s position in Indochina with the fresh move into Afghanistan will no doubt strengthen Chinese concerns. Taken together with the existing Soviet military presence in Mongolia and the continued wooing of India, the makings of a “cordon sanitaire” around China are present. We would see the Afghan move, if it is directed against China, as basically defensive, but we cannot exclude the possibility that the Afghan operation is a dry run for an eventual move into Sinkiang. At the moment, however, we would place this as very low on the scale of probabilities. —A key question is whether the Soviet action will be self-contained in Afghanistan, or whether there are broader objectives. There may be only a plan to help the Afghanis seal off the border with Pakistan, to prevent use of Pak territory by rebel reinforcements. But some Pakistani officials have long feared the revival of historic Russian ambitions to move toward the Arabian Sea through Afghanistan and Pakistan. —The turmoil in Iran, as well as the crisis in U.S.-Iranian relations might even tempt the Soviets to move through Afghanistan and Iranian Baluchistan to the Straits of Hormuz, thus establishing a controlling position on access to the Persian Gulf and Iranian oil. Should Iran begin to disintegrate into autonomous regions, a Soviet move into the Kurdish areas, thereby extending Soviet Azerbaijan, might also be tempting. Again, we consider such moves improbable in the near term, but we are unable to dismiss the possibility altogether. Timing, decision-making and the leadership factor 7. We assume that the Soviet leadership, in preparing the Afghan operation, considered the overall shape of their foreign relations. We assume further that, while contingency plans may have existed earlier,
