3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
68
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Gromyko said that Soviet side viewed this quite differently. He had
been present in Helsinki when General Secretary Brezhnev and Presi-
dent Ford had a conversation. He thought Kissinger had been there
too. Brezhnev had asked President Ford who it was in the United States
that kept giving the President deliberately falsified characteristics re-
garding the Backfire. Moreover, when Kissinger had been in Moscow
in January 1976, Brezhnev had given him some data regarding this
bomber, that is official data characterizing various parameters, particu-
larly range.7 Brezhnev had at that time said that he was presenting the
data on an official basis, and that Kissinger could so refer to them in this
record. Gromyko could clearly state that the Soviet Union had no inten-
tion of using the Backfire as a strategic bomber. It certainly must have
taken a great deal of inventiveness to come up with the reaction that the
US had come up with. The Soviet side was now told that the Backfire
had in-air refueling capabilities and, therefore, could reach the territory
of the United States, although it might have to refuel more than once.
Well, in that case all American Phantoms and other planes could also
be regarded as strategic weapons. This single counter-argument alone
makes present US arguments completely untenable. And yet, the US
position has remained unchanged. Was the new Administration trying
to uphold the honor of those who had misinformed it in the first place?
If someone had given the US Government information to the effect that
the Backfire bomber was a strategic bomber, he was completely mis-
taken. The Soviet Union certainly denied that the Backfire bomber was
a strategic weapon. It had no strategic capabilities, nor did the Soviet
Union intend to give it strategic capabilities. On more than one occa-
sion the US side had been informed that the Backfire was a medium
range bomber. This fact was also well-known to the US side. The fact
that this question had been raised again was, in the Soviet view, simply
the result of the unwillingness of the United States to move forward in
the strategic arms negotiations toward a successful outcome. Repeti-
tion of incorrect facts even 100 or 1000 times would not change the situ-
ation one iota. Therefore, it was now necessary to do away with this
issue once and for all, and to remove it from the agenda. (Gromyko em-
phasized “once and for all”).
Gromyko now turned to the question of mobile missiles, in part
because Secretary Vance had raised it, and in part quite independently.
In July 1975 the Soviet side had proposed that the sides refrain from the
deployment of mobile missiles for the term of the new agreement. This
was intended to apply to mobile land-based ICBM launchers as well as
to ballistic and cruise missiles with a range of more than 600 km on all
aerial systems except heavy bombers, and on all sea-based systems ex-
7 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Document 117.
