duty by the Municipal Police and be directly responsible to the Court in the execution of their duties as judicial police. The Municipal Police shall render full and prompt assistance in such matters as may be requested of or entrusted to them by the Court, and when the Municipal Police arrest any person, he shall, within twenty-four hours, exclusive of holidays, be sent to the Court to be dealt with failing which he shall be released. 5. In all mixed civil cases where there has been a Consular Official sitting jointly with the judge, the appeal shall be made to the office of the Commissioner for Foreign Affairs, acting with the Consul concerned according to the treaties, but such cases may be turned over to the Provisional Court for retrial by a different judge, the original Consular official being also changed. In the event of a disagreement between the Commissioner for Foreign Affairs and the Consul in respect of the appeal in a case which has been retried, the judgment given at the retrial shall stand. 6. The financial affairs and such administrative work of the Court as shall be determined by a joint commission shall be entrusted to a Chief Clerk who shall be recommended by the Senior Consul and appointed by the Provincial Government on the receipt of a petition from the Court. He shall be subject to the supervision and orders of the President of the Court and shall have charge of the staff and exercise proper supervision over the Court finances. If the Chief Clerk is found to be incompetent or remiss in his duty the President of the Court may reprimand him, and if necessary remove him from office with the consent of the Senior Consul. 7. The foregoing six articles, forming the Provisional Agreement for the rendition of the Mixed Court to the Kiangsu Provincial Government shall be in force for three years, dating from the day on which the Mixed Court is handed over. Within this period the Chinese Central Government may at any time negotiate with the foreign Ministers concerned in Peking for a final settlement, which if agreed upon between the Chinese Central Government
