992  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
198.	 Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, January 29, 1991, 4–7 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
US:		
The Secretary
	
	
Dennis B. Ross (Notetaker)
USSR:	 Soviet Foreign Minister Bessmertnykh
	
	
P. Palazhenko (Notetaker)
[Omitted here is discussion not related to START.]
Baker: Should I go on to START now and outline the issues that 
need to be resolved before we can wrap it up? In summary, it seems to 
me the key issues are bombers, downloading on the SS–18 missile, new 
types, PPCM, and data denial. What’s the best way to approach this so 
that the next time we can really move to wrap these things up or at least 
reduce the issues?
Bessmertnykh: Well since these things were discussed last week, I 
think quite a job has been done in terms of identifying the unsolved 
issues. In order to reach a solution, we need to do so in the framework 
of the entire package. We’re prepared to propose the following com-
prehensive approach. We are ready at this point to agree, subject to 
your agreement on all the other elements at Houston, to settle the B–2 
bomber and here we would include a unilateral US statement that the 
US has no intention to equip the B–2 with a long-­range nuclear ALCM 
prior to flight testing the plane with a nuclear ALCM. As of the time of 
the flight testing of long-­range ALCMs on a B–2, they would then be 
subject to inspection and verification. This is consistent with Article 3, 
paragraph 6 and Article 14, paragraph 12 on types and inspection. This 
should be recorded in a mutually-­acceptable form.
Baker: That’s acceptable.
Bessmertnykh: Regarding the B–1 bomber, we are ready to accept 
the explanation for the bombers—­particularly, the explanation given 
by Reggie Bartholomew. We understand the essence of that explana-
tion as being the following. The US has no plans to make the B–1 the 
carrier of bomber long-­range nuclear ALCMs. However, if a decision to 
make it such a carrier is taken, the kind of work needed to do so would 
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Executive Secretariat, Lot 96D277, Baker 
Subject Files 1990–1994, No Folder Title. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took place in Baker’s 
office at the Department of State. The full memorandum of conversation is scheduled for 
publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet 
States: High-Level Contacts.
