40
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
have emerged as the most powerful non-Syrian force in Lebanon. At a
minimum, they are capable of defending the areas under their control
against the Muslim Leftists and Palestinians. It is clear that if the Chris-
tians cannot dominate a new Lebanon, they will try to fragment the
country along confessional lines to achieve unencumbered political
dominance in the areas—the richest in Lebanon—under their control.
This objective has brought them into direct conflict with the Syrians.
The first clash occurred at Fayadiyah in February 1978, and since then
the tempo of fighting has increased. The results have not been disap-
pointing to the Christians, and they seem more determined than ever to
thwart Syrian designs.
(C/NOFORN) For its part, Israel’s policy toward the Syrian pres-
ence in Lebanon has until recently reflected some ambivalence. In late
1975 and early 1976, Tel Aviv expressed strong opposition to Syrian in-
tervention in the Lebanese civil conflict because of the threats such a
development would pose to Israel’s security. Of particular concern
was the threat to Lebanon’s status as a Christian-dominated non-
confrontation state, and that posed by a Syrian military presence along
Israel’s northern border. The careful manner in which Syria handled its
escalating intervention in Lebanon, its tacit acknowledgement of Israeli
security concerns, US pressure on Israel not to over-react to Syrian
moves, and the transitory security benefits that the Syrian involvement
provided Israel allowed Israeli officials to come to accept a carefully
controlled Syrian presence in Lebanon. Israel at times was called upon
to control Syria’s actions, but at no time did Israel appear to be moving
to end Syrian involvement. Tel Aviv, however, never accepted that the
Syrian presence should become either permanent or dominant and, to a
very real degree, Syria is in Lebanon at Israel’s sufferance. It now ap-
pears that the Israeli Government has decided to end the Syrian adven-
ture in Lebanon.
Discussion
Syria’s Position and Options
(S/NOFORN) In the face of its difficult position in Lebanon, Da-
mascus has three basic options: withdraw from Lebanon; confront the
militias and prepare for a prolonged occupation; or temporize and
hope for favorable developments. Syria has so far pursued the third op-
tion, partly out of natural caution and partly out of fear of the repercus-
sions from exercising options one or two. The third option, however, is
beginning to prove counterproductive. No favorable developments are
on the horizon, and a series of escalating clashes, separated by tense
cease-fires of more and more limited duration, has been occurring.
Christian hardliners appear intent on provoking a Syrian military at-
tack in the belief that Israel will come to their assistance. So far, how-
