1148 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement transport of personnel, supplies, and equipment into and out of the country from which evacuation is to take place;2 and (2) In those extreme cases where conditions do not permit either the principal diplomatic or consular representative in the area con­ cerned or the appropriate military commander to obtain Presidential approval in time to initiate effective action. c. Responsibility for initiating action under the circumstances described in b–­(1) and (2) above devolves in the following order: (1) The principal U.S. diplomatic or consular representative in the country or countries concerned has primary responsibility for making the decision that immediate use of military forces and facili­ ties is necessary for evacuation or protection of U.S. citizens and for requesting assistance from the appropriate military commanders, who will respond to the extent which he considers militarily possible. Responsibility for the execution of such evacuation centered military operations rests wholly with the military commander, coordinating, [illegible in the original] with policies of the principal U.S. diplomatic or consular representative. (2) If timely communications cannot be established between the principal diplomatic or consular representative in the country con­ cerned and the appropriate military commander, the military com­ mander concerned shall assume the responsibility for undertaking the above actions. 6. In implementing the guidance outlined in 5, the Secretary of State shall have over-­all responsibility for the protection and evacuation of U.S. citizens abroad. In certain areas the Secretary of Defense shall have primary responsibility for the protection and evacuation of those U.S. citizens specified jointly by the Secretaries of State and Defense. The Secretary of Defense has supporting responsibility for the evacuation of all other U.S. citizens abroad. NOTE ON FINANCING 1. The cost of the preparation of evacuation plans and the nec­ essary support thereof, in times of peace, is absorbed by the several Departments concerned out of their regular operating budgets. 2. It is impossible, at this time, to estimate the cost of evacuation in time of emergency, because conditions under which evacuation will occur can not be foreseen. 2 As requested, attache aircraft; scheduled MATS flights and MSTS runs which fall within the above criteria. [Footnote is in the original.]
