Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III SUBJECT Analysis of the Effectiveness of United States Foreign Assistance On several occasions, including my foreign assistance message to Congress and the London Summit,2 I have pledged a more effective U.S. development assistance performance. This commitment was further reinforced at the CIEC Ministerial, for which I also approved announcement of our intention to seek from Congress substantial increases in future aid levels. I am now directing the Economic Policy Group and the National Security Council jointly to undertake a full examination of our foreign assistance programs prior to my making major budget decisions this fall. The study should address bilateral assistance including food aid, security supporting assistance, and military aid insofar as it bears on the effectiveness of our over-all assistance; and multilateral assistance provided through international financial institutions and other organizations. It should draw on work in progress, including PRM 8. New analysis and consultations with non-governmental organizations and individuals should be initiated where necessary. The study should be carried out through the Development Coordination Committee,3 chaired by Governor Gilligan, with participation by other agencies as necessary. Three broad questions should be addressed: —Within the context of our evolving North-South relationships, what should be the basic orientation of our foreign economic and military assistance over the next five years and beyond? How should they complement other ingredients of U.S. policies toward the developing countries? —What should be the relationship among the components of our assistance effort? —In the context of substantial aid increase over the next five years, what are the alternative effective program mixes? And what kind of programs are most likely to evoke the required degree of public and Congressional support? More specific issues are listed in the attachment. A final report should be ready for cabinet level review not later than September 1, 1977. Jimmy Carter
