September 1953–December 1954
767
C.
The
February
proposals
represent
Britain’s
minimum
requirements.
D. Zahedi cannot appear too eager to settle with British nor can he
fail to settle the dispute.
E. He is not likely to consider settling on terms which appear to
prevent Iran from receiving full value for its oil or which puts Iran in
Britain’s debt for a long period.
IV. Anti-Tudeh drive continuing effectively:
A. 3,000 suspect government employees reportedly discharged, ar-
rests of Tudeh total about 1,300.
B. Many arrested Tudeh will be put in a concentration camp in
Luristan province in western Iran.
C. Important Tudeh members will be given trial by military court;
rank and file will probably be released without trial after short
imprisonment.
D. Tudeh membership is disorganized by police raids, but the
party is trying to reduce cell structure from 8 to 3 to increase its
security.
E. Tudeh reportedly receiving arms smuggled in from Soviet
Union via Caspian Sea. Soviet embassy in Tehran believed printing lit-
erature for Tudeh whose presses have been destroyed.
F. Party still trying to carry on propaganda campaign including
wall slogans and tracts; also trying to form united front with other
anti-government groups such as Iran Party.
G. Despite government measures, party structures considered
intact and party making strong effort to continue functioning
underground.
H. Tudeh will be ineffective only as long as a government con-
tinues strong suppressive measures.
V. The shah is asserting leadership:
A. Reports from Tehran emphasize shah’s new-found confidence.
B. He apparently feels that he has the mandate of the people.
C. Shah is trying to establish tight control over the army.
D. This pleases the minister of defense and the chief of staff, but
has resulted in friction with Zahedi.
E. Possibility exists of more disagreements between shah and
Zahedi.
VI. Some cabinet changes are expected:
A. The cabinet, containing many old-time politicians, has aroused
criticism.
