Panama 923 the Canal Zone. The then Secretary of War William Howard Taft’s 1906 statement on titular sovereignty3 is cited and quoted, as is the reference in Mr. Merchant’s departure statement of November 24.4 The note states that since the United States recognizes Panama’s titular sovereignty over the zone it is natural and logical to fly the Panamanian flag on a regular basis in the zone. The note further states that such action would have a favorable impact in Panama and throughout the world especially in Latin America. The note closes with the reiteration that it is desirable that the local authorities of both governments in Panama reach agreement as to places and procedure for flying the Panamanian flag in the Zone. Ambassador Arias told me when he handed me the note that while he realized what our reply would be, he had to present his government’s position on flying the flag in the Canal Zone.5 3 For William Howard Taft’s statement on the theory of titular sovereignty that he made to the Senate Committee on Interoceanic Canals, see U.S. Congress Senate, Committee on Interoceanic Canals, “Hearings Related to Panama Canal,” S. Doc. 401, 59th Cong., 2d sess., 1906, vol. III, p. 2526. 4 See Document PM–25, footnote 7. 5 In a Note delivered to the Panamanian Embassy on December 10, the Department of State informed the Government of Panama that the appropriate agencies of the United States Government had taken the matter of flying the Panamanian flag on a regular basis in the territory of the Canal Zone under consideration and that the Department of State would communicate further with the Government of Panama when a decision was reached. (719.00/11–2559) PM–25. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1  Washington, November 27, 1959. SUBJECT Recent Developments in United States-Panama Relations. During the past several months our relations with Panama have been noticeably deteriorating and as a result of incidents arising from uncontrolled mob action in Panama on November 3 and 4, they have been subjected to severe strain. If demonstrations scheduled for 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.19/11–2759. Confidential. Drafted by Sharp.
