January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1307 right then, before their afternoon meeting6 with President Carter. Ali then said he had no authority to agree to resumption but would try to contact Cairo immediately. Burg wondered what he was doing in Washington if Ali could not agree to resume talks. Burg and Ali agreed to meeting again with Linowitz just before meeting the President. 6. In this second brief trilateral meeting before seeing President Carter, Ali said he could not agree to announcement of agreement to resume talks. He said he had to consult further with Cairo. Ali proposed a draft announcement which would state only that three delegations heads had talked and would consult further with their governments. 7. Meeting with the President: At Ali’s request the President met alone with him7 for a few minutes during which Ali delivered personal message from Sadat. Trilateral meeting then began. This was at first a replay of morning meeting with Linowitz, with Ali disclaiming authority to agree to resume and stating he had been unable to reach Cairo. President pressed Ali to call Sadat from White House with successful result8 you now know. Subsequently the President met alone briefly with Burg (with President out of town9 we have thus far been unable to get a read-out on his private meeting with Burg and specifically whether he raised issue of moving Prime Minister’s office to East Jerusalem). 8. Meetings July 3 at heads of delegation and other levels concentrated on text of resumption statement for that day’s press conference and on the agreed schedule of talks already reported to you by septel. While talks at heads of delegation level were amicable, though candid, mood at lower levels was cooler than usual. Israelis were incensed by al-Baz’ contacts with media, particularly his appearance on morning news show July 2, after heads of delegation had agreed there would not be such contacts until after meetings had ended. Egyptians accompanying Ali did not favor resumption and were frustrated by Sadat’s willingness to resume and U.S. request for him to do so. Amer Mousa particularly rubbed Israelis against the grain. Kubersky and Gabbai sensed 6 See Document 387. 7 See footnote 2, Document 387. 8 Following Ali’s July 2 telephone conversation with him, Sadat assented to the resumption of the talks beginning July 10. (Telegram 14786 from Cairo, July 3; National Archives, Central Foreign Policy File, D800320–0183) The following day, July 3, the Egyptian, Israeli, and U.S. delegations agreed to a tentative schedule of meetings through August 5. (Telegram 176039 to Cairo and Tel Aviv, July 4; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–2631) 9 President and Mrs. Carter departed Washington on July 3, for a series of public appearances in California and Florida, before returning to their home in Plains, Georgia, July 4–8. On July 8, Carter flew to Tokyo to attend funeral services for former Japanese Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira and returned to Washington on July 10. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
