3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
64
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
This was the preliminary statement Gromyko had wanted to
present with regard to these issues; he would now propose to give
the floor to Secretary Vance and would be pleased to hear US
considerations.
Secretary Vance thanked Gromyko for his remarks and said that at
the outset he would like to indicate his agreement with what Gromyko
had described as central to the relations between our two countries. He
would also agree that he shared Gromyko’s view about both countries
being equally interested in achieving a new strategic arms limitation
agreement. Further, he would also state that we believed the principle
of equality and equal security to be fundamental to our task, and that it
had to form the basis for our strategic arms limitation talks.
The Secretary wanted to take a minute or two to review the history
of our efforts on strategic arms limitation, and then he would go on to
the specific question of the Vladivostok understanding. When we
began the process of negotiating strategic arms limitation a number of
years ago, we had several purposes in mind: to reduce the risk of out-
break of nuclear war, to enhance strategic stability, and to reduce the
level of arms on each side so as to build up confidence between our
states. We had made progress toward achievement of this goal. We had
concluded the ABM Treaty, the Interim Agreement, and had also
reached an understanding at Vladivostok in 1974. It was quite true that
the principle of parity had been established in that understanding.
Since that time a great deal of useful work had been accomplished in
Geneva. At the same time, we had to recognize that over the past two
and a half years two important problems had emerged, which had not
yet been resolved. These were the Backfire and the Cruise Missile
issues. Neither of these had been resolved in the Vladivostok under-
standing, nor had they been resolved since that time. It was precisely
for this reason that US President Carter had proposed, as a method of
most rapidly resolving the problem before us for the immediate future,
that these two issues be set aside, and that agreement be reached on the
basis of the aggregate numbers agreed upon in Vladivostok, at the
same time resolving other issues, such as MIRV verification, data base
and concealment. Such an agreement would be wholly consistent with
the Vladivostok understanding. The Secretary had read the history of
the negotiations and had also consulted with the former Secretary of
State. On the other hand, President Carter felt that there was another al-
ternative, a bold one to be sure, that would achieve significant further
progress along the lines of the real substance of arms control. This alter-
native the Secretary would call a comprehensive approach. It had
several significant advantages which he would like to sketch out for
Gromyko, after which he would hand him the proposal briefly summa-
rized on one piece of paper. First, it would provide for significant arms
