1118 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI had, in the middle of the night, unexpectedly claimed that its January offer to exhibit all Bear D aircraft had to be paid for in hard currency and implemented before treaty signature. This was unacceptable. 13. Brooks then used the following talking points: – The Soviet proposal on maritime Bears (dated 18 January) offered exhibitions. No mention was made of these exhibitions being before signature. – The U.S. side drafted an agreed statement and formal letters of agreement on 7 March. No response was received from the Soviet side before the break. – When queried in mid-June, the Soviet side asked for copies of the U.S. March 7 papers. – During the week of 17 June, Colonel Shemyakin responded that the Soviet side accepted both the agreed statement and the letters, which were ready for conforming. – At conforming, the Soviet side conformed the agreed statement, but not the letters. The page change on the agreed statement is dated 24 June. – During Under Secretary Bartholomew’s visit, General-Major Peresypkin confirmed that the letters only needed conforming. This position was documented and agreed in the July 2 issues list. – At 2300 on the last night of the Washington ministerial, General- Major Peresypkin said the words in the issues list that the “sides must conform language” had to be changed to “sides must agree on language.” – At that point, General-Lieutenant Ladygin told the U.S. side that visits must occur “prior to signature” and gave the “price list” for the visits. 14. After handing over his talking points,4 Brooks asked Nazarkin what lay behind the change in the Soviet position. Nazarkin declined to be specific, but said with a smile that “General Peresypkin had major influence in this area.” 15. Brooks said he wished to raise a potentially serious problem. The year before, the sides had agreed on a solution to the problem of training silos which were less than full depth. The Soviet side had, however, never listed any such silos. Brooks then handed over a list5 of 57 such silos. Brooks noted that the failure to list these silos would cause political problems. On the other hand, Brooks continued, the U.S. side had concluded that the silos posed no threat. Thus, Brooks said, 4 Not found. 5 Not found.
