Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 355 public and political support here and abroad for overcoming the kinds of obstacles we have encountered, we must orchestrate our efforts so they will be mutually reinforcing and not mutually contradictory. Foremost among those steps we will be taking shortly is the Vance mission to Moscow2 and the possibility of significant progress in SALT. That visit, to be successful, needs to be part of a broader effort on a number of fronts. It is important that the mission itself not be merely a negotiating session devoted to the specifics of SALT but that it address other issues in the US/Soviet relationship which are the source of deep concern, both in your government and with the public at large. It is clearly in the Soviet interest, and part of the Soviet strategy, to focus attention on SALT, and to proclaim the agreement to be evidence of a general improvement in US-Soviet relations. This then leaves the Soviets free to pursue their political objectives elsewhere and by other means. In addition to negotiating, with an agreement being clearly also in the U.S. interest, it is therefore imperative that the U.S. focus also on the larger dimensions of the U.S.-Soviet relationship. Indeed, the U.S. side should open the discussions with a broad review of the relationship, emphasizing that we seek a detente that is increasingly comprehensive and genuinely reciprocal. Unless we do that, we enable the Soviets to set the tone and to define the priorities of the U.S.-Soviet relationship, clearly to their own advantage. Moreover, I am quite convinced that unless detente becomes comprehensive and reciprocal, we will face an increasing rebellion at home, and SALT will not be ratified. I think it is not unfair to summarize the Soviet strategy as involving the following elements: 1. Keep movement going forward on detente in the area of arms control relationships. This both restrains any U.S. build-up, and generates a more passive U.S. attitude on other issues;3 2. Create the impression of a special U.S.-Soviet relationship, which frightens both the Europeans and the Chinese; 3. To induce the Europeans increasingly into a self-Finlandized attitude, in part out of fear of the Soviet Union, and in part out of wishful thinking that a genuine detente truly exists; 4. To prevent a rapid resolution of the Middle Eastern problem and to increase U.S. difficulties, in the hope of radicalizing the Arabs and of gaining greater leverage; 2 Vance met with Brezhnev in Moscow April 19–23; see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Documents 99–103. 3 The President placed a checkmark in the right-hand margin next to this and the subsequent five points.
