614
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
249.
Report Prepared in the Office of Science and Technology1
Washington, April 25, 1980
[Omitted here is Section I: an introductory paragraph about the
Augmented Nuclear Test Program.]
II. General Impact and Scope of ATP
The Panel agrees that the ATP as proposed would make an impor-
tant contribution to increased confidence in the reliability of the U.S.
nuclear weapon stockpile under a CTB. The ATP cannot, however,
eliminate all concerns about stockpile reliability especially under a pro-
tracted CTB. The most important contribution of the program with re-
spect to improving CTB readiness is to make available redundant war-
heads for the important strategic systems.
Also of importance is the renewed effort to better understand
weapon design questions. Such effort will provide the laboratories with
a better data base with which to analyze and deal with future weapon
problems. Even in the absence of a CTB, the ATP, particularly its in-
creased support for weapons physics would be of value. The nuclear
weapons program has suffered in the immediate past because of dwin-
dling budgets and accelerated Phase III testing to meet current needs
and a potential CTB deadline.
Of concern is the decrease in the number of experienced, innova-
tive designers. The Panel is worried that the scope of the proposed pro-
gram is so ambitious that it might overwhelm the laboratories. In par-
ticular, acceleration of testing as proposed in the ATP would require a
sharp increase at the outset in the number of specialists in the program.
It would surely require inducing some experienced personnel who
have left the program in the recent past to return to it.
We note that the proposed ATP covers a five-year span, although
only the first two years are explicitly discussed. That part of the pro-
gram that contributes to the availability of tested warheads for U.S.
strategic systems is planned to be finished by the end of fiscal year
1980. Thus, a CTB could be undertaken after 1980 without impacting on
the availability of tested warheads for U.S. strategic systems. While the
remaining portion of the program seems clearly very useful, it is harder
to quantify its direct contribution to stockpile reliability and longevity
or to other factors that bear on readiness for a CTB. The weapon physics
tests could continue profitably for a very long time, indeed. However,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 20,
PRM/NSC–38. Secret. The report was attached to a May 16 covering memorandum from
Brzezinski to Brown and Duncan.
