Colombia  309
to come to Colombia 100 years ago. In the last ten years they had had 
mounting difficulties which had culminated under the Rojas Pinilla 
administration. I had not heretofore pressed this matter due to the 
many other serious problems facing the Government, and Villarreal’s 
resignation, but now that the Government had a legal mandate from 
the people it seemed an appropriate time to move ahead.
I mentioned the assurances I had been given since arriving here 
and described my conversations with Minister Villarreal. With regard 
to the circular which the latter had sent to the respective Governors in 
September as a result of my intercession, I said that I understood that at 
least some favorable replies had been received.
I said there were two phases to the question. In some cases the 
Protestant churches had been closed in the so-­called mission territories. 
The Colombian Government had alleged that Protestant churches were 
forbidden in these territories under the terms of its agreements with 
the Vatican. On the other hand, there were a number of churches which 
had been closed outside the mission territories where no legal authority 
seemed to exist except the arbitrary fiat of the Government. I gently 
emphasized how arbitrary the attitude of the Rojas Pinilla adminis-
tration had been in this regard, since General Rengifo had mentioned 
earlier that he had been “out of grace” with that administration. I said 
that we hoped that these churches at least could be opened as a starter. 
General Rengifo asked if we had a list of them available, and I handed 
him a copy of our Note of August 6, 1957, with this list.
I said we recognized that this was a delicate matter and that a 
gradual approach might be better than a drastic one. I did want to 
say, however, that while we felt that the case was clear in regard to 
the churches in non-­mission territory we hoped that in due course the 
churches in mission territory could also be reopened. Although the 
Rojas administration had claimed that the agreements with the Vatican 
precluded Protestant churches, the text of the agreements did not bear 
this out, and the Nuncio had informed the Embassy that he did not 
so interpret them. I said that so far as I knew, although some parish 
priests and a few bishops were against the reopening of the Protestant 
churches, I had been informed by Minister Villarreal that the Cardinal 
and the Nuncio were quite willing to have them reopened, provided 
they did not proselytize. I said that I had no instructions to ask that 
they be permitted to proselytize and that I did not think that this was 
by any means as sore a point among Protestants in the United States as 
the basic question of liberty to worship, which was guaranteed by the 
Colombian Constitution and observed in practically every country in 
the world outside of the Communist bloc.
General Rengifo said that he did not think there was any opposi-
tion to Protestants worshipping in their own churches. He recalled that
