226  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Retention of American forces in Europe should be a great assur­
ance to Europeans. (McElroy)
8. Douglas: If our allies in Europe had sufficient limited nuclear 
capability to defend themselves against conventional attack by USSR, 
would they not be less fearful of the outcome? (Meaning, if we increased 
their capability.)
9. Dulles thinks we should explore a wider internationalization in 
NATO of nuclear capability. Max Taylor—­this is the ultimate answer: 
act on it and believe in it.
10. Have we been too focused on massive nuclear retaliation with 
large weapons to realize our current, increasing ability with tactical 
nuclear ability, carrier forces, mobile marine battalions? (McElroy) 
Perhaps 30% of our money is going into this kind of capability. Should 
we emphasize this capability more to our allies and to the public and 
to the Congress?
11. Dulles: We are planning to make small nuclear weapons in 
quantity. For what purpose?
McElroy: To use against conventional forces which would over­
whelm us.
JFDulles: We will have time if this comes in 1961–1962 and allies 
know we have this intended capability and use it.
Quarles does not think small war preparations would hinder going 
on into general war, but that going into a general war would limit your 
limited war capability.
12. Twining: You can’t say that there will never be a limited war in 
Europe. But you must never let Russians think that we won’t use our 
nuclear retaliatory capability, toy with idea of limited war. Only solu­
tion is to get comprehensive safeguarded arms control system.
13. Burke: Our allies want a mortgage on us, as security we will 
come to help. Our forces in Europe are hostages. Must we give a new, 
different, or bigger mortgage? Perhaps giving them a nuclear capability 
of their own or in common control.
14. What will JFDulles tell de Gaulle? He will require France to 
have a greater nuclear independence or to have an independent foreign 
policy.
15. Dulles always tells our allies we’re going to help you because if 
we don’t we’ll be crowded and crowded against our own interest. They 
are convinced as to this in the case of present Administration.
16. Quarles: We should make clear to de Gaulle (a) not part of our 
policy to prevent France from acquiring independent nuclear capabil­
ity, (b) our equipping them is a different thing. But would de Gaulle be 
in a good posture unless France had enough by itself to defend France? 
No, in a better posture to share in our common nuclear power in NATO. 
Perhaps let him have a few to bolster his morale.
