1112 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Minister could stand up and make a favorable remark in IPC’s behalf. If anyone did so, he would be charged with taking a pay-­off from IPC. He said IPC has always had poor public relations: “They don’t know how to handle this situation.” He said they expect that paying 40,000 soles for an advertisement in El Comercio, which is one of IPC’s big critics, helps, but it does not. He criticized IPC officials, saying they are difficult to deal with. He said he sent one of his representatives to IPC only a few weeks ago but his man received a “brush-­off.” He stated IPC had sent him copies of its position on La Brea y Pariñas for distribution to each member of the Chamber of Deputies. He said, “I returned all of them to the company and then telephoned to see whether they had been received. This was not the way to handle the matter.” He said if I would think about it a minute I would realize that IPC is unique in the hate it has generated in Peru. He said companies producing lead and zinc, cotton, sugar, fish, and copper are popular with the people, and these companies can be defended, but not IPC and petroleum. According to Ortiz de Zevallos, IPC has always been unpopular because it inherited a “dirty business.” He said the original Award was brought about by graft to certain persons in France and to the Peruvians who put over the deal. He said he and his father (former Ambassador)8 were talking only this morning about the Award and that his father was in Paris when the Award was made and remembered the talk of the “pay-­offs” at that time. He said his father warned him about the matter and had convinced him that it was an illegal thing from the start. I told him I knew the stockholders of IPC would like to know just what could be done to place this in the proper light. He said he didn’t know but that “building a few houses in Talara” (the IPC housing project in Talara was one of the first in Peru and was quite well done) and putting advertisements in El Comercio was not going to win friends. (Comment: Ortiz de Zevallos is quite right about Talara housing, it was never received as it should have been.) I kept pressing the President for his idea of a solution. He said, “Pedro Beltrán is a good friend of the United States. I am certain he will have some formula.” At the same time, he stated that when the President returns from Paris he is going to concentrate on La Brea y Pariñas matter.9 8 Reference is to Emilio Ortiz de Zevallos who was Second Secretary of the Peruvian Embassy in France at the time of the La Brea y Pariñas Award in 1922. 9 President Prado returned to Peru on March 11 after a 28-­day official visit to France, the United Kingdom, Italy, Switzerland, the Federal Republic of Germany, and the Netherlands. In despatch 575 from Lima, March 29, the Embassy reported on a March 22 radio and television address by President Prado on his trip. (823.00/3–3960)
