674
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
course, as jobs and housing and education and health, but we must re-
alize that a prerequisite to the enjoyment of such progress is to assure
peace for our Nation. So in asking congressional support for our de-
fense efforts, I’m asking for consistent support, steadfast support—not
just for 1980 or 1981, but until these commitments have been fulfilled.
Sustained American strength is the only possible basis for the
wider, truly reciprocal de´tente which we seek with the Soviet Union.
Only through strength can we create global political conditions hospi-
table to worldwide economic and political progress and to controlling
both conventional and nuclear weapons.
As the strongest, most advanced country on Earth, we have a spe-
cial obligation to seek security through arms control as well as through
military power. So, I welcome the debate by the Senate in its consider-
ation of the SALT II treaty. It will enable us to build a clearer under-
standing that these efforts in both arms control and in defense are vital
to our security and they are mutually compatible, one with another.
There are several reasons why SALT II will strengthen the military
aspect of our national security:
First, we can better maintain strategic equivalence in nuclear
weapons with SALT II. Without it, the Soviet Union can add more to
the power of their own forces, widen any advantage that they may
achieve in the early 1980’s, and conceal from us what they are doing.
For us, maintaining parity with these uncontrollable Soviet activities
would add to our costs in time, money, and also uncertainty about our
own safety.
Second, we can better maintain the combat efficiency and read-
iness of our non-nuclear forces with SALT II than we can without it.
Whatever the level of the defense budget, more of it will have to go into
strategic weapons, atomic weapons, if SALT II is not ratified.
Third, we can better strengthen the unity, resolve, and capability
of the NATO Alliance with SALT II than we can without it. That’s why
the heads of other NATO countries have urged strongly its ratification.
Fourth, we can better continue the SALT process, which has now
been going on for more than 30 years, the process of negotiating further
reductions in the world’s nuclear arsenals, with SALT II than without
it. Without SALT II and all its limits, its rules, and definitions in place,
any agreement in SALT III would, at the very best, take many more
years to achieve.
And finally, we can better control the proliferation of nuclear
weapons among currently non-nuclear nations with SALT II than
without it. This could be one of the most important factors involved in
our pending decision on the SALT treaty.
All of these issues are extremely important and they are intimately
interrelated. A strong defense is a matter of simple common sense; so is
SALT II.
