462 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement indicated that despite his long-­standing friendship he could not continue to cooperate as fully with the United States as in the past. As an indication of what this would mean, the Dominican Government recently notified us that it does not plan to attend the Law of the Sea Conference in Geneva in February.3 This paper discusses this policy question and proposes a position for Ambassador Farland to take with Trujillo. Background: During the past year our relations with the Dominican Republic have become increasingly strained, primarily because of the Galíndez- Murphy case, improper activities of Dominican officials and agents in the United States, and Dominican meddling in other countries’ affairs. In these circumstances, the United States has refused or hesitated to act favorably on such normally routine matters as requests for technical assistance, visits by Dominican officials to the United States, and export licenses for military equipment. We refused to permit the sale of jet fighter aircraft to the Dominican Republic even though our Defense Department found there was military justification for these fighters for hemispheric defense purposes. The Dominican Republic, on the other hand, smarting under United States press attacks and official U.S. pressures of various types, has refused to cooperate effectively in clarifying the Galíndez-Murphy cases, has tried to discredit our motives in pursuing these cases and has tried to stir up trouble in other countries where the United States has important political interests (particularly in Guatemala). The recent decision not to attend the Law of the Sea Conference indicates that Trujillo may try non-­cooperation on international questions as a new countervailing tactic. Trujillo himself, at 66, is weakening physically under the pressures of the situation. He appears to suffer from high blood pressure, at least, and perhaps from other organic disorders. The fundamental U.S. interests in the Dominican Republic and its political orientation are: 1. Its strategic position in the Caribbean, on the approaches to the Panama Canal; 2. The guided missile tracking station on the northeast coast; 3. The continuing support the Government of the Dominican Republic has given us in the United Nations and elsewhere. 3 A United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, attended by delegates from 86 countries, took place at Geneva, February 24–April 28, 1958. Documentation on this conference is presented in Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. II, United Nations and General International Matters, Chapter 8.
