1977 95 Mr. Duncan: I agree. Secretary Brown: However, it’s not so obvious what we can do to the Soviets. Dr. Brzezinski: You need to relate this area to the first one. Since I favor stalemate in Europe, I favor an activist strategy in other areas. For example, if there are states allied to the USSR, we can capture them and perhaps hope for a territorial trade. Cuba is an easy target. Mr. Gelb: Would you want to buy forces for that? Dr. Brzezinski: Yes. I think we need a global strike force. The Second Division might become part of that when it comes out of Korea. Secretary Brown: Why not put the same capability in Europe? Dr. Brzezinski: That’s not the point where conflict is most likely to occur. Mr. Christopher: What are the most attractive targets? General Brown: Perhaps Soviet territory in the northwest Pacific. But that is very risky in response to something like Berlin. Mr. Aaron: This must be seen in terms of what sort of force multipliers you can create to help yourself—­northwest Asia maybe. However, we would be better off sizing our forces to help out in the Persian Gulf, which is important because of the oil. Why not size forces for Europe plus what we need for the Persian Gulf? Secretary Brown: What would worry the Soviets most? Why would they care about Cuba, if they were fighting in Europe? Dr. Brzezinski: It would be a political defeat. Admiral Turner: [1 line not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski: We cannot anticipate [less than 1 line not declassified] help in such a situation. They would prefer to sit tight and watch the two giants fight it out. We might consider such actions as naval blockades. General Brown: Yes, and we could take action against their fishing fleets. Secretary Brown: How does this help in the context of a war for Europe? Let’s move now to a discussion about local wars and crisis management. Are there specific regions of the world that we should worry about? Dr. Brzezinski: I agree with David. The Persian Gulf, in addition to the Middle East, is an important area. Secretary Brown: Is it likely that we need no special capability for Africa or Latin America? General Brown: The most likely problem in Latin America might result from a failure to ratify a Panama Treaty.
