to take this step. Therefore, it would seem that Mr. McPhail is not at this
time in a position to assert his claim diplomatically since he has not
complied with the generally accepted principle that the legal remedies in the
country against which a claim is made should be exhausted before
diplomatic intervention is resorted to.
The foregoing statements have been based upon the possibility that Mr.
McPhail may have a just claim against the Dominican Republic. So far as
concerns his assertion of a claim against the Government of the United
States, I beg to refer you to the position consistently taken by the
Department in the previous correspondence with your Embassy regarding
this case that Mr. McPhail’s claim, if any, is against the Dominican
Republic.
With respect to the merits of the claim, and as bearing upon statements
contained in Mr. McPhail’s memorial, the following observations may be
made: Mr. McPhail seems to imply that bandit activities in the Dominican
Republic did not exist prior to the time when American troops entered the
Republic, or in 1916. On this point it may be observed that in a letter
addressed to the Department October 3, 1921,52 by Mr. F. A. Vicini,
President of the company which owned the plantation upon which Mr.
McPhail was employed at the time he suffered the injuries in question, Mr.
Vicini referred to the bandits who committed the outrage, and said: “Bands
of this nature are called in Santo Domingo ‘gavilleros’, and they operated in
the country long before the American occupation and were usually formed
during revolutionary times.”
As you are aware the British subject Thomas J. Steele was kidnapped by
bandits on the occasion when Mr. McPhail was injured, and in a report on
this matter from the American Legation at Santo Domingo dated October 9,
1921,53 the Legation said: “The Marines had been quite active around the
neighborhood of the sugar estate of which Mr. Steele is manager for several
weeks, and the very night he was taken they caught up with the band that
had him but were unaware of this fact. In the encounter that followed,
several of the bandits were wounded, but all escaped.” Referring to the
leader of the band which committed the outrage in question, the Legation
said: “From the time of the death of ‘Vicentico’, Nateras has been the
