Afghanistan
199
72.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, October 4, 1979, 0410Z
7326. Subj: Some Disturbing Signs Affecting Afghanistan’s Inde-
pendence and the Position of Amin: Part One of Two.
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary. Much concern has been expressed in Washington
over Soviet troop movements on the Soviet side of the Oxus, but more
significant and ominous may be the growing Soviet military presence
in Afghanistan. The number of troops and military advisors—totalling
perhaps 7,000—and the role the latter are playing, makes it moot
whether this or any other Afghan regime can again exercise full inde-
pendence. End summary.
3. While a great deal of concern has been expressed in Washington
about the possible positioning of Soviet airborne troops just north of
the Oxus, I think a more dangerous and significant development has
been the continued build-up of Soviet equipment and forces in the
country, and the recent appointment of Soviet generals to direct the
counter-insurgency operations in the troubled Provinces of Paktia,
Ghazni and Konar.
4. To recapitulate the situation:
(A). Soviet troops are now known to be stationed in the following
two strategic areas:
—Bagram Air Force Base, located about 25 miles north of Kabul,
the single most important air base in the country. The number of Soviet
troops guarding the base is modest: about 600. More significant is that
the Soviets have apparently been given control of the base. It together
with Kabul Airport (partly an Air Force base as well) are highly strategic
points for control of the capital and surrounding areas.
—Kabul itself at probably three locations: Kabul Airport (at the
Air Force area), Pol-i-Charki tank base, and the Microrayon apartment
complex where many Soviets live. These troops, numbering perhaps
3,600 are probably here for several purposes, such as guarding the
Soviet community in the event of civil war and chaos. The troops would
also be in a position to try to secure Kabul Airport and the principal
tank base (over 150 tanks) if necessary.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790458–1129.
Secret; Exdis. Sent for information to Islamabad, Moscow, and New Delhi.
