permit France: To wait until the Dawes Plan has entered into a period of effective application and the expenses resulting from the war (the pensions, annuity allowances for reconstruction) shall begin to decrease. It is under these conditions that French public opinion may be led to adopt such a plan as the following: Fixing the nominal amount of the debt to the amount of this debt in capital, that is to say, at $3,340,000,000 (the value of American stocks included); rate of interest and amortization in conformity with the following table: (Here insert table quoted in foregoing letter.) In order to combine in a certain measure the value of the annuities and France’s possibilities of payment, a principle which is in conformity with all the American declarations, it should be understood that if Germany were to fulfill only a part of the obligations prescribed by the Dawes Plan or if only a portion of the German annuity should be paid to France in accordance with one of the methods provided for in the Experts’ Plan, the portion of the French annuity corresponding to the interest of the debt should be reduced in the same proportion. But France would undertake to pay regularly and integrally to the United States the portion of the annuities representing the amortization, whatever may be the degree of execution of the Dawes Plan.” Portion of old text bearing upon American stocks is omitted from the new memorandum. The new memorandum indicates that the suggested changes which I mentioned in my number 8 January 3, 11 a.m. have received certain consideration. Clémentel’s modification of his first proposal I construe to be symptomatic of the present government’s earnest desire for practical solution of this problem. I venture the opinion that it is an opportune moment to act because the French Government realizes now that the absence of progressive negotiations is restrictive to French credit. Moreover while the payment of entire debt has been unofficially avowed by the French Government yet I believe that important advantages would attach to the official and outspoken recognition of that principle. The harmful and befogging beliefs concerning the French attitude and that we are exacting creditors should then be dispelled. In this connection may I call your attention to the views expressed in my number 79 January 23d, 6 p.m. relative to the detrimental effect of marking time. To reject Clémentel’s new memorandum without a constructive suggestion from our Government as to what might constitute a starting point would have a depressing effect and tend to jeopardize future negotiations.
