364 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Even at this late date, I doubt that the Soviets fully appreciate the depth of the national about-face taking place here. They seem to believe that US-Soviet relations can be returned to the uncertain mix of the last several years after the elections, that the competitive elements of our policy will be ineffective, and that our allies can be coaxed away from us. Only US actions across all the policy echelons discussed above will sober their outlook. But the chances for peace in the next five years would be improved if somebody were to go to Moscow now, not to negotiate or to debate, but to tell the Soviets exactly how we view the period of struggle ahead. That person should have the absolute confidence of the President and labor under no suspicions that his mission is to rescue detente by acquiescing in Soviet power grabs. You’re the only candidate with the credibility to do this. (S) 134. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, January 2, 1980 SUBJECT Strategy for Dealing with Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan You should seek to accomplish four things in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan: 1. In Afghanistan. Make the costs to the Soviets very high, preventing a successful Soviet consolidation of power there if possible. 2. In the Region. Accelerate a number of measures and take additional steps to build a security system in the Persian Gulf which can repel Soviet power projection into the region.2 3. With our Allies. Assert leadership of the NATO Alliance and Japan which provides a context and a rationale for our allies’ supporting actions. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1–2/80. Secret; Outside the System. Printed from an unsigned copy. 2 Documentation on U.S. efforts to build a security framework in the Persian Gulf area in the wake of the fall of the Shah of Iran and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula.
