March–August 1953
715
298.
Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East
and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans (Waller) to the
Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency
(Wisner)1
Washington, August 24, 1953.
1. Attached hereto is the draft of a cable prepared by Mr. Jernegan
of State on the basis of suggestions made by you.
2. It has not been sent, however, since Messrs. Byroade, Matthews
and Berry of State were in agreement that such an approach to Zahedi
at this time would be unwise. Specifically, their reasoning was as
follows:
A. State would possibly find itself in a difficult position if Zahedi
actually concluded economic agreements with the USSR. Such agree-
ments might, amongst other things, prejudice U.S. aid. If Zahedi were
to construe U.S. remarks per attached cable draft as encouragement to
continue negotiations, it would be difficult later to bring pressure to
bear causing Zahedi to abandon undesirable economic ties with the
USSR.
B. The Department of State would risk adverse U.S. criticism if the
attached cable draft should leak from Persian government sources and
be quoted out of context. Zahedi could, in fact, use it as an excuse for
later de´marches with the USSR which would be unacceptable to the
U.S.
C. Inexperienced as he is, Zahedi may find himself out-
manoeuvered and out-foxed by the Soviets in ensuing negotiations.
This could be to the detriment of U.S. interests.
3. If you still feel that the attached cable draft or a communication
similar to it should be sent, it is suggested that you discuss the matter
with Mr. Matthews.2
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A, Box 11, Folder 14,
Iran 1951–1953. Secret.
2 At the end of the memorandum is a handwritten note that reads: “While I origi-
nally shared reason #A, the possibilities of the Russians rising to the bait was remote; and
even if they did we could avoid the fish (barracude, that is), swallowing angler Zahedi for
the same reason we could avoid Z from falling in the river (see reason C). As to reason B,
maybe we shouldn’t have started Ajax, and simply stayed in bed to avoid ‘risk adverse
U.S. criticism.’ (Reason B)”
