3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
646
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ments by the President, the Secretary of State and the National Security
Advisor.2 Talking points should not be left in writing.
3. Soviet ground forces unit
—We have recently confirmed, through multiple intelligence
sources, the presence in Cuba of what appears to be a Soviet combat
unit. Rumors and fragmentary intelligence concerning such a unit have
been in circulation for some time. But this is the first time we have been
able to confirm the presence of a Soviet ground forces unit on the
island.
—Elements of the unit appear to have been there since at least the
mid-1970’s. We estimate that it consists of 2,000 to 3,000 men. The unit
includes motorized rifle armor, and artillery battallions, and combat
and service support elements. This is in addition to an estimated 1,500
to 2,000 Soviet military advisory and technical personnel in Cuba.
—The combat unit’s mission is as yet unclear, and we are pressing
the Soviets for an explanation. Possible missions include protecting So-
viet intelligence facilities, protecting Castro and protecting Soviet
installations.
—Ground forces per se did not figure in our bilateral under-
standing with the Soviets, which were directed toward offensive
weapons.
—Nonetheless, we are naturally concerned about the presence of
Soviet combat forces in Cuba, among other reasons because it repre-
sents the stationing in Latin America of non-advisory military forces
from outside the hemisphere, and because of recent Cuban activities in
this hemisphere.
—We have in recent months expressed to the Soviets our concern
over the Soviet/Cuban military relationship. Within the last few days,
we are making clear to the Soviets that the presence of this unit can ex-
acerbate our relationship. We have also raised this with the Cubans. We
will continue our discussion on this subject.
—What concerns us most about these troops and what should be
of concern to all the countries of the Americas is the fact that the dis-
covery of a Soviet combat force coincides with a heightened and dan-
gerous collaboration between the Soviet Union and Cuba in recent
years. This is true in military, economic, intelligence and foreign policy
activities. The ongoing attempt by Cuba to transplant the non-aligned
movement to the Soviet camp is only the most visible indication of
2 The statement made by Vance, August 31, and the President’s remarks, September
7, are both in Department of State Bulletin, October 1979, pp. 63–64. Both statements indi-
cate the size and type of unit stationed in Cuba and what that means for U.S.-Soviet
relations.
