512  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
369.	 Telegram 1141 from Geneva1
Geneva, November 11, 1955, 5 p.m.
1141. From Johnson. ReMytel 1132.
1. I have been reconsidering question of text of any public state­
ment we should issue if PRC makes statement. It now appears to me 
text in Deptel 1183 would not be best answer to probable type of state­
ment PRC could be expected.
2. There is given below my thought on general lines of what might 
be said here if Wang issues statement, or it could be modified for issuance 
in Washington if PRC release was from Peiping. It will be noted this draft 
attempts to make our points without becoming involved in specific sub­
stance of meetings or drafts which I feel should if possible be avoided.
A. It is a matter of disappointment and concern that Ambassador 
Wang has chosen to issue a public statement at this time. As he and I 
agreed when these talks started progress can best be made by not giving 
out details of our exchanges until understandings can be announced, as 
when we made the agreed announcement of September 10 with regard 
to the return of civilians.
B. Some time ago I proposed, in order to make progress in the dis­
cussion of other practical matters arising between the two sides, that 
both sides should declare that they renounced the use of force.
C. Ambassador Wang appears to have accepted this principle and 
we have since that time been discussing an appropriate form for this 
declaration. Such a declaration must make it clear that force is being 
renounced as an instrument of national policy in general and also with 
particular reference to the Taiwan area. My government believes that 
an unqualified declaration in this regard, such as the United States is 
willing to make, would be a major step in assuring peace in the Far East 
and permit hopeful discussion of other problems.
D. I am pleased to note that Ambassador Wang’s statement appears 
publicly to indicate that the People’s Republic of China is in fact willing 
to renounce the use of force. I hope that agreement can soon be reached 
on an unqualified declaration in this regard.
E. However, the extreme slowness and apparent reluctance with 
which Ambassador Wang’s government is now implementing its com­
mitment of September 10 to permit all Americans in China desiring to 
return expeditiously to do so is a source of serious concern. Although 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–1155. Secret; Limited 
Distribution.
