214  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
166.	 Telegram 684 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 6, 1955, 6 p.m.
684. From Johnson.
With respect to remaining two disputed points in “agreed 
announcement” I feel we must and can retain “in any such case”. 
Wang’s motive for deletion is clear even though his argumentation is 
weak and there is no reason we should concede.
I do not feel “now” is of same order importance.
It originally appeared in Deptel 492 which was drafted in form 
joint statement in order meet point contained para 4 Deptel 466. Since 
then we have shifted to “agreed announcement” form of unilateral 
statements which do not have force of intergovernmental agreement 
and which it seems to me we are free renounce any time we consider 
such action justifiable and desirable.
Since that time I have continued to use word with thought that in 
PRC rpt PRC section it signified all Americans were as of date of state­
ment able to depart. We are now accepting situation in which this not 
case and from standpoint Americans in prison key portion para is “will 
further adopt appropriate measures” and “expeditiously”.
While at today’s meeting Wang argued for its deletion from only 
PRC section and may well argue for its retention.
US section his motives are of course entirely different from ours. 
Certainly if retained in our section they will cite as admission Chinese 
have in past not been free leave US.
Therefore believe it should be either retained or deleted in both 
sections and that its deletion from both sections would not materially 
weaken force of announcement. My ability accept deletion would also 
of course strengthen my negotiating position for retention of “in any 
such case”.
Also seems to me our interest now lies in getting announcement 
issued as quickly as possible so as accomplish release some Americans 
and bring into play public pressure on PRC for “expeditious” release 
remainder.
Gowen
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–655. Secret; Priority.
