142 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Defense Department, namely: (1) the command structure, (2) elimination of interservice rivalry, (3) better direction of research and engineering, and (4) improvements of efficiency both within the Military Services and within the Department of Defense, with a view especially to speeding up decision-­making. Secretary McElroy then called on Mr. Coolidge, who spoke from notes with the assistance of a large chart of the new organi­ zation. Among other matters, Mr. Coolidge pointed out that in the revised command structure it was proposed to abandon the use of one or another of the Military Services as an executive agent of the Department of Defense. The line of command for the future under this proposed reorganization plan would be from the President to the Secretary of Defense to the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the fighting forces. Thus there would be no intervention of a Service Chief of Staff in the line of command. Such an improvement should enable us to face up more promptly to any emergency. Mr. Coolidge pointed out also that a great deal of time and thought had been given to the oft-­mentioned proposal for the creation of a single Chief of Staff. However, it had been decided to retain the present system with certain changes which might, perhaps, appear at first sight picayune but which, in fact, Mr. Coolidge thought might prove very effective. He cited a number of such changes, of which perhaps the most significant related to Research and Development, whose head was in the future to be provided with a lot more authority than the heads of R&D in the past. Under the new system, the head of R&D would supervise all the research and engineering activities of the Department, and would be responsible for making certain that all the research and development required for the several missions of our armed forces (such as CONAD and Continental Defense) were actually being carried out. Appropriations for research and development would be made only to the Secretary of Defense, and not to the several military departments. Mr. Coolidge said that no deci­ sion had yet been made as to the precise title to be given the head of R&D, but that, regardless of title, he would rank as an Under Secretary. With respect to the general functions of the Department of Defense, the new reorganization plan would suggest the elimination of paragraph 4 of Section 202 of the National Security Act of 1947, which states that the Departments of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force “shall be separately administered by their respective Secretaries under the direction, authority and control of the Secretary of Defense.” Mr. Coolidge pointed out that such elimination would not mean that we would abolish the Service Secretaries, but the elimination of this phraseology would enable the Secretary of Defense clearly to direct the Service Secretaries. Moreover, all appropriations by the Congress henceforth would be made solely to the Secretary of Defense and not to the Services.
