Hungary 525 —Madrid—Horn said that Hungary found the outcome in Madrid3 to be surprisingly good given the sulphurous atmosphere that prevailed before the conference actually began. He admitted the true test was yet to come. Although Hungary does not expect many of the 83 proposals on the table actually to be passed, they do hope for two things: (1) that a continuation of the Helsinki process is assured with another meeting scheduled within several years or some variant of the Finnish proposal for an even more permanent process, and (2) that some sort of a disarmament conference follow Madrid although they were not very particular about its form. He did feel the French proposal was totally negative. —Differentiation—Horn said he hoped that the Reagan administration would not view the Communist world as a monolithic bloc. He thought the Carter administration with its policy of differentiation was basically on the right track but could have made even more headway. He referred to a portion of General Haig’s testimony this week4 which he interpreted to be a much more realistic viewpoint about China than had characterized anything that Brzezinski had said on the subject. Horn emphasized that Hungary wishes to make even more advances towards opening up the system and sees the Polish situation as an opportunity in that direction rather than a threat to the process. —Poland—Horn said the Warsaw Pact Summit meeting of December 5 had turned a new corner with respect to the Brezhnev Doctrine; it was decided not to use force but to allow the Poles to work out their own admittedly very difficult economic problems. He characterized the bringing of Soviet and bloc forces to a higher defense condition as political rather than military. Horn said he believed that the Polish situation was also distinct from Hungary 1956 and Czechoslovakia 1968, in that it seemed that the interests of the Soviet Union, the other Warsaw Pact states, the U.S., and NATO were coming to an almost identical position, namely that nobody wanted to see tensions rise in Poland and everyone wanted to see the Poles work out their own problems, giving them a helping hand where appropriate. He said he thought it was inconceivable that the Soviets would actually invade Poland because such an action could do nothing to resolve the Polish economic problems. He was, however, worried about Solidarity and its search for “monopolistic power”. 3 For information on the CSCE Conference in Madrid, see Foreign Relations, 1977– 1980, vol. V, European Security, 1977–1983. 4 General Alexander Haig, Ronald Reagan’s Secretary of State-designate, testified before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations during his confirmation hearings beginning January 9, 1981.
