218 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Thus, the U.S. position in START would reduce ballistic missiles, constrain ICBMs more than SLBMs, and required particular reductions in the very large (so-­called “heavy”) ICBMs that the Soviets have deployed. We also have proposed separate and somewhat looser limits on “slow-­flying” bombers, both because we regarded them as less de-­ stabilizing than ballistic missiles and because they are an area of traditional U.S. advantage. The environment in which the talks began was one of a Soviet advantage in the number of ICBMs and their warheads, and a U.S. advantage in airbreathing systems (i.e., bombers and cruise missiles). Those respective advantages remain today. The U.S. has sought in START to reduce the Soviet ICBM advantage and persuade Moscow to shift its nuclear forces to a better balance among ICBMs, SLBMs, and bombers, at the same that we have sought to preserve our right to continue to deploy (and modernize) a relatively balanced mix of forces among ICBMs, SLBMs, and bombers. U.S. Defense and Space Objectives The Defense & Space (D&S) negotiations convened in 1985. The principal U.S. objectives have been to protect our right to develop and test SDI within the “broad interpretation” of the ABM Treaty, and to deploy strategic defenses at a future time. In addition, the U.S. has sought Soviet agreement to a cooperative transition to effective defenses, as well as Soviet compliance with their existing commitments under the ABM Treaty. Put simply, our current approach to the D&S talks reflects an effort on our part to have it both ways: seeking virtually complete freedom to test SDI and deploy it when it is ready, but using the ABM Treaty to dissuade the Soviets from deploying nationwide defenses in the interim. Current START Position After ten rounds of negotiations, the two sides have produced a 400 page joint draft treaty text (which includes extensive bracketed language that reflects disagreements between the two sides.) The principal agreed elements are: — 6000 accountable warheads on 1600 ICBMs, SLBMs and heavy bombers. (Note that because bomber weapons are “discounted” as one per bomber even though 16 or more bombs may actually be deployed on each, there will be significantly more than 6000 nuclear weapons on each side. The U.S., for example, probably would deploy over 9000 warheads under a START Treaty, meaning that START would result in a 25–30 percent rather than 50 percent cut.) — No more than 4900 of these warheads can be on ICBMs and SLBMs (about 50 percent of the current Soviet force, 60 percent of the U.S. force); no more than 1540 of those could be on 154 “heavy” ICBMs
