December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
775
praises. No objection to Jordan getting it after five years. This is his
way. He is an opportunist. He waits for anything to collapse then save
it. He is a schizophrenic. President Carter said to be patient with him,
but be fair. I am not boasting. You have seen my people. I intend to
submit the treaty to my Parliament on my return. I will ask if I should
keep the Arab League when it is Libya, Syria, and Iraq who pretend to
protect the Palestinians. If that is so, take it away. All of them are
shaking. We are not shaking here. No leader in any of these countries in
Africa goes around in an open car. These 40 million people (in Egypt)
are the dream of the Arab world. The others are bedouins. We are com-
mitted to defend Saudi Arabia and Yemen. It is marvelous that you
acted so promptly. I told Congress two years ago, at that time it was
Angola. I said next it is coming to East Africa. This was a good move.
There must be a U.S. presence in the area. Where? The near future will
tell me what to advise you. When we check the Soviets, then we have
the upper hand. South Yemen, that boy Qadhafi, are nothing. The im-
portant thing is not to lose the upper hand. I sent a military team to
Yemen. Also, I have antitank missiles. They shot 400 Israeli tanks in
three days, the ones you tried to replace. They are very accurate,
though they use the primitive Soviet material. Now we have the British
Swingfire. It is better. If the situation deteriorates, I will send them.
They will shoot every tank in the South Yemen Army. We are always
ready. We have the Mirage, two squadrons of MIGs. From their base in
the Red Sea, it is only one and one-half hours to the Gulf and one hour
anyplace in Saudi Arabia. Tell them I am always ready to rescue them,
whenever they ask. For Hussein, we will be patient and fair. He will
now undermine the whole thing in the West Bank, but not in Gaza. It is
his benefit. Whatever happens, I will fulfill this in Gaza. I will make it a
model. I was asked about autonomy after one month. I said yes but
Begin will raise hell. I am very optimistic. Before one year things will
come to shape.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that there has been a great change in Israel.
Peres spent one-half of his speech on Palestinian rights. This is your ef-
fect. We will work together to keep Saudi Arabia in line. We were quite
clear with Hussein.
President Sadat said that he (Hussein) is always pessimistic. It is a
psychological thing. He is a schizophrenic like his father. He is full of
show. Now he is not able to make any show.
Dr. Brzezinski said that Hussein had asked what the results would
be after five years. I told him that there were three things that we could
say. If it was pro-Arab, the Israelis would not join in. If it was pro-Israel,
the Arabs would not join in. If it required concessions of both sides, nei-
ther would join in. We need to shape an outcome that is acceptable. No
one can predict what that is now. It would be ridiculous to try.
