Bolivia  183
ICA and USOM Bolivia have continued to believe that an aid level 
for FY 1959 of $23 million is excessive in the light of Bolivian perfor-
mance and needs and that $18 million is adequate in the circumstances.
ARA and OFD believe that the additional $5 million which 
Ambassador Bonsal, on authorization of the Department and ICA, told 
the Bolivians would be available if we found it was needed and subject 
to satisfactory performance by the Bolivians on stabilization, should be 
provided as indicated. They believe the full $23 million is necessary (a) to 
support the stabilization program to which we are committed, (b) because 
of the desirability, both politically and economically, for as much develop-
ment activity as is practicable to go forward at this time, and (c) because 
our failure to provide the full support Ambassador Bonsal announced 
would be difficult for the Bolivian Government and people to under-
stand now, when the Government has just successfully carried through a 
politically extremely risky operation to achieve an important stabilization 
objective, i.e., the unfreezing of commissary prices, and also since we will 
be continuing to condition releases of cash support on performance on the 
stabilization commitments of the Bolivian Government to the IMF.
The relevant facts, from an examination of USOM and IMF doc-
uments as well as conversations with the USOM Director, Mr. Rey 
Hill, the U.S. Executive Director on the IMF,2 the staff of the IMF and 
Department personnel, appear to be as follows:
1. The United States aid program has two major economic objec-
tives in Bolivia of an immediate nature (there are other longer-­term 
goals). These are (a) monetary stabilization, which the U.S. and the 
IMF have in common, and (b) economic development, which is a U.S.-
supported objective to be achieved separately from but consistently 
with monetary stabilization.
2. As in other countries, the U.S. relies heavily on the IMF for estab-
lishing the Bolivian monetary stabilization program and for influencing 
the Bolivian government to adhere to that program. The 1959 target of 
the IMF, agreed upon with the Bolivian government, is to avoid depreci-
ation of the present exchange rate of 12,000 bolivianos to the dollar while 
maintaining a free exchange system. To achieve this the IMF has reached 
agreement with the Bolivian government on the controls to be applied 
to the sources which generate monetary pressure, chiefly the budget, 
Central Bank credit, the use of aid counterpart, and wage and subsidy 
policy. A key issue between the Fund and Bolivia—­the immediate reduc-
tion and early elimination of subsidized prices in the commissaries of the 
mine workers—­has just been settled on a basis which the Fund considers 
will, together with other commitments, justify a new standby agreement 
and a further credit to Bolivia of $1.5 million.
3. The U.S. Director in the Fund and the Fund management, while 
conceding that the Bolivian stabilization program might well fail, 
2 Frank Southard, Jr.
