474  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
greater emphasis on air defense, submarines, nuclear weapons, long-­
range bombers, and guided missiles. Further evolution in Soviet mil­
itary policy and force structure can be expected during the coming 
period under the impact of further rapid advances in technology, the 
growth in mutual capabilities for nuclear devastation, and other factors 
affecting the balance of military power.
89. The chief factor affecting Soviet military thinking and leading 
to changes in the Soviet military establishment has been a growing 
appreciation of the devastation inherent in all-­out nuclear conflict, and 
of the threat to Soviet security and Soviet objectives posed by Western 
nuclear capabilities. This realization has led to strenuous Soviet efforts 
to develop both adequate air defenses and offensive nuclear capabil­
ities. These efforts, as well as various declarations of Soviet political 
and military leaders, clearly indicate that the chief military contin­
gency against which the USSR feels it must guard is that of general war 
involving all-­out use of nuclear weapons. The USSR almost certainly 
believes that the West’s current military posture and strategic doctrine 
are such as to compel the West, if general war occurred, to fight it pri­
marily by nuclear means.
90. Despite their strenuous efforts to develop nuclear capabili­
ties, the Soviets probably consider that present US capabilities to wage 
nuclear war remain greater than their own. They show acute awareness 
of the advantage accruing to the US from its deployment of nuclear 
striking forces on the periphery of the Bloc as well as within the con­
tinental US. We believe that, under these circumstances, the Soviet 
planners have concluded that at present the USSR, even if it launched 
a surprise attack, would receive unacceptable damage in a nuclear 
exchange with the US. Notwithstanding probable further improve­
ments in the Soviet nuclear and delivery capabilities over the coming 
period, the USSR almost certainly will still not be confident that it can 
attack the US without receiving unacceptable damage in return. These 
estimates of Soviet military judgments underlie our basic estimate (see 
paras. 190 and 191, chapter VI) that the USSR will not deliberately initi­
ate general war or undertake courses of action gravely risking general 
war during the period under review.
91. On the other hand, the Soviet civilian and military leaders 
probably regard their own growing nuclear capabilities, added to 
their already great conventional strength, as enforcing caution on the 
Western powers. They are probably confident that their own nuclear 
capabilities have already reached the point where the US and its allies 
will also be deterred, except under extreme provocation, from deliber­
ately initiating general war or from reacting militarily to any local crisis 
in a manner which would gravely risk broadening such a conflict into 
general war.
