International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
469
Schmidt: The UK has not been mentioned.
Callaghan: If anything would be mentioned, it would be the
common agricultural policy.
Giscard: It is a question of method. We can’t open the door on sub-
sidies at 4:30. We can accept this because it has no practical conse-
quences. But this would not be honest on our part. U.S. firms for in-
stance have favorable contracts on defense production. Is this a
subsidy? Let’s put this on the agenda for the next Summit.
Carter: I will yield on this issue but I do not accept the French argu-
ment. We are concerned about the excessive use of subsidies. We tried
in our phrasing to be as innocuous as possible but apparently this
caused some embarrassment to some countries. We will not insist on it,
but we are concerned about excessive and perhaps growing subsidies.
Schmidt: We must not [now] spend some time on North/South
issues.
Fukuda: We are surrounded by LDCs. We enjoy a close relation-
ship with ASEAN, whose views and philosophy we find compatible
with industrialized nations. The developing countries want us to
suppress protectionism and there are a number of institutional matters
on which the developing countries request our decisions. They want
expanded imports by the developed countries. They also want estab-
lishment of a common fund and want specific consideration by devel-
oped countries of commodities. They urgently want a conclusive atti-
tude on the common fund to achieve results by next year’s UNCTAD
meeting in Manila.2 It is important for the developed countries to take
some improved philosophy or posture. On the common fund, we
should show an attitude of determination to work on the common fund
idea to provide a conclusive idea by the end of the year. This would be
a meaningful gesture to the LDCs.
As for Japan, we will double aid in 3 years. We are also trying to
improve our growth and to provide co-financing through the interna-
tional financial institutions. Some success resulted from the UNCTAD
meeting last March,3 but we must still deal with the mounting debt
problem of LDCs and develop a conclusive attitude on rising debt.
Schmidt: In addition to the general evaluation of the situation, do
you want to alter the communique?
Fukuda: I do not propose any changes, but you mentioned
common fund. In addition to the draft, I suggest that we approach our
2 UNCTAD V took place in Manila May 7–June 3, 1979.
3 The negotiating conference on the Common Fund, agreed to at UNCTAD IV in
May 1976, held a preliminary meeting in Geneva March 6–April 3, 1977.
