12 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 12. Telegram 244 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 2, 1955, noon 244. From Johnson. Second meeting with Chinese held August 2, 10 A.M. I led off with statement on Americans detained in China. I expressed deep concern of American people at continued detention of civilians pointing out many imprisoned over four years and others under house arrest or denied exit permits. I said despite my government’s efforts through various chan­ nels and direct talks initiated by Wang and me last year and continued at consular level results have not been entirely satisfactory as Wang him­ self stated yesterday. At least 36 American civilians still detained in China mostly in prison. I emphasized this causes continued deep concern to American people and inevitably heavily influences attitude of American people and government toward Wang’s government. I handed Wang list of 36 American civilians. I continued that although gratified at release 11 rpt 11 Air Force personnel I must in all frankness stress that only release of all Americans both civilian and military detained by Wang’s govern­ ment would serve dispel ill feeling existing in US over this issue and bring about atmosphere permitting fruitful discussion other practical matters. I then told Wang I was aware his government’s interest in discussing ques­ tion of some Chinese civilians in US. Said I would be glad hear his views. Wang replied he had noted my statement, that he would answer some questions raised there this morning and others later. Then pro­ ceeded read prepared statement qte status of American nationals from our viewpoint unqte as follows: American nationals treated like all other aliens in China and accorded protection so long as they respect Chinese law. If they breach Chinese law treated as law provides. Wang said his government had been informing US from time to time of status Americans in China and was now rpt now willing advise US once again of status of Americans and measures they intended to take out of special consideration. Classified Americans in four categories: 1. 42 ordinary Americans. This includes those who had applied to leave China and those who had not. Those under this category may apply and leave any time provided they not involved in unfinished 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–255. Confidential. Attached is a message stating that the date of telegram 244, “received as August 2, midnight should be corrected to read August 2, noon.”
