1272  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
altitudes above 20,000 feet will not be detected by nuclear techniques. 
Figure 5 is a graphic portrayal of the situation that will occur in the case 
of low yield tests in the environment under discussion.
Debris collection seems to be at its greatest disadvantage in the 
summer time. From fall through winter and spring collection activities 
are at their best. It is, therefore, believed that the air sampling technique 
will substantially add to the overall system capability but it is difficult 
to make a quantitative assessment. The overall detection capability for 
the system under the environment being discussed must, therefore, 
rely to a certain extent on the judgment as to what size nuclear cloud 
could escape routine sampling flights from 30° N to 85° N during short 
periods when interruptions of flight schedules occur and to what extent 
clouds from small shots would overpass routine flight lines.
Taking everything into consideration, it is believed that for tests in the 
USSR between the surface and 50,000 feet there will be a substantial con­
tribution to the acoustic component by the nuclear detection component. 
A combined acoustic and nuclear detection capability, which is believed 
to be the determining factor in the low yield range, is shown in Table III.
Table III
Overall Detection and Identification Capability for Airbursts 
between the Surface and 50,000 feet
Detection 
Coefficient
Overall Acoustic 
(KT)
Acoustic plus 
Nuclear (KT)
Excellent (90–100%)
≥15
≥10
Good (60–90%)
10–14
5–10
Fair (30–60%)
5–9
3–5
Poor (0–30%)
<5
<3
The limited capability for seismic and electromagnetic techniques to 
contribute in the low yield air burst range does not permit any quanti­
tative evaluation of the small contributions which they may make. Both 
techniques are limited, however, in any case to small tests conducted on 
or near the surface as indicated above and to some large yield tests at 
moderate heights of burst. There is the possibility mentioned in para­
graph 1c of some assistance from the electromagnetic component on 
surface or low air bursts.
b. Subsurface Tests. It is assumed that a clandestine subsurface test 
by the USSR will be conducted in such a way that no radioactive debris 
will be cast into the atmosphere, that the shot will be sufficiently tamped 
to prevent any energy appearing in acoustic waves and, of course, that 
there will be no electromagnetic radiation. The seismic component of 
the Long Range Detection System will then be the sole component 
responsible for the detection of such a test.
