432 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Egypt’s Objectives The letter4 that has just come in from Sadat concentrates entirely on the need for an “unequivocal commitment on what is to take place in the West Bank and Gaza in implementation of the Camp David Framework;” it does not mention any of the other issues over which the two sides are bargaining. From my meeting Thursday with the Egyptians,5 the West Bank/Gaza issue will clearly be the focus of the Egyptian delegation’s negotiating efforts now that Boutros Ghali has returned. How far they are prepared to push this remains a difficult question to answer, but they are starting off with a long list—e.g., setting dates not only for beginning West Bank/Gaza negotiations but also for the establishment of the self-governing authority and the end of the military government, plus a half dozen or so unilateral steps they want Israel to agree to now. Undoubtedly the delegation itself would be prepared to hold up progress on the treaty in order to achieve these commitments. But you will recall that at Camp David we dropped the paragraph on linkage when Sadat himself did not press very hard for it. The same pattern could repeat itself in the present circumstances. Sadat may be giving his advisors a license to achieve what they can for a period of time figuring that he will settle for whatever he can get rather than delay conclusion of the Treaty beyond a certain point.6 On the other hand, Arab pressures may be registering more keenly on Sadat in the wake of the Baghdad Summit7 than they were at Camp David. Secret resolutions8 were apparently passed at Baghdad calling 4 See Document 126. 5 No record of this meeting has been found. 6 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Excessive.” 7 The Arab League convened in Baghdad November 2–5 in response to the agreements signed between Egypt and Israel at Camp David. The conference resolved that the Accords harmed the rights of the Palestinian people, and urged the Egyptian Government not to ratify the agreements and to align itself with the Arab League. The League also froze its relations with the Government of Egypt. (“Arab League Appeals to Egyptians to Renounce Accord with Israelis” The New York Times, November 6, 1978. p. 1) On November 4, Sadat refused to receive a delegation of Foreign Ministers from Arab countries that had been sent from the Baghdad Conference to Cairo. (Boutros Ghali, Egypt’s Road to Jerusalem, p. 173) 8 During a November 7 briefing on the conclusions of the Baghdad Conference, Saudi Deputy Foreign Minster Abd al-Rahman Mansuri told officials of the Embassy at Jidda that the Saudi delegation had blocked an attempt by the “rejectionists” to propose an Arab break in diplomatic, political, and economic relations with Egypt by making the counterproposal that these items should be discussed at a “later” conference of Arab Foreign Ministers and Economic Ministers. (Telegram 7992 from Jidda, November 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780460–0171) Of the Saudi decision to “join” the “rejectionists” in their condemnation of Egypt, Carter wrote in his memoirs that, despite the Saudi explanation of their “moderating influence, he “was disturbed that the Saudis had not fulfilled their earlier commitment to me.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 410)
