Comprehensive Test Ban
425
As a final point, Cy Vance has noted that the UK might insist on
going with challenge inspection; however, in our consultations with
them, the British have indicated that they do not have a firm position
on verification and will follow our lead on these issues. Consequently, I
recommend that you authorize us to propose a small annual quota of
mandatory inspections in addition to the obligation for explanation of
any refusals. I have in mind that the quota might be perhaps two or
three per year, but we will have the Working Group take a quick look at
this to ensure that it is consistent with our needs.
As you know, Defense was anxious that tabling the Working Paper
might prejudice our position on the sorts of experiments that could be
conducted under a CTB, or the detailed nature of verification provi-
sions we would need on on-site inspection and internal seismic sta-
tions. These issues are currently undergoing intensive interagency
study and we will not be ready to discuss them in detail until January.
However, the Working Paper was carefully drafted to avoid preju-
dicing these issues, and in the SCC discussion we agreed to some modi-
fications which will further protect us on these issues, including an ex-
plicit caveat to this effect in your instructions to Paul Warnke. Harold
would still prefer on balance to withhold the portions of the paper
dealing with prohibitions on weapons tests or PNEs, pending further
SCC review, but can accept tabling of the entire document subject to the
agreed modifications and caveat in your instructions.
Following is a brief discussion of the other key issues, together
with the SCC agreed recommendations:
PNEs. The Soviets have proposed that their three-year moratorium
on PNEs be incorporated in a Protocol to the CTB treaty which would
call for continuing negotiations on how to permit PNEs in the future.
We would agree to having a Protocol on PNEs, providing that it is in-
tegrally linked to the treaty and would remain in force concurrently
with the treaty. Rather than agree to continue negotiations on how to
permit PNEs, we would simply offer to keep them under consideration
and would insist that any subsequent agreement on PNEs would re-
quire an amendment of the treaty with our agreement.
Duration. Consistent with previous instructions, Paul Warnke
would be authorized to indicate, while maintaining our position that
the treaty should continue in force indefinitely without French or Chi-
nese adherence, that each party should have the right to withdraw
from the treaty with one year’s advance notice if it determined that con-
tinued testing by a non-party affected its security.
Internal Seismic Stations. The Soviets continue to object to our con-
cept of “black boxes,” but have indicated that they would be willing to
consider joint design of “national stations” in order to assure adequate
authentication of seismic data. From a verification standpoint, it is un-
