Afghanistan
183
ity.3 As between the second and third explanations, I like the second
one since I think that Amin would have held out longer in his bluff
against the Soviets, and will doubt his vague professions of future
collegiality until he starts implementing them. That, however, is only
a guess. (TS/Codeword)
It is hard to see how the Soviets can come out winners no matter
which is the case. They tried before to put a national front together
and failed, probably because nobody else would play. Why would
anybody be more willing to sign on now—unless the Soviets could
give credible guarantees that there would be a genuine sharing of
power? That doesn’t seem too likely. And, given the growing weakness
of the regime, why would anybody want to share power now when
they might get the whole thing shortly? (There may be in fact reasons
that would impel people to do so, arising perhaps from inter-tribal
considerations. But I don’t understand these and know nobody who
does.) (S)
Most likely, the Soviets have just been pushed a big step nearer to
their moment of truth in Afghanistan. In this game of “Ten Little
Afghans,” there is now only one left. (S)
Whatever the Soviet role in this, they should be made to look as
if they had a hand in the operation. Taraki was something of a Lenin
figure and had a degree of foreign respect. Amin is the Stalin of the
drama and the Soviets should have him hung prominently around
their necks. (S)
Brement concurs.
3 This uncertainty was reflected in a September 17 intelligence note for the Secretary
of Defense, which stated that on the one hand [text not declassified] “possibly reflected”
Soviet foreknowledge; on the other, Soviet facilities and residential areas in Kabul only
received extra protection in reaction to the fighting that broke out at the palace, thus
suggesting Amin’s move took the Soviets by surprise. (Department of Defense, Afghan
War Collection, Box 4, USSR in Afghanistan (September 79)) In telegram 7063 from
Kabul, September 22, the Embassy reported that Vasily Safronchuk, Minister-Counselor
of the Soviet Embassy, denied that the Soviets had any advance knowledge of the
takeover. (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Soviets in Afghani-
stan—General Part #1) A situation report prepared in the CIA, September 18, found “no
evidence” of Soviet complicity in Taraki’s ouster, and cited the unlikelihood that Brezhnev
would have met with Taraki during his visit to Moscow had Brezhnev known Taraki’s
fate. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job
81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box
6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Pre-Invasion Reporting) A CIA intelligence information cable,
September 19, quoted Aleksandr Puzanov, Soviet Ambassador to Afghanistan, who
allegedly told the Yugoslav Ambassador to Afghanistan that Brezhnev and Taraki had
discussed replacing Amin as Prime Minister. According to this report, Amin learned of
the discussion and was consequently prepared for the “power play” of September 14.
(Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, USSR in Afghanistan (Septem-
ber 79))
