514  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
DR–25.	
Memorandum of the Discussion at the 453rd Meeting of 
the National Security Council1
[Extract]

Monday, July 25, 1960
3. FORTHCOMING MEETING OF THE ORGANIZATION OF 
AMERICAN STATES WITH RESPECT TO CUBA AND THE 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Secretary Herter said that the Organization of American States 
would hold a meeting on August 15 to discuss action with respect to the 
Dominican Republic. Venezuela was trying to effect a separation between 
the problem of Cuba and the problem of the Dominican Republic. The 
OAS had sent a special mission to investigate the Venezuelan charge that 
the attack on Betancourt2 had been directed by the Dominican Republic. 
If the OAS proposes sanctions against the Dominican Republic, the case 
would have to go to the UN. The OAS, however, can recommend mea-
sures which each state could implement individually. Secretary Herter 
said the U.S. would suggest such measures as the following against the 
Dominican Republic: withdrawal of Chiefs of Missions; the admonition 
to take into account OAS condemnation in relations with the Dominican 
Republic; refusal to permit the shipment of arms and ammunition into the 
Dominican Republic; collaborating in preventing shipment of arms and 
ammunition from the Dominican Republic to other countries, including 
air and sea patrols; a request that other nations outside the hemisphere 
take note of the measures recommended by the OAS; creation of a com-
mittee to observe the implementing of these measures.
The President asked whether it would not be desirable to add 
to the list surveillance to make certain that no other American state 
intervenes militarily in the Dominican Republic. Secretary Herter said 
the recommendation on the shipment of arms and ammunition into 
the Dominican Republic would prohibit such intervention and was 
intended to cover the President’s point.
The President said he believed it was desirable to connect the cases 
of the Dominican Republic and Cuba but he also believed that it was 
very necessary to settle the Trujillo situation because it appears to be 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Extract. 
Drafted and signed by Marion W. Boggs on July 28. Information on the source text indi-
cates that this NSC meeting was held at Newport, Rhode Island. Agenda items 1 and 
2 are omitted; they cover, respectively, “Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. 
Security” and “Measures to Enhance U.S. Military Readiness.”
2 For documentation on the attempted assassination of President Betancourt, see 
VE–44 and DR–26.
