Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 191. Intelligence Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 [paper number not declassified] Washington, January 1980 [Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and cover page.] The Soviet Leadership Balance and Afghanistan ([classification marking not declassified]) Key Judgments The decision to intervene in Afghanistan has raised the question— as all major Soviet decisions have in the past—of the degree of consensus that existed among the leadership on this action. It has also prompted speculation that President Brezhnev—the Kremlin’s strongest advocate of detente—is no longer a leading force in Soviet policymaking. ([classification marking not declassified]) On balance we believe that Brezhnev remains the dominant force within the Politburo and was directly involved in and supportive of the decision to invade Afghanistan. Measuring the level of enthusiasm within the Soviet hierarchy for military action is more difficult. We suspect there were some reservations, but we believe these concerns did not extend to fear for the future of detente, a policy with which the leadership was increasingly disenchanted during the closing months of 1979. ([classification marking not declassified]) Public statements by Soviet leaders about Afghanistan before the invasion occurred revealed little more than a common concern with developments there. Party ideologist Suslov, who has often spoken out favorably about revolutionary processes in the Third World, implied that Afghanistan was a Communist state worth preserving. This could mean that he was in the vanguard of those favoring intervention. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) Premier Kosygin was removed from the political scene in mid- October by a heart attack and almost certainly did not play an active part in the Afghan decision. His counsel probably would have been on the side of caution, and his absence from office probably facilitated the choice for military action. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]) 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
