536
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
191.
Intelligence Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[paper number not declassified]
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and
cover page.]
The Soviet Leadership Balance and Afghanistan
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
The decision to intervene in Afghanistan has raised the question—
as all major Soviet decisions have in the past—of the degree of con-
sensus that existed among the leadership on this action. It has also
prompted speculation that President Brezhnev—the Kremlin’s strong-
est advocate of detente—is no longer a leading force in Soviet policy-
making. ([classification marking not declassified])
On balance we believe that Brezhnev remains the dominant force
within the Politburo and was directly involved in and supportive of
the decision to invade Afghanistan. Measuring the level of enthusiasm
within the Soviet hierarchy for military action is more difficult. We
suspect there were some reservations, but we believe these concerns
did not extend to fear for the future of detente, a policy with which the
leadership was increasingly disenchanted during the closing months
of 1979. ([classification marking not declassified])
Public statements by Soviet leaders about Afghanistan before the
invasion occurred revealed little more than a common concern with
developments there. Party ideologist Suslov, who has often spoken out
favorably about revolutionary processes in the Third World, implied
that Afghanistan was a Communist state worth preserving. This could
mean that he was in the vanguard of those favoring intervention.
([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
Premier Kosygin was removed from the political scene in mid-
October by a heart attack and almost certainly did not play an active
part in the Afghan decision. His counsel probably would have been
on the side of caution, and his absence from office probably facilitated
the choice for military action. ([classification marking, codeword, and han-
dling restriction not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. A statement on the title page reads: “The author of this paper
is [text not declassified] USSR-Eastern Europe Division, Office of Political Analysis.”
