3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
669
then it will be difficult to preserve the proper relations between our two
countries.
The Secretary expressed the hope that Gromyko might have, on
the basis of his reflections since their last meeting, some thoughts on
practical steps that could move us in the direction of a constructive and
mutually satisfactory resolution of our problem. Steps which the So-
viets could take along the lines we have suggested would speak more
loudly than words and would be a considerable help in defusing the
issue. As he had said earlier, we would, of course, not represent such
steps as resulting from any sort of agreement between us.
That, in brief, was where the Secretary saw us at this point after re-
flecting carefully about the situation and where we stood at this
moment.
Gromyko said that, from what the Secretary had just said, he drew
the conclusion that the Secretary had nothing new to say as compared
to what he had brought with him for their previous conversation.
The Secretary acknowledged that in the way of suggestions he did
not have anything new. He had given the situation a great deal of
thought.
Gromyko said that the considerations and comments the Secretary
had made at their previous meeting had been the subject of Soviet reac-
tion at that time, and Gromyko had voiced their thoughts regarding the
Secretary’s suggestions. He did not want to repeat himself, but would
confirm what had been said then on their side.
The Soviets cannot accept any of the conditions the Secretary had
suggested. He would restate this now.
Gromyko said he had to say that the Secretary was evidently pro-
ceeding from some sort of erroneous premises. He was evidently con-
vinced that U.S. hints to the effect that certain questions might be re-
solved not in the way the Soviet side would want to see them resolved
(and here he was specifically referring to ratification of the SALT Treaty
and to MFN), that they would be decided in a different, i.e., negative
way if the Soviets adhered to their position, would lead the Soviets to
change that position. Gromyko would not recommend that such hints
be voiced. They did not make any impression on the Soviets other than
a negative impression. The Soviet side had always stressed that the
Treaty is a bilateral matter, that it was needed equally by both the So-
viet Union and the U.S., and that this matter could not be held hostage
for exerting pressure or influence on the Soviet Union. A method of
that kind was quite inappropriate and Gromyko thought that the Secre-
tary was aware this was the case. The same thing applied to the ques-
tion of MFN.
The Secretary said he wanted to speak to that. He believed that
Gromyko had not carefully listened to what the Secretary had been
