Human Rights human rights performance and he used as an example of what could be done the progress that has been made by quiet persuasion on the population problem. 4. Problem of Conflicting Interests—Erb of Treasury made the point that in a number of cases our own national security interests might be in conflict with pressure to improve human rights performance of individual countries and he urged that some consideration of this problem be included in the redraft. He specifically called for the establishment of some procedure whereby the issue of human rights could be introduced into the decision-making process so that a conscious decision could be made between competing U.S. interests. 5. Existing Human Rights Agreement, Charters and Conventions— Goldklang of Justice stressed that the U.S. is a party to a number of overlapping international agreements affecting human rights, including the UN Charter, the Genocide Treaty, the OAS Agreement on Human Rights, the Helsinki Declaration, etc. He pointed out that the legal basis for taking action in a specific case would depend upon what agreements have been ratified by the country in question. 6. Communist vs Non-Communist Countries—There was an inconclusive discussion of the need for making a distinction between Communist and non-Communist countries in our policy approach. Derian argued strongly against such a distinction but Tuchman and the majority seem to feel that it was necessary to draw this line. 7. Intelligence Contribution—Tuchman felt that a section of the PRM should specifically call for an intelligence contribution and she indicated she would introduce such a paragraph into the redraft. Baker of State and I pointed out that the CIA Stations did contribute to the Embassy reporting to Congress on the human rights situation as required by law. 8. Belgrade Conference—There was general agreement that there was need for clarifying U.S. policy towards the Belgrade Conference3 and this item will be covered in Tuchman’s redraft. 9. At the end of the meeting I had a chance to chat briefly with Tuchman and suggested that we get together to review the present status of Agency production in this field and she indicated that she very much wanted to do so and would be in touch with me.4 Cord Meyer, Jr. 3 Reference is to the CSCE Review Conference, scheduled to take place in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, in October 1977.
