Human Rights
61
human rights performance and he used as an example of what could be
done the progress that has been made by quiet persuasion on the popu-
lation problem.
4. Problem of Conflicting Interests—Erb of Treasury made the point
that in a number of cases our own national security interests might be
in conflict with pressure to improve human rights performance of indi-
vidual countries and he urged that some consideration of this problem
be included in the redraft. He specifically called for the establishment
of some procedure whereby the issue of human rights could be intro-
duced into the decision-making process so that a conscious decision
could be made between competing U.S. interests.
5. Existing Human Rights Agreement, Charters and Conventions—
Goldklang of Justice stressed that the U.S. is a party to a number of
overlapping international agreements affecting human rights, in-
cluding the UN Charter, the Genocide Treaty, the OAS Agreement on
Human Rights, the Helsinki Declaration, etc. He pointed out that the
legal basis for taking action in a specific case would depend upon what
agreements have been ratified by the country in question.
6. Communist vs Non-Communist Countries—There was an incon-
clusive discussion of the need for making a distinction between Com-
munist and non-Communist countries in our policy approach. Derian
argued strongly against such a distinction but Tuchman and the ma-
jority seem to feel that it was necessary to draw this line.
7. Intelligence Contribution—Tuchman felt that a section of the PRM
should specifically call for an intelligence contribution and she indi-
cated she would introduce such a paragraph into the redraft. Baker of
State and I pointed out that the CIA Stations did contribute to the Em-
bassy reporting to Congress on the human rights situation as required
by law.
8. Belgrade Conference—There was general agreement that there
was need for clarifying U.S. policy towards the Belgrade Conference3
and this item will be covered in Tuchman’s redraft.
9. At the end of the meeting I had a chance to chat briefly with
Tuchman and suggested that we get together to review the present
status of Agency production in this field and she indicated that she
very much wanted to do so and would be in touch with me.4
Cord Meyer, Jr.
3 Reference is to the CSCE Review Conference, scheduled to take place in Belgrade,
Yugoslavia, in October 1977.
4 According to Lake’s March 25 memorandum to Vance (Document 29), the NSC
cancelled the human rights PRM. Tuchman, during a May 24 Interagency Working
Group meeting, indicated that the NSC had rejected her draft PRM outline in March (see
Document 50). The final version of the PRM, as approved by the President, is printed as
Document 46.
