154 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 announcement by the Kurdish Democratic Party that they are prepared to act in unity with Khomeini in the event of U.S. military intervention is perhaps indicative of greater support throughout the Arab world on that issue. (S) 2. Energy. DOE is conducting a survey of the oil companies to get a better fix on the gasoline production versus draw down of crude reserves. They will continue to report as the information becomes clearer. It would be premature to take the issue to the President at this point. The IEA meeting went well,3 but the IEA is probably going to ask the U.S. for more visible leadership, specifically some tough steps on the energy front, e.g., a move toward rationing or an increase in excise taxes on gasoline. (C) 3. Iranian Assets. There was considerable confusion in the international markets concerning Iran’s intentions to meet their financial obligations. Thus far there has not been a cascade of seizures. It was the judgment of the SCC that we should not push the Export-Import Bank to declare Iran in default during the next few very dangerous days. The Bank would prefer to follow its usual procedure of trying to negotiate a settlement.4 (C) 4. Iranian Exports. State, Commerce and Treasury will meet today to review our position on exports of food and other commodities. Although we have taken a public position exempting food and medicine from the freeze, should we be in the position of pushing the unions and others to continue loading ships? This question will be reviewed tomorrow.5 (C) 5. Immigration and Civil Rights. There have been a number of complaints about the rights of Iranians being violated by being fired from jobs, refusals to serve them, etc. The SCC agreed that the Attorney General should let it be known that violations of U.S. law will not be condoned. (C) 6. Public Posture. Jody Powell will consult with State and provide for the meeting tomorrow a list of actions which we could promote to demonstrate U.S. popular solidarity with the hostages. Bruce Laingen, for example, has suggested that church bells be rung each day at noon, 3 The IEA Governing Board met in Paris November 16. At this meeting, the U.S. delegation urged the IEA to advance its scheduled January Ministerial level meeting to December prior to OPEC’s December 17 Caracas meeting. The IEA agreed to meet December 10 to focus on oil import limitations. (Ronald Koven, “Acts by Key Allies Back Iran Oil Ban,” Washington Post, November 17, 1979, p. A12; Steven Rattner, “Miller Cites Plans to Cut U.S. Oil Use,” New York Times, November 24, 1979, p. 29) See also Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980, Document 244 and footnote 3 thereto. 4 Carter wrote “somewhat reluctantly” next to his approval of this item. 5 Carter underlined the phrase “pushing the unions,” then wrote in the margin: “no.”
