1058 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement said he was able to obtain official transportation but it broke down in the first hundred yards. Secretary Gates said he had no identification and at first the marines would not let him inside the gates to board the helicopter. Mr. Gray felt the exercise indicated that a meeting of the National Security Council could be assembled on rather short notice. The President believed the exercise of moving a Council Meeting to a relocation site had been a desirable one. He remarked that he had arrived at High Point early in order to inspect the facilities. 1. HISTORY OF U.S. AND USSR LONG-­RANGE MISSILE DEVELOPMENT (NSC Action No. 2137) Mr. Gray recalled that at the Council Meeting on October 15, 1959 (NSC Action No. 2137) the President had requested the Secretary of Defense to arrange for the preparation of a factual history of the devel­ opment by the U.S. of long-­range guided missile weapons systems. The President had also requested the Director of Central Intelligence to arrange for the preparation of a history of the development by the USSR of such missile systems. These histories had now been prepared and summaries of them would be presented by Dr. York for the Department of Defense and Dr. Scoville for the Central Intelligence Agency. Dr. York said that before and during World War II, the develop­ ment of missiles had been primarily in the hands of the Germans. Following World War, II U.S. armed forces instituted a number of study programs of long-­range missiles, which were considered to be missiles with a potential range greater than 1000 miles. He displayed a bar chart entitled “Development of Long-­Range Missiles by the U.S.” which portrayed our long-­range missile programs from 1945 to the present. Dr. York called attention to the Army HERMES B and C programs which involved a winged ram-­jet and a study of rocket missiles. All of the study programs, Dr. York went on, were characterized by rap­ idly changing plans through 1950. Dr. York also called attention to the REDSTONE program which later became the JUPITER program and to TRITON, which was a Navy study at an applied physics laboratory but never an actual missile. However, out of TRITON developed the REGULUS I and REGULUS II, both of which were eventually cancelled because of the prospective development of POLARIS. Dr. York then called attention to a number of Army Air Corps and later U.S. Air Force studies which involved some work on rockets, although the bulk of the work was concerned with air breathers. Most of these studies ended after a year except for SNARK which went on into the development phase. However, at the time of the Korean War it was decided that no program should be given priority unless it involved a missile which could be ready by 1954. After this decision SNARK reverted to study status.
