alliances, and great military forces were not brought about by any mutual dislike for
independence, but resulted from the domination of circumstances. Ultimately they were
forced on us. Like all others engaged in the war whatever we said as a matter of fact we
joined an alliance, we became a military power, we impaired our independence. We
have more at stake than any one else in avoiding a repetition of that calamity. Wars do
not spring into existence. They arise from small incidents and trifling irritations which
can be adjusted by an international court. We can contribute greatly to the advancement
of our ideals by joining with other nations in maintaining such a tribunal.
FOREIGN DEBTS
Gradually, settlements have been made which provide for the liquidation of debts due
to our Government from foreign governments. Those made with Great Britain, Finland,
Hungary, Lithuania, and Poland have already been approved by the Congress. Since the
adjournment, 
further 
agreements 
have 
been 
entered 
into 
with 
Belgium,
Czechoslovakia, Latvia, Esthonia, Italy, and Rumania. These 11 nations, which have
already made settlements, represent $6,419,528,641 of the original principal of the
loans. The principal sums without interest, still pending, are the debt of France, of
$3,340,000,000; Greece, $15,000,000; Yugoslavia, $51,000,000; Liberia, $26,000;
Russia, $192,000,000, which those at present in control have undertaken openly to
repudiate; Nicaragua, $84,000, which is being paid currently; and Austria, $24,000,000,
on which by act of Congress a moratorium of 20 years has been granted. The only
remaining sum is $12,000,000, due from Armenia, which has now ceased to exist as an
independent nation.
In accordance with the settlements made, the amount of principal and interest which is
to be paid to the United States under these agreements aggregates $15,200,688,253.93.
It is obvious that the remaining settlements, which will undoubtedly be made, will
bring this sum up to an amount which will more than equal the principal due on our
present national debt. While these settlements are very large in the aggregate, it has
been felt that the terms granted were in all cases very generous. They impose no undue
burden and are mutually beneficial in the observance of international faith and the
improvement of international credit.
Every reasonable effort will be made to secure agreements for liquidation with the
remaining countries, whenever they are in such condition that they can be made. Those
which have already been negotiated under the bipartisan commission established by the
Congress have been made only after the most thoroughgoing and painstaking
investigation, continued for a long time before meeting with the representatives of the
countries concerned. It is believed that they represent in each instance the best that can
be done and the wisest settlement that can be secured. One very important result is the
stabilization of foreign currency, making exchange assist rather than embarrass our
trade. Wherever sacrifices have been made of money, it will be more than amply
