844  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
which also carries other nukes. Our position, of course, is the bomber 
still counts as ten and we have told the Soviets that this was nailed 
down last spring. Nazarkin is being cagey and suggests that Moscow 
may still cling to its earlier position that an ALCM heavy bomber with 
other nukes should count as eleven.
— The B–1 Problem: The Soviets have tabled language that sug-
gests that because the B–1 has been tested with an ALCM, all 97 of the 
B–1s must be counted as ALCM carriers. This clearly is unacceptable 
and should be presented to the Soviets as a potential treaty-­buster. We 
should tell them that B–1s will be counted as ALCM carriers only if and 
when they are deployed as such.
— The B–2 Problem: The Joint Staff is said to have no flexibility 
on inspecting the B–2. But I don’t know how we’re going to sell this 
to the Soviets. It should be noted that the B–2 is also an obstacle to a 
solution to the issue of cooperative measures to enhance NTM and, as 
outlined above, to solving tagging. I agree that we shouldn’t tag the 
B–2, but I don’t see any harm in rolling the planes outside their hangars 
for six hours six times a year.
— ALCM Inspection Regime: Right now, we would only let the 
Soviets inspect certain storage facilities for ALCMs at air bases, and 
only at bases for non-ALCM bombers and conventional bombers. 
Moreover, we are only prepared to let them inspect those missiles that 
we identify as being non-­nuclear ALCMs. I think there is a clear need 
to extend inspections, on a random basis, to all storage areas and to all 
bases. I think the Joint Staff has flexibility here.
— ALCM Distinguishability: The problem here is that the Soviets 
want to include technical differences between nuclear and non-­nuclear 
ALCMs in the treaty that would prevent the conversion of one to the 
other. We have a less demanding concept of distinguishability, but so 
far we haven’t been very specific. If we are to solve this, we need to be.
I don’t think we can tie the ALCM/Heavy Bomber complex into 
a neat package—­each issue will probably have to be addressed on its 
own merits. That said, if the Soviets are prepared to give in on ALCM 
attribution and B–1 counting, then I think we should be more flexible 
on an ALCM inspection regime and inspecting the B–2.
— Other Issues: Finally, Reg, I haven’t addressed either Data Denial 
or RV counting/New Types because Washington has yet to flesh out its 
position on those two issues. I would only say on Data Denial that the 
Senate, especially the Intelligence Committee, will not understand an 
outcome that gives both sides all kinds of latitude to continue encryp-
tion. On RV Counting/New Types, my only plea at this stage is: Keep 
it simple.
