Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1189 America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, with 10 annexes (“Memorandum of Understanding”). Also enclosed, for the information of the Senate, are documents that are associated with, but not integral parts of, the Treaty. These documents are of four types: separate executive agreements related to the Treaty; letters embodying executive agreements on various aspects of the Treaty; declarations regarding specific systems that do not fall within the scope of the Treaty; and a variety of statements and correspondence concerning aspects of the negotiation of the Treaty. Although not submitted for the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification, these documents are relevant to the consideration of the Treaty by the Senate. INTRODUCTION The Treaty’s central limits require the Parties to reduce and limit their strategic offensive arms so that specified limits are reached at designated intervals over a seven-year period from entry into force of the Treaty. The Treaty’s central limits also restrict the aggregate throwweight of deployed ICBMs and deployed SLBMs. In addition, the Treaty places restrictions on, among other items, non-deployed ICBMs and non-deployed SLBMs, ICBM launchers and SLBM launchers, heavy bombers and former heavy bombers, ICBMs and SLBMs used for delivering objects into space, ballistic missile submarines, and on certain types of facilities. The Treaty contains other prohibitions and restrictions, including those covering “heavy” ICBMs and SLBMs and their launchers, the locations of various strategic offensive arms, reentry vehicles, certain types of flight-testing, and the basing of strategic offensive arms subject to the limitations of the Treaty outside of each Party’s national territory. The Treaty requires the Parties to broadcast telemetric information during flight tests of ICBMs and SLBMs and generally to refrain from any activity that could deny the other Party full access to such information. The Treaty establishes a far-reaching inspection regime, including on-site inspections, special access visits, continuous on-site monitoring of certain facilities, and technical exhibitions. This regime is designed to complement national technical means, the primary source for monitoring compliance with the provisions of the Treaty. Cooperative measures, such as the display of road-mobile and rail-mobile launchers of ICBMs, are also required and are designed to further enhance the effectiveness of our national technical means. BACKGROUND INFORMATION The goal of meaningful reductions in strategic offensive arms has long been sought by the United States and has its roots in the very
