863.51 Relief Credits/149
[Document 776]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[WASHINGTON,] August 16, 1928.
The Austrian Minister called this morning to discuss the question of the
steps to be taken in further reference to the loan and debt settlement. He
said that he had just received a letter from Dr. Schüller, stating that the
Austrian Government confidently expects an early adjustment of the
difficulties with Italy which lead to the blocking by the latter of the loan
proposal. The Austrian Chancellor had, with great reluctance, deemed it
advisable to make a statement to the effect that the questions arising in the
Italian Tyrol are regarded by Austria as wholly of Italian domestic concern.
The Italian representative, who had just returned to Vienna, had stated that
Mussolini would change his attitude on the Austrian loan. Mr. Prochnik
gathered that a settlement of the Austrian debt to Italy on the lines of the
settlement made with the other European creditors is likely within a very
few weeks.
The Minister stated that the Austrian Government had assured the European
creditors other than Italy that it would make no settlement with Italy on
terms more favorable to the latter than the terms embodied in the settlement
made with the other creditors.
The Minister then raised the question of further procedure in the United
States. He wondered whether it would not be better to drop the Bill
introduced at the last session of Congress and submit the definitive terms of
a debt settlement. He stated that the Austrian Government would be
prepared to sign with the United States a debt agreement embodying terms
analogous to those already agreed upon with the European creditors (except
Italy) with a clause added to the effect that, in the event of granting more
favorable terms to any other creditors, similar terms would be granted to the
United States. I stated that I would discuss with the Treasury and others the
question involved as to the tactics to be followed, and talk with him further.
