218 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Because certain deficiencies threaten to develop in our posture as a result of the recent and diverging patterns of defense spending in the United States and the Soviet Union, we need increased resources to redress them. I will discuss our main concerns here. The details of our needs will be found in the remainder of the report. II. THE STRATEGIC NUCLEAR FORCES A strategic nuclear attack is the least likely military contingency we face. However, there is no task more vital than the maintenance of the strategic nuclear balance between the United States and the Soviet Union. In my judgment, a rough strategic nuclear equilibrium exists between the two superpowers at the present time. Neither country enjoys a military advantage; neither is in a position to exploit its nuclear capabilities for political ends. The situation is one of standoff or stalemate. Mutual strategic deterrence and essential equivalence are in effect. This administration is determined to continue the current state of affairs. We would prefer to continue it through equitable and verifiable agreements for arms limitations and reductions, and I believe we are making progress in that direction through the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT). But we will maintain it by whatever means and resources are necessary. No one should have any doubts whatsoever on that score. I stress this determination for two basic reasons. First, the strategic balance is not static; owing to a substantial and continuing Soviet effort, it is highly dynamic. Second, the problem of coping with this dynamism is complex and demanding; there is no easy, one-­shot solution to it. The United States has not been idle in this competition; we have programs underway to modernize each element of our TRIAD. However, all of us must recognize that the Soviets continue to fund a number of large, impressive and costly strategic programs to strengthen their offensive capabilities, their active defenses, and their passive defense system. Exactly why the Soviets are pushing so hard to improve their strategic nuclear capabilities is uncertain. What is certain is that we cannot ignore their efforts or assume that they are motivated by considerations either of altruism or of pure deterrence. My own view is that, for many years now, we have been at the point where a full-­scale thermonuclear exchange between the United States and the Soviet Union would be a disaster of unprecedented proportions for both sides. Nothing I have learned during the past year has altered that conclusion. I also believe that any use of nuclear weapons by the two superpowers against one another—­whether tactical or
