International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 105 In Puerto Rico, I gave some figures about what would happen if we concluded commodity agreements for 25 commodities. It would mean that we would not only misallocate resources, but would create other economic mistakes. We would be enlarging the revenues and receipts of countries who do not need it. We would give the US and the Soviet Union windfall price increases. The Soviets already charge Eastern Europeans a lot. Commodity agreements will only raise the price of the exports of Australia, Canada and the USSR. We want to help the developing countries, not the developed countries. I have made a proposal to help the developing countries. We must, of course, have commodity agreements for a few tropical products. But we should use a Stabex scheme4 to avoid regulating all of the world’s market. This can help the developing countries without overregulation of most commodity markets. I do this not out of German interests, but to maintain the continuity of the world economic system as a whole. A solution is no good if it is simply a cheap gesture which will hurt the world economy in 1978 and 1979. We haven’t even seen the peak of the world structural problem. We can’t stand more economic upheaval. This is true of all of our European partners. Italy, France, the UK, and Germany are all under serious political strains because our people do not believe that our difficulties are insurmountable. They feel we can surmount them. If not, they will vote us out. Our objective should not be to please, but to help, the LDCs. We may want to please God, but we do not necessarily need to please the LDCs. We should think of the consequences of fixing world commodity prices. We should not repeat the situation of agriculture inside the EC. Too much commodity price-fixing leads to over-production, the cost of storage, buffer stocks, the breakdown of the system and too high costs for our economies. I can go along with anything you decide. I am not out to pursue German national interests. But I do not believe we should please the developing countries for a short while, if in the long run we suffer economically and politically. Andreotti: We should have considerations that relate not only to humanitarian and welfare concerns, but also to our interests. Without participation of the developing countries, there can be no constant development of the world economy. We should not have regulation of commodities as in the EC. On this I agree with Chancellor Schmidt. I believe we should move from a general statement to a concrete study which Schmidt also referred to. 4 See footnote 6, Document 24.
