National Security Policy  1081
4. In the light of the above decisions, the Joint Chiefs of Staff will, as 
a matter of priority, advise me of their views in regard to the remaining 
questions stated in CM–386–59, reference (c) above.
Tab A
NATIONAL STRATEGIC TARGETING AND ATTACK POLICY
1. Intent. To provide guidance for the optimum employment of 
appropriate United States atomic delivery forces in the strategic attack 
against the Sino-­Soviet Bloc.
2. Objectives. The basic objective of this policy is to establish an 
essential national task to be accomplished under the several conditions 
under which hostilities may be initiated. Specific objectives are:
a. Destroy or neutralize the Sino-­Soviet Bloc strategic nuclear 
delivery capability and primary military and government controls of 
major importance.
b. Destroy the major urban-­industrial centers of the Sino-­Soviet 
Bloc to the extent necessary to paralyze its economy.
3. Method of Accomplishment. In planning the strategic attack against 
the Sino-­Soviet Bloc war-­making potential, a National Strategic Target 
List (NSTL) and a single integrated operational plan (SIOP) shall be 
developed which will provide for the optimum integration of the com­
mitted forces for the attack of a minimum list of targets, the destruction 
of which will accomplish the objectives stated in paragraph 2 above.
4. Responsibilities. The responsibilities of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the 
commanders of unified and specified commands, and of the Director of 
Strategic Target Planning are as follows:
a. Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Joint Chiefs of Staff shall:
(1) Be responsible for National Strategic Targeting and Attack Policy.
(2) Review and approve the NSTL and the SIOP.
(3) Specify the date on which the SIOP will become effective.
b. Commanders of Unified and Specified Commands. The commanders 
of appropriate unified and specified commands shall:
(1) Provide permanent senior representation at the headquarters of 
the Director of Strategic Target Planning.
(2) Commit appropriate forces to the attack of targets of the NSTL 
and insure the timely execution of these attacks in consonance with the 
SIOP.
(3) Program no attacks against targets on the NSTL unless pro­
vided for by the SIOP.
c. Director of Strategic Target Planning.
(1) There shall be a Director of Strategic Target Planning, who as 
agent of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shall:
