168
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
should not be narrowly propagandistic, but why assume that a properly
led U.S. Government is going to want it to be? Why should the U.S.
Government abdicate responsibility for managing a major information
instrument in a world that wishes to have American positions and
American values explained to it and wishes to be informed on what
is happening in the United States?
18. An Administration which divested itself of control over VOA
might well find that it had created more problems for itself than it had
eliminated. There is the danger that VOA could drift into an adversary
position against the government; this is probably less serious danger
than decline in effectiveness and relevance.
19. None of this is to say that VOA could not benefit from some
improvements. Tight budgets and strict adherence to civil service
requirements have resulted in broadcast staffs that tend toward the
elderly and unimaginative. There is a case to be made for broadcasting
in more languages, for there is now hardly any corner of the world
where cheap radio receivers are not within reach of practically every-
one. There is, also a case for reviewing VOA’s position in our govern-
mental structure and for taking a fresh look at the way in which it is
given policy and administrative guidance. But this should be done
objectively and by persons free of the partisan views that have grown
up around some of these questions in the past few years.
20. All of the U.S. Government’s international broadcasting instru-
ments have been essentially marking time during recent years. Tech-
nically, they are all behind their competitors. A program for strengthening
them needs to be put into effect immediately. They have all been kept
under such tight budgetary restrictions that they have not been able
to experiment with more creative programming approaches or more
appealing ways of delivering news and information. They need to be
given the means of doing so. Both technically and substantively, they
need to be infused with new dynamism. Technical developments which
are now on the horizon—direct satellite broadcasting, e.g.—may pro-
vide the means of greatly increasing the impact of our international
broadcasting instruments a few years from now. We should rejuvenate
them so that they can take full advantage of what technological break-
throughs may offer.
