Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
749
The issue is this: Are we willing to commit sufficient resources to
the defense of our interests and the promotion of our ideals abroad?
The issue was raised again by the decision last week on Capitol Hill to
lop off still more of the funds we budget to help other countries bolster
their security, develop their economies, and help their people to sur-
vive.2 In less than 90 days, FY 1980 will be over. We’ve gone all this time
with no aid appropriation for 1980. We’ve limped along at last year’s
spending levels. The practical effect has been deep cuts in critical pro-
grams and projects. Now we have a supplemental appropriation. It be-
latedly funds a few of the most urgent activities—but then excludes all
the others. This is not a solution. It has simply prolonged much of the
problem.
Consider just a few examples of what we are forced to neglect be-
cause of the delay and the deletions I have mentioned.
• There is currently a serious shortage in Export-Import Bank
lending authority, a vehicle to promote American trade. That means
fewer American jobs and reduced American profits.
• Foreign military credit sales are curtailed—credits that could
have been used in areas of the world important to our security. Can
anyone look at Soviet activism in the world and conclude that this is the
time to neglect the security needs of our friends?
• The international military education and training program—a
program that increases the professionalism of military officers in devel-
oping countries—has been cut by 25%.
• We are funding international narcotics control efforts at 20%
below the amount approved earlier by a conference of the House and
Senate. This is not a large program, but it serves our interests by at-
tacking the drug problem that costs the American people billions each
year in crime, in lost health, and in ravaged lives.
• We have to absorb serious cuts in the Agency for International
Development’s (AID) programs to promote food production, rural de-
velopment, and nutrition. Projects in the Caribbean, in Kenya, and in
North Yemen are among those in jeopardy.
• The multilateral programs are especially hard hit. Only 16% of
what we owe the World Bank has been approved. Funding for the Af-
rican Development Fund would drop 40% from the budgeted
2 Presumable reference to House and Senate approval on July 2 of supplemental
foreign assistance appropriations for FY 1980. The House rejected a proposal to add $528
million in foreign aid. (Martin Tolchin, “Congress Approves $16.9 billion In Added Ap-
propriations for 1980,” The New York Times, July 3, 1980, pp. A–1, D–14) Muskie had ear-
lier criticized congressional inaction on the appropriations bill during a June 13 news
conference, noting that the lack of activity allowed the Soviet Union to take advantage of
“the doors of opportunity to spread their influence.” (“Muskie: Congress Jeopardizing
Policy by Not Approving Aid Bill,” The Washington Post, June 14, 1980, p. A–11)
