Covert and Overt Operations 293. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 6, 1980 SUBJECT Political Action Options on Iran (S) Some months ago, you approved several intelligence findings authorizing a significant covert action program toward Iran. During the February and March negotiations with Bani-Sadr, this program was conducted in a very low key to avoid disrupting the talks, although useful contacts were developed with a number of [less than 1 line not declassified] individuals which may prove valuable in the future. After the breakdown of the negotiations, all of our assets were devoted almost exclusively to the rescue operation. (S) Over the past month, we have again examined our options, with the objective of becoming more active in political action. The draft memorandum at Tab A represents the consensus of State, CIA, Defense, the JCS and myself about the present situation and the options available to us. Basically, it outlines a strategy for the long haul, in which we would build an infrastructure of contacts [less than 1 line not declassified] in order to maximize our ability to influence the course of events. (S) This strategy represents a more realistic reflection of current political realities and our actual capabilities. We are also aware of the danger that a premature direct confrontation with Khomeini, so long as he remains the symbol of the revolution, could give the Soviets and the radical left an opportunity to intervene. (S) Unless you disagree with this general approach, we would propose using the paper at Tab B as guidance for the Agency in their discussions and contacts [less than 1 line not declassified].2 It has been reviewed and approved by all of the appropriate agencies. (S) [2 lines not declassified] We believe the program outlined in the attached papers will provide the basis for a mutually consistent and effective political action effort.3 (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 16. Secret; Sensitive; Outside the System. Sent for action. In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “Zbig, J.” 2 Carter wrote “ok” in the left margin. 3 In an undated memorandum to Turner, Brzezinski wrote that Carter had approved Tabs A and B as recommended at a June 5 SCC(I) meeting. (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 16)
