316
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
some unilateral gestures to demonstrate its goodwill in dealing with
the West Bank and Gaza issues.
3. The President suggested that Israel might want to let the Egyp-
tians put in some phrases dealing with the broader peace framework so
long as they did not affect the substance of the treaty. Dayan mentioned
amnesty for political prisoners, and removal of military headquarters
from some cities, such as in Gaza, as the type of unilateral gestures that
might be possible. The President suggested that the Israelis might ease
the ban on political activity in the West Bank and Gaza. Dayan said that
they would consider this, but that it might create problems for Sadat,
since there might be demonstrations against him.
4. Dayan’s third concern was the speed of normalization. He fears
that the Egyptians are weakening their commitment to the establish-
ment of diplomatic relations at the end of the interim withdrawal. They
are speaking of gradual normalization. In the economic and cultural
areas, Israel can accept this, but not in the diplomatic area. Israel has al-
ready agreed to speed up the pace of the withdrawal, so that al-Arish
will be returned within two months, Rash Muhammad within four
months, and all of the rest of the area up to the interim withdrawal line,
by the end of six months. This was done on the assumption that the
Egyptians want to move quickly on the normalization of relations. The
President said that he agreed with the Israelis on this point.
5. Dayan also mentioned the problem of one Israeli settlement lo-
cated to the west of the interim withdrawal line. Some arrangement
should be made so that this settlement is not required to withdraw be-
fore the others.
6. Dayan also raised issues in our bilateral relationship. He spoke
first of the need for some form of American guarantee that the agree-
ment will be carried out in good faith. Dayan’s second point concerned
financial assistance to help carry out the withdrawal of forces. Weiz-
man explained the difficulties that Israel would confront beyond those
of building two new airfields. The President agreed that an American
team could consult with the Israelis, but that they would not have au-
thority to make any commitments.
7. Finally, Dayan turned to the question of the cost involved in re-
locating the settlers from Sinai. The President made clear that he would
not be prepared to ask Congress for funds for this purpose in light of
the well-known American position on the illegality of settlements.
