676 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Staff and Board consideration. Should this be approved in principle, they might then be despatched to Guatemala City to assist in an on-­the-­spot discussion and draft of an application. Such action would signify to the Government of Guatemala our sympathetic interest in resolving its political concern for improved housing along sound economic lines. At this point I would merely recommend that you attempt to dissuade other Board members at this time from taking so rigid a position on DLF financing in the housing field as to preclude further consideration of the limited but potentially significant approach briefly outlined above. This approach is designed to take account of the fact that while the financing of housing construction primarily is a subject for local action, it may be initiated and spurred by U.S. guidance, expression of confidence and relatively small loan assistance in the same way that the currently huge mortgage market in the U.S. initially was stimulated by temporary Federal Government loans4. 4 In a letter dated December 24 to Ambassador Mallory in Guatemala, Assistant Secretary Rubottom stated that DLF policy apparently ruled out housing and rural resettlement loans for the present, but he hoped for DLF approval of a $5 million rubber project loan without too much delay. (720.5–MSP/12–1958). GT–12. Memorandum from the Officer in Charge of Guatemalan Affairs (King) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, December 30, 1958. SUBJECT Call of the Guatemalan Ambassador, 4:30 p.m., December 30.2 Ambassador Antillón informed me yesterday that he is shortly going on a trip to Guatemala, and that he wished to have a talk with 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 60 D 647, “Col. Carlos L. Antillón Hernandez: Guatemala, 1958.” Confidential. 2 According to the memorandum of their conversation of December 30, Assistant Secretary Rubottom told Ambassador Antillón that the Development Loan Fund would approve part of the $33.5 million in loans requested by Guatemala; “he authorized the Ambassador to tell President Ydígoras that the Department and the U.S. Government were supporting the GOG, were cooperating with it, and were trying to be helpful in every possible way.” (601.1411/12–3058)
