World Hunger and Food Policy
651
industrial powers. The ability of certain transnational or nonstate
actors (e.g., the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC), terrorists, multinational corporations) to influence events aug-
ments the tendency toward power diffusion.
Domestic and external constraints to some extent affect the efficacy
of an assertive foreign policy on the part of the USSR and China as well
as the industrial democracies. While the Communist powers may at
times attempt to take advantage of opportunities for foreign adventure
(as in Angola), their cost-benefit calculations are also conditioned by
domestic problems and by the diffusion of power, especially in regard
to the growth of nationalism among LDCs and even within the Com-
munist parties of many countries.
Third, the heightened sensitivity of the industrial democracies to
their dependence on imported oil and other raw materials, the periodic
reliance of the Communist powers on imported technology and food,
and the persistent economic strains in nearly all LDCs have helped to
politicize a wide range of international economic issues. The growing
sensitivity to economic pressures of nearly all countries is reflected in in-
tensive high-level “bargaining” on economic issues not only between
industrial and nonindustrial nations, but also among the industrial de-
mocracies and between them and the Communist powers.
Finally, the three broad trends summarized above have produced
increased complexity and uncertainty in international relations. In part, the
complexity reflects the growing interconnections among global issues
(for example, among energy dependence, LDC demands, and nuclear
proliferation). It also reflects the strains global problems place on har-
monious alliance relationships, because of the varying degrees of sensi-
tivity and vulnerability to these issues among the industrial democ-
racies, and on the management of crises in the Middle East and
elsewhere. As a result, the difficulties of dealing with any of the global
issues singly are, as a rule, magnified by the reverberations among re-
lated issues. The difficulties of attempting “national solutions” to one
or all of the issues are similarly increased.
As previously mentioned, the causal relationships among global
issues and international trends are difficult to align with confidence.
What does seem clear, however, is that the need to manage these global
issues effectively—whether to reduce risks or optimize opportunities—
will remain a central challenge to US foreign policy at least for the re-
mainder of the 1970s and the early 1980s. Such issues will represent an
important part of the international agenda in their own right. In addi-
tion, as the following chapters will demonstrate, they will have an im-
portant and at times major role in shaping the character of our relations
not only with LDCs but also with traditional allies and adversaries. On
each of these issues, the individual industrial democracies and Com-
