578 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI text (attached).3 The Secretary added that we would like to put this issue behind us on the basis of this text. Shevardnadze thanked the Secretary for the proposal and emphasized again that the Soviet side respected the obligations the U.S. had already assumed. The future was a different matter, however. START: PPCMs Turning to the question of continuous monitoring of ICBM production facilities, Shevardnadze said this was a key issue in the system of verification being developed in Geneva. The Soviet approach was based on a position of principle that we must have rigorous verification and constraints based on reciprocity. The Soviets were prepared to accept monitoring of the production of systems of types that did not yet exist in the U.S. Specifically, he said, verification of rail-­mobile ICBMs would be acceptable to the Soviets if the verification regime did not also exempt other strategic offensive arms. On this basis we could agree on a mutually acceptable solution. The Secretary said that on this subject we hoped to table a proposal soon in Geneva. At that point our delegations could take it on as a priority item. He agreed with Shevardnadze that this was quite complex and complicated a subject. START II Principles Shevardnadze said fine, this could be discussed among the experts. The next question he wanted to turn to concerned the Joint Statement of intentions regarding future strategic arms and strategic stability talks. The previous day4 he had explained some of the views of the Soviet delegation. A commitment in the START Treaty to future negotiations would be an important milestone for the disarmament process. The START Treaty at this time did not set any goals for the future. Shevardnadze said he thought we already had a good understanding about beginning START II. This second phase of negotiations would focus not only, or not so much, on numerical reductions. Instead, the emphasis would be on deep and radical restructuring of the strategic potentials of the two sides, in order to remove the most destabilizing aspects. The Soviets proposed working out a Joint Statement by the summer summit. The Soviets had already done preliminary work and had given a draft text to the Secretary’s colleagues. He proposed working on this constructively in order to define the main avenues for START II. 3 Not found. 4 See Document 95.
