896  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
coalition interests in the 80s. Some also argue that there is a “window” 
of vulnerability—­not just nuclear—­which Moscow might be tempted 
to exploit before this gap can be closed. For example, the USSR might 
feel impelled to create a diversion from its problems in Eastern Europe 
by pressing forward in Southwest Asia.
Moreover, the threat to vital Free World oil access in the volatile 
PG/IO region could lead to direct US/USSR confrontation—­if the Soviets 
were tempted to intervene forcibly and only the US has much capabil-
ity for deterring or halting Soviet intervention.
Thus DoD does see a greater likelihood of conflict, which impacts 
directly on both the size of coalition deterrence/defense effort needed 
and on relative emphases within it. For example, it bears on the relative 
weight we give to readiness vs. modernization if resources remain so 
constrained.
Issue #2—If for several years to come defending our vital interests in the 
widely separated NATO, Persian Gulf and Far East theaters simultaneously 
is beyond our capabilities, which should receive priority? And—­a different 
question—­where should the greatest resource increment be applied? 
These issues have grave political as well as military implications. Our 
strategy has long been based on the premise that holding on to Western 
Europe, a developed power complex now fully as rich as our own, was 
first priority. We see no reason to change this judgment.
But the security and economic health of Western Europe (and 
Japan for that matter) depend on assured access to PG oil. Thus in a 
real sense defense of the PG/IO is directly linked to that of both other 
areas of vital interest to us. Moreover, the vulnerability and volatility of 
the PG region suggest that the risks of conflict may be greatest in this 
area, where we are currently least well-­prepared. The DoD judgment is 
that the Soviets would see much less risk and almost as great gain in 
seeking control of Southwest Asia and its resources by combined mil-
itary action and political pressure than in seeking control of Western 
Europe by those means. Therefore, DoD believes that Southwest Asia 
should have priority in our FY 82–86 buildup, (though not necessarily 
in wartime allocation of our forces).10
In turn Europe and Japan must be pressed to assume a greater 
share of the burden of their own defense under a “division of labor” 
concept (see Issue #4). Moreover, in the Far East theater improving US/
PRC/Japan relations offer new strategic options to protect our vital 
interests and create added constraints on Soviet behavior at little cost 
to the US (see Issue #4).
10 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the portion of 
the previous sentence that begins with “Asia and its resources” and ends with “by those 
means” and an arrow pointing to it.
