National Security Policy  961
13. In the world in general, recent Soviet behavior contributed to 
a spreading popular impression that the East-­West struggle, or cold 
war, was entering a phase of greater movement and fluidity, and that 
the direction of this movement was towards a diminution of cold war 
tensions. Moreover, the USSR has gained new outward respectability 
as shown in the rapid growth of Soviet international contacts and the 
acceptance and furthering of such contacts by the US and other major 
Western nations. The rivalry between the US and USSR is increasingly 
regarded in many quarters as a long drawn-­out competition between 
two super-­powers rather than as a currently acute conflict likely to pro­
duce a large-­scale military clash.
14. Viewed objectively and realistically, however, the East-­West 
relationship remains fundamentally hostile. The Soviet ICBM capabil­
ity is altering military power relationships and in Soviet eyes operates 
to enlarge Soviet freedom of action and to widen Soviet influence. The 
economic growth and scientific progress of the USSR greatly enhance 
the prestige of communism as a system of social and economic orga­
nization. Confidence that the trend of events is in their favor remains 
a keynote of the behavior of the Soviet leaders, and they assert that 
the growth of their relative power position has now reached the point 
where major consequences will be manifest on the world scene within 
the foreseeable future. Even in the present phase of Soviet conduct, 
politeness is matched by assertiveness and the appearance of concilia­
tion by an unyielding position on most key issues.
15. On the Communist Chinese front moreover, there is not only 
no relaxation in the atmosphere of the cold war, but on the contrary an 
increase of tension. Peiping’s thrusting policy and expanding economic 
and military power, against the background of a troubled internal sit­
uation have already excited apprehension throughout Asia and may 
create recurrent acute pressures and dangers over the next few years.
16. In the world at large competition between the West and the 
Sino-­Soviet Bloc is taking place on a wider stage than in the past, with 
the secondary actors playing greater parts. The increased economic 
strength of Japan and of the major nations of Western Europe has altered 
their relationship to the US and freed them for a greater degree of inde­
pendent action. In the underdeveloped areas, the Bloc is increasingly 
involved in Latin America, and both the US and the Bloc are increasing 
their interest in Africa. The smaller nations in all Free World areas are 
developing roles of their own. These nations find in the UN in particu­
lar a sounding board for their grievances and a forum in which they can 
band together and assert against the great powers a weight dispropor­
tionate to their individual or even collective power status.
17. Finally, there is throughout the underdeveloped world increas­
ing awareness of the enormous problems of creating national stability
