654
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
if they ask for asylum, otherwise he thought they should go home. We
should have a viable option to break diplomatic relations.
Secretary Vance said we should do the expulsion first. If we then
get the Allies to join us, we could all break relations at once. He thought,
however, that the Allies probably will not break relations. They may
withdraw all their people.
Dr. Brzezinski said it would be better if we did it now in a clean
break.
Secretary Vance said that we previously told the Allies we would
consider that in mid-May.
Dr. Brzezinski said that was when we were talking about a transfer
first, with the break in relations to come if they did not follow through
with a total release by mid-May. That situation is now changed since
they have not agreed to a transfer of the hostages.
The President said he could not see what significance it should
have for the Allies if we decide to break relations.
Dr. Brzezinski said that in view of the political situation, he thought
a clean break in relations made a better package.
Secretary Vance said it could be argued, however, weakly, that a
break in relations would change the diplomatic status of our hostages.
The President agreed that was a weak argument in view of the
lack of respect they had shown for diplomatic immunity.
Mr. Claytor asked what effect a break in relations would have on
student visas.
The Attorney General said that a break in relations would immedi-
ately affect how quickly you could act in cancelling A–2 visas, but it
would not affect at all how quickly you could expel students. They
could still delay through the courts.
The President said he did not think we should try to expel students.
Dr. Brzezinski said the Allies would probably not break relations.
They have too much at stake. If we take the step several weeks from
now, it will look like a weak and empty gesture. He failed to see why
we should not do it now. The package we are considering is marginal.
We should not dribble it out.
The President said it would forego an Iranian break with us which
would make them seem to be more forceful than us. Our break should
put a greater sense of responsibility on our Allies. We would be saying
we were through with Iran, that we were washing our hands of it.
Giscard, Schmidt, Thatcher, and others would see the ball was out of
our hands and the responsibility was more their own. We should ask
the Allies to respect the UN sanctions and let Iran know that they will
break relations later if the problem is not solved. Our break in relations
should not shock even our most severe critics.
