888 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX after Ramadan and that this would probably mean at the end of August. Haifa, I know, will accord the President of Egypt an enthusiastic reception. I thank you, Mr. President for your attention. Yours respectfully and sincerely, Menachem Begin9 9 Begin signed “M Begin” above this typed signature. 273. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, July 17, 1979 SUBJECT UN Resolution on Settlements (U) This week, the UN Security Council will vote on a resolution derived from the report of the Three-nation Commission on Settlements.2 The first draft (with State’s technical suggestions) is at Tab I.3 (U) The issue: Should we vote for a “good” resolution (close to the draft) and incur the wrath of the Israelis (and possibly sidetrack the process of questioning the settlements in Israel)? Or should we abstain, while making a strong speech on settlements, thus minimizing the political damage? (There is agreement that we stand to gain little from the Arabs 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 23, United Nations (UN), 1–7/79. Secret; Sensitive. A stamped notation at the top of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.” Brzezinski wrote in the upper right-hand corner: “RG Fri. breakfast issue. ZB.” 2 The United Nations Security Council Commission, established by Resolution 446 on March 22 and charged with examining the situation relating to Israeli settlements in Arab territories, including Jerusalem, occupied during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, released the report on July 12. The report recommended that the Security Council launch a “pressing appeal” to the Israeli Government “re-emphasizing the disastrous consequences which the settlement policy was bound to have on any attempt to reach a peaceful solution in the Middle East” and to call upon the Israelis to “cease establishing and planning settlements in the occupied territories.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1979, pp. 387–388) 3 Attached but not printed.
