Human Rights
235
stantially both bilateral and multilateral foreign economic assistance by
1982.
Where the promotion of human rights is concerned, increases or
reductions in the security and economic assistance (including food aid)
that we provide to individual countries are more decisive and visible
measures than diplomatic actions, public statements or symbolic acts.
However, because of the sensitivity of recipients and the unpredicta-
bility of their reactions, reductions in aid ought not be considered
lightly or until less drastic measures have been taken. Ideally, we
would like to be perceived as working closely with the developing na-
tions that are pursuing equitable growth policies which protect and
promote human dignity. To the extent we are so perceived, our human
rights policy will be strengthened.
Obviously we do not write on a clear slate when we consider re-
ductions in assistance in view of the various statutory provisions which
direct that assistance be used to promote human rights, and except in
certain exceptional cases, be withheld when a consistent pattern of
gross violations emerges.
Our military and economic assistance is generally valued highly
by recipient governments. Thus it is appropriate, circumstances per-
mitting, that we should seek to obtain improved human rights conduct
in return. It should be noted that in many cases aid is extended in re-
turn for other considerations, e.g., in some cases it is called for by base
rights agreements. In other cases, our assistance may be small in
amount and thus easily dispensed with or replaced from other sources.
In such cases our aid may afford us only limited leverage on human
rights issues.
Certain general costs and benefits apply to the use of both military
and economic assistance as sanctions and incentives with respect to
human rights. The benefits include underscoring the seriousness and
determination with which we are pursuing our human rights objec-
tives, avoiding where feasible the inconsistency of providing substan-
tial material assistance to repressive governments, and demonstrating
tangibly that it can be costly to violate human rights and valuable to re-
spect them. The costs include possible damage to U.S. national security
interests, and to our general political and economic interests; disrup-
tion of established assistance relationships; curtailment of activities di-
rectly supporting the second group of human rights; possibly penal-
izing groups of individuals who bear no responsibility for the abuses of
their governments; and the risk that some recipient governments from
whom we withhold assistance may be in a position to retaliate by with-
holding resources that we vitally need.
As a very general proposition, reductions in military assistance
ought usually to precede reductions in economic assistance. Con-
