862 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII From the outset, it was recognized that the conclusions of this study could not be pressed too far. Both the performance of the Intelligence Community in providing warning of the invasion of Afghanistan and the applicability to other theaters of the lessons learned in that situation are very much affected by the particular circumstances involved. In contrast to a Soviet move against NATO, the situation for which the US warning system is largely designed, the invasion of Afghanistan required only a fraction of the USSR’s military assets, was not opposed at the outset, did not involve a certainty of confrontation with US forces, and occurred in a region where US intelligence collection capabilities were limited. ([classification marking not declassified]) These limitations notwithstanding, the examination of the Soviet approach to invading Afghanistan and the Intelligence Community’s success in giving prior notice of this event have yielded some valuable lessons: —Despite the unique circumstances surrounding this operation, the Soviets’ behavior was essentially in keeping with US estimates of their doctrine for mobilization and the initiation of hostilities. This finding is important because the success of any warning system is dependent on the extent to which an adversary’s behavior conforms to expectations. ([classification marking not declassified]) —The system of warning indicators that is set up to detect potentially important changes in the Soviet/Warsaw Pact military posture provided a structured approach to and a sound evidentiary base for the Intelligence Community’s conclusion that the USSR was preparing to introduce substantial forces into Afghanistan. The fact that the system worked in this unique situation provides increased assurance of its usefulness in other theaters, particularly in the NATO area. ([classification marking not declassified]) —The US intelligence collection system proved equal to the task of providing analysts with sufficiently detailed, accurate, and timely data to allow them to reach essentially correct conclusions about the military activities in the Soviet Union with respect to Afghanistan. Of particular note was the synergy of [less than 1 line not declassified] in this collection effort and the quality of the data collected, despite limitations on the resources available. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) —The Intelligence Community’s analysts met their basic responsibility in a situation of this sort by providing sufficient prior reporting to assure that no key policymaker should have been surprised by the invasion. The analysts were unable to forecast precisely the timing or the size of the Soviets’ move, but gave warning at least 10 days beforehand that the USSR was prepared to invade. ([classification marking not declassified]) In conclusion, the examination of the early phases of the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan provides a basis for greater confidence in US intelligence estimates of Soviet doctrine with respect to initiating hostilities and in the capacity of the US Intelligence Commu-
