Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX in three categories: (1) issues connected with the text of the treaty itself, (2) Israel’s desire for U.S. assistance in connection with its withdrawal from Sinai, and (3) the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian aspect. I. Unresolved Issues in Treaty Text There are two main issues and several minor ones that remain to be resolved in the treaty text. The main ones are: A. Major Issues 1. How to correlate the Egypt-Israel process with language on a comprehensive peace framework. The Egyptians started out by proposing a number of additions to our basic treaty text, both in the Preamble and in the operative articles, that stressed the continuing commitment of the two sides to solve the problems of a comprehensive peace and the Palestinian issues. The Israelis immediately put up a stiff resistance. Following a meeting with Ghali, Dayan in an effort to be helpful suggested that all of the language along these lines could be embodied in an exchange of letters, either direct between Sadat and Begin or through President Carter. Sadat has agreed to this in principle, and it is now being considered by Begin. The two sides have not yet discussed the contents of such an exchange of letters, but Dayan insists it must not go beyond Camp David language. The Egyptians have now also agreed that, with respect to the treaty text itself, it will suffice for language on a comprehensive peace to be only in the Preamble, omitting anything along these lines in the operative articles—though they probably want more extensive language than Dayan has in mind. 2. The question of how fast normalization of relations will be put into effect. The Egyptians are not yet prepared to discuss this subject in specific terms as laid out in our draft Annex 3 (they are meeting today to try to develop a coordinated position). They have received instructions from Sadat to put emphasis on a phased schedule for normalizing relations. I met privately with Boutros Ghali today to stress the importance that we, as well as the Israelis, attach to rapid normalization, and that we regard this as implicit in the Camp David undertakings. The Israelis attach the most importance to an immediate establishment of diplomatic relations; they warned in a drafting group meeting this morning that if the Egyptians tried to stretch this out beyond the interim period, it would cause Israel to reconsider its commitment to conclude its interim withdrawal within a shortened time-frame. This is going to be a difficult issue, but we will not know the exact dimensions of it until we see what the Egyptians propose for the specific steps outlined in Annex 3. B. Minor Issues 1. Controlling third party acts of violence from either party’s territory. Israel wants more detailed and specific language than Egypt. The Egyp-
