1978 361 81. Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 22, 1978 SUBJECT Appraisal of Your SAC/NORAD Trip The full impact of your personal appearance and touch with the officers and troops will not be fully apparent for some time, but it was undoubtedly great. I could see that, particularly in your interaction with the lower ranking officers and the enlisted personnel at Ellsworth AFB.2 The SAC Wing Commander said that White House interest in strategic forces has never been so great as in this Administration. He felt it from the beginning and sees the persistency manifested in your visit. The discussions on operational, planning, and doctrinal matters was most fascinating and hard-­hitting for the briefing officers. The strongest impact was Sunday evening at Offutt.3 Perry and Jones were clearly nervous. General Ellis was having a great time dumping the tough questions on the JCS, but when you nailed him on the implications of C3I vulnerability, he was very unhappy with the trap into which he had put himself. He merely wanted to lobby you for a larger C3I budget, not to raise the fundamental issues about how Soviet growing capabilities are making SAC’s posture less relevant to the President’s crisis management and war fighting needs. When I tried to pick up on “war fighting” the next day, he evaded the question. So did Jones. The other officers in that evening briefing were noticeably moved. Three of them told me the next day that the discussions were the most “interesting” they have ever heard on this topic. Coyle, Duncan’s assistant, found them not only interesting but “troubling.” Several of the one and two star generals who briefed at SAC clearly had some idea of the direction you would probe. They could not tell me two months ago how long it took to plan an LNO from scratch. Nonetheless, your repeated underscoring of the non-SIOP scenario and the longer campaign gave them more than they could handle. The result, 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 52, SAC and NORAD 8/20–21/78 Brzezinski Trip 7–9/78. Top Secret; Sensitive; ­Outside the System. 2 Ellsworth Air Force Base, near Rapid City, South Dakota. 3 August 20. Offutt Air Force Base, near Omaha, Nebraska, was the headquarters of the Strategic Air Command.
