Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I ture, political imprisonment, and repression by any government, anywhere in the world. We believe that basic human rights transcend ideology. We believe all nations, regardless of political systems, must respect those rights. Just as respect for human rights is central to our foreign policy values, so progress toward a just and lasting Middle East settlement is essential to the prospect of a more peaceful world. The President has asked me to describe what we are trying to do to achieve peace in the Middle East. We want the American people to have the fullest possible understanding of our approach, for your support is crucial to its success. President Carter has now met with the leaders of Egypt, Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia.5 The President met with Prime Minister Rabin of Israel, and we hope that we will soon meet with the new Prime Minister.6 With the exception of the meeting with President Asad which was held in Geneva, I have participated in all of them and have sensed these leaders’ great desire for peace and their longing for the benefits that peace can bring to nations too long mobilized for war. Yet at the same time, we also found deep fears and suspicions which must be overcome if peace is to be achieved in that strategic and troubled region of the world. A genuine and lasting peace in the Middle East is of essential interest to all Americans. Conflict there carries the threat of a global confrontation and runs the risk of nuclear war. As we have seen, war in the Middle East has profound economic consequences. It can, and has, damaged the economies of the entire world. It has been a tragedy for the nations of the region. Even short of war, continued confrontation encourages radicalization and instability. Genuine peace is needed by all parties to the conflict. The Arab nations need peace. Israel, above all, has a profound interest in peace; there is no question about that. Israel’s Survival For almost three decades, Israel has borne the burden of constant war. More than half its entire budget is dedicated to defense. Its citizens
