730 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement near hysteria occasioned in the U.K. by our decisions against importing British electrical equipment. The President believed that trade restric­ tions which tend to drive away an ally as dependable as Great Britain would do much more harm in the long run to our security than would be done by permitting a U.S. industry to suffer from British competi­ tion. Thus, while intangible, this factor must always be weighed in NSA cases. Yet another illustration of the point that he was making, said the President, was represented by the various stages in the development of atomic weapons. In the early stages of this development, there had been very real and very complete cooperation between the British and ourselves. This superb cooperation had now been destroyed by a law which greatly restricted exchange of atomic energy information with the British. The effect of this restriction on the British had been very serious indeed and because of their own contributions in the early stages, they had felt severely let down when the U.S. imposed its restric­ tions in the Atomic Energy Act. Thus, said the President, we have got to take account of these intangibles as well as of the tangibles and he certainly agreed likewise that the U.S. must increase the volume of its own exports and improve its own competitive position. The President added that every time he declared a restriction on the import of a com­ modity from abroad, he was occasioned considerable mental anguish even though approval of the restrictive action had been unanimously recommended to him. With respect to the National Security Amendment, Mr. Gray pointed out that even though Secretary Beale had reported that our organizational arrangements were adequate, there were some of us who were worried about such matters as TVA purchases of electrical equipment. The President replied that the role of such independent agencies as the TVA had bothered the Administration for quite a while inasmuch as the Government could of course not control such agencies and there was doubt about the nature of their relation to the Presidency. In this connection Governor Hoegh commented on the effect of the Buy American Act. The President again expressed himself as puzzled about the relation to the President of such entities as the TVA and the GAO (General Accounting Office) which he added, laughingly, did not seem to have any. Nevertheless, such entities the President thought were rather minor and exceptional causes of friction. Mr. McCone predicted that the problem of foreign competition with American business was a problem that was going to grow rap­ idly in the future. The costs of production abroad of competitive prod­ ucts were shockingly lower than costs in the U.S., mostly as a result of cheaper labor costs. Our shipbuilding industry for example has totally lost its foreign markets. The President commented that one reason for this situation was that it had become so easy for a Board of Directors
