3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
8
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
coast; the Soviet Union’s in the interior. A 600 kilometer range is, there-
fore, a threat. The President said that if we could agree on a lesser range
for the sea-based cruise missile . . . 300–400 kilometers instead of 600—
this might alleviate our concerns.
Throw-weight and Accuracy Advantages
The President commented that the Soviets have a throw-weight
advantage. Dobrynin responded that the United States has an accuracy
advantage and, therefore, their throw-weight advantage is necessary.
The President asked whether the Soviets would consider reducing
their throw-weight advantage if we would forego escalating our
quality advantage. Dobrynin responded that this might be considered
after SALT II. To include this equation in SALT II would make it more
complicated, he said.
Fixed and Mobile Missiles
The President asked whether the Soviets would forego the use of
mobile ICBMs. Dobrynin said the Soviets have mobile medium-range
missiles because of China. The President then asked about the SS–20
and the SS–16. The SS–20 is mobile; the SS–16 is not. The SS–16 has the
range to hit the United States. The President mentioned that it is diffi-
cult for us to tell the difference between the two missiles.
Dobrynin stated that he didn’t see any difficulty in medium-range
mobile missiles. He added that the Soviet Union has no need for
long-range mobiles because it has sufficient numbers of fixed ICBM
missiles. The President asked how we could confirm the difference be-
tween the two. Dobrynin said, “I will pass the question to my people.”
The President suggested the Soviets might consider keeping their
present SS–20s, but adding no additional ones or new types of mobile
missiles. He added that he would like mobile missiles eliminated. He
again asked if Dobrynin could tell us how to distinguish between the
two missiles.
Advance Notice of Missile Test Firings
The President indicated that he would like to reach a formal agree-
ment with the Soviet Union to have advance notice—at least 24 hours—
of missile test firings. This, according to the President, would allow us
to avoid any misunderstandings on intentions. This advance notice
would include sea-launched missiles. Dobrynin responded: “that is a
good idea.”
Comprehensive Test Ban
The President asked about the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB).
Dobrynin raised the issue of French and PRC compliance. The Presi-
