342
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
when he heard that Kashani had been elected President of the Majlis. In
the Parliamentary debates concerning continuation of martial law after
the July 21 riots, there was a definite split in nationalist ranks as the
newly created pro-Kashani national movement faction of approxi-
mately thirty deputies directly opposed the smaller group of National
Front politicians. There are rumors that Mullah Kashani, on his way to
Mecca, recently sent a message to Dr. Mosadeq that he expected to as-
sume control of the situation upon his return to Tehran unless Dr. Mo-
sadeq had successfully improved conditions. In the past few days Am-
bassador Henderson has been informed by high Iranian sources of
intrigues to replace Mosadeq with another leader who has not been
described but obviously will depend upon the support of Mullah
Kashani.
A combination of Mullah Kashani’s personal prestige, his forceful
organization of street rioters, anti-Mosadeq conservatives, and nation-
alist politicians such as Khosro Qashqai could wield very important in-
fluence in Iranian affairs. These groups would lead to dangers of de-
moralizing the Army and joining with the communists. Almost
certainly a government dependent upon these elements would be even
more unreasonable and difficult to deal with than Dr. Mosadeq.
Iranian Communist Organization
The communist organization in Iran is not strong in numbers but it
has shown ability to take advantage of widening opportunities for agi-
tation. Over the past few years the communists have concentrated on
developing a disciplined nucleus of leaders with a comparatively nu-
merous screen of front organizations. Agitators are known to be circu-
lating among the peasants and there are believed to be communist cells
in every Iranian industry and most dangerously among the unem-
ployed oil workers in Abadan. The Embassy has reported that the com-
munist organization will probably not attempt to stage a violent out-
break against the nationalist government but will, on the contrary, look
for opportunities to infiltrate and pervert the nationalist movement.
However, if public confidence in the nationalist government weakens
and if the armed forces become demoralized, it is entirely possible that
the communists may consider it advisable to attempt direct action to
gain control of the central government. Observers differ as to the time
when the communists may win dominant influence in Iranian affairs
but all agree that if the economic and social conditions of Iran worsen
hopelessly, a communist coup must eventually be expected.
Questionable British Military Responsibilities for Iran
United States policy toward Iran has been influenced by an under-
standing that the United Kingdom is responsible for the initiative in
military support of Iran in the event of communist subversion or ag-
