Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 523 to negotiate; and voicing our concerns to the Soviets while carefully managing our public statements. Our impartiality among the Rhodesian parties will be increasingly important if, as seems likely, Rhodesia again becomes a lively Congressional issue. Our relations with Pretoria will need to reflect any progress in Namibia, but not go so far as to imply a backing away on apartheid. C. Mexico: Your February trip reinforces the fact that we are starting to give the future of our relations with Mexico the proper attention.24 Putting these relations on a solid basis of cooperation would pay handsome dividends over the next decades, both in reducing our dependence on Middle Eastern oil and in helping us manage together problems that could otherwise create constant tensions and domestic political problems for us both.25 We should approach the many complex issues with Mexico—including especially natural gas and migration—in the context of a positive, long-term strategy. D. Nicaragua and Central American Stability: The Nicaraguan crisis has links and/or parallels to the situations in neighboring countries. Costa Rica, Panama and Venezuela are watching to see what we can accomplish. El Salvador and Guatemala share most of Nicaragua’s political characteristics. A settlement in Nicaragua could help us encourage moderate evolutions in these two neighbors. Deterioration in Nicaragua will have repercussions here that could affect congressional action on such issues as Panama Canal Treaty implementation and AID levels. E. Nuclear Non-Proliferation and CTB: Our non-proliferation policies have been designed and implemented well. We have had some success on a number of discrete issues (e.g., France and Pakistan), and the INFCE is a creative measure that could point the way to resolve some thorny technical issues. But I am concerned about the potentially difficult period of late 1979/January–June 1980.26 Some twenty-two countries will then be candidates for renegotiation of our bilateral nuclear agreements. Most can be deferred or managed. But India will be very difficult. In addition, the 1980 NPT Review Conference is scheduled for that June.27 24 The President was scheduled to travel to Mexico to meet with Lo´pez-Portillo February 14–15, 1979. Documentation on his visit is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXIII, Mexico, Cuba, and the Caribbean. 25 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote: “Play down oil & gas.” 26 The President underlined the word “concerned” and added “I am too” in the left-hand margin next to this sentence. 27 Documentation on the NPT Review Conference is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVI, Arms Control.
