September 18–December 16, 1978
241
ognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and their just
requirements.”
Fahd said that is fine but he had heard that Begin refused to use the
term “Palestinians” and continued to refer to them as the “Arabs of
Israel.”
The Secretary said what Begin had said was that he would con-
tinue using the term “Palestinian Arabs.” He never said “Arabs of Is-
rael.” We would reject that and so would Egypt.
The Secretary noted that on the West Bank settlement Begin had
given us a letter which we had rejected.
Fahd deplored Begin’s “verbal acrobatics”, noting that he had
heard the details as the Secretary described them on Israeli radio. The
Secretary said he had a message from Dayan4 in which Dayan agreed
with what the Secretary and the President had been saying on the set-
tlements, and indicating that they would straighten things out when
Begin returned to Israel and give the U.S. an acceptable letter. The Sec-
retary said that he felt at Camp David that Begin’s advisors sincerely
wanted an agreement which would bring lasting peace.
Fahd said on the basis of the recent poll, Israeli public opinion ob-
viously wants to relinquish the Sinai settlements. He feared Begin
wants to make trouble in his remaining years in office. What is impor-
tant, however, is what the U.S. Government understands the agree-
ment to mean.
The Secretary said that our own West Bank settlement language
will be in a published letter. The Saudis should wait to see what it says.
The Secretary continued that the Palestinians are recognized as a
party to negotiations with Egypt, Israel and Jordan in which the final
status of the West Bank as well as its relation to its neighbors will be set-
tled. The negotiations are to be completed within five years. Parallel
with this negotiation, Israel and Jordan will negotiate a peace treaty.
We insisted in a difficult fight that the agreement provide that Pales-
tinians can participate in the Jordan/Israel treaty negotiations. Our po-
sition was that the treaty would affect the future of the people of the
West Bank and Gaza and that they therefore had a right to participate
4 On September 20, Dayan asked Viets to inform Carter and Vance that he, along
with Weizman and Barak, were “extremely upset over Begin’s public disagreement with
the President over the issue of the duration of a settlements freeze.” Viets reported,
“Dayan said he was certain that he, Weizman, and Barak ‘and others in the Cabinet’ can
prevail on Begin to agree to a formulation covering cessation of settlement activity which
will be acceptable to us. In retrospect, Dayan observed, it had been a serious error ‘to
leave Begin on his own’ in Washington and New York. He (Dayan) should have stayed
on, for if he had this unfortunate situation would never have arisen.” (Telegram 12849
from Tel Aviv, September 20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P840153–2618)
