582 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Although education is free and medical and social services are cheap, it is often difficult to overcome the necessary bureaucratic obstacles without bribing each petty and not so petty official in the chain leading to the service in question. Because housing and services are inexpensive, Romanian workers can often save some money. But frustration rises as money income outpaces supplies of popular consumer goods. Salary increases scheduled during the rest of this five year plan then will be two-edged swords. It appears as if the new policies discussed above would, if implemented, first cause a drop in real productivity and wages, which would only increase popular frustrations. 11. Last year’s Jiu Valley worker unrest, with which the general population sympathized, points out that there is a limit to the workers’ passivity. Their success will not be lost on workers of other industrial complexes in the country. 12. While Romania was primarily a rural country before and immediately following World War II, its work force has been rapidly changing over to industry (74 percent of the working population worked in agriculture in 1950 while only 35 percent did so in 1976); along with industrialization comes heightened political awareness and realization that there are more similarities than differences between the current system and its Ottoman and monarchist predecessors. As seen by many workers, high party and government officials appear to enjoy the same privileges as their predecessors. When these officials’ homes or offices are in buildings formerly occupied by members of the royal family, the basic lack of social progress is blatant. 13. Every day the Romanian population suffers total immersion in statistics put out by the media which are designed to prove the success of party policies and to show the country’s economic achievements. An increasing number of people are wondering when they will begin to benefit directly from these improvements. The regime cannot spur economic growth indefinitely at the expense of the population’s standard of living without creating a deep well of frustrations. 14. The factors discussed above are converging, and Ceausescu may be forced to reorder his priorities to give the consumer a better break if violence is to be avoided before Romania joins the ranks of “developed” countries. DISSIDENCE: 15. The recent appearance of a former high Romanian Communist Party official to publicize the situation of the minorities in Romania is a reminder that, internally, Romania is not quite the maverick it often appears to be. As Jean-Francois Revel wrote in a recent issue of “Foreign Affairs”: “Derussification is not democratization. . . The most totalitarian of all the popular democracies of Eastern Europe is Romania, which
