1120  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
him, but knowing him would be very reluctant to reach any conclu­
sions on the basis of a letter in which he may have had some particular 
purpose in mind. However, I entirely agree that on the basis of this 
and Mackensen’s letter they may very well be attempting to prevail on 
some Americans to remain as a counter to the reluctance of Chinese to 
return.
Incidentally I had heard nothing here about a NBC filmed inter­
view and, of course, would do nothing about it in any event. However, 
all of the correspondents here have been pushing me hard for “anni­
versary stories”, and in reply I have been stressing that I simply do 
not look at it in that light, it having been just another meeting. I have, 
of course, seen them individually and explained there is nothing new, 
everything having been very thoroughly covered in the press releases. 
They have also pressed me hard for “private and personal” opinions on 
the relationship with our elections but I have strictly refused any dis­
cussion of this pointing out that there was no reason to believe that on 
the fundamental questions of release of American prisoners or renun­
ciation of force there was or could be any differences of opinion among 
Americans. You can thus expect a spate of “birthday stories” from here 
which they have all been instructed to write but I wanted to let you 
know I have done my best to minimize them. The only thing I have 
done is to give AP a list of the remaining 11 taken from the Dept’s. lists 
giving their occupation and home towns.
Wang’s performance today together with his proposal for another 
two week’s gap to the next meeting confirms me in my belief that they 
intend to mark time until November. Depending on how they read our 
domestic political situation we must expect some new move on their 
part shortly before or very shortly after the election. I do not think that 
we should exclude the possibility that they may estimate that if the 
“peace” issue figures heavily in the campaign the administration would 
be responsive to pressures just before the election that would threaten 
hostilities in the offshore islands.
I certainly have no objection to a speech by Lodge on the missing 
servicemen issue. I presume it would be in the GA and tied to the still 
outstanding UN resolution.
One aspect of my guidance for today’s meeting on which I would 
appreciate a little more background amplification is how far I can go 
if I think it useful in stating the converse of the proposition that there 
can be no fruitful discussion of trade in the absence of a renunciation 
of force. You will note that today I carefully kept away from this con­
verse and will try to continue this line. However, if necessary, how it is 
suggested that I handle the implied converse, that is, could I hold out 
any hope for a “fruitful discussion” of trade in the event of a satisfac­
tory agreement on renunciation of force, and, of course, release of the
