694
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
might be to enlarge the discussions and to talk about the military
presence in the Indian Ocean.
Secretary pressed two questions—would the Soviets be willing to
withdraw their forces, and can the Afghanistanese choose their own
government? Dobrynin thought that the Soviet forces would most natu-
rally withdraw after the conclusion of Step I although this might happen
in the course of the discussions to Step II as well. (With further question-
ing, Dobrynin on this point was evasive.) He emphasized that border
crossing on the Pakistan-Afghanistan border was and is a large prob-
lem, but he thought that once the border was agreed and sealed it
would create a situation where the Soviets could withdraw. He then
turned to his proposal and urged, what was wrong with discussing
the Afghanistan idea? The Secretary responded that the Afghanistan
Government in no way represented the Afghanistan people, and
returned to his point asking, can the Afghanistanese choose their own
government? Babrak is no real representative. He pressed then the
question—does an Afghanistan Government have to be acceptable to
the Soviets? Dobrynin responded that obviously the Soviets did not
want a hostile government, but otherwise were quite open about the
form of government. The Secretary responded then that Dobrynin was
insisting on a Soviet-installed government. Dobrynin replied that, you
say it so.
Dobrynin gave a long comment on the nature of Afghanistan, the
social changes. He said that it is a land that where for decades there
has been fighting and discontent. This has been particularly true in
more recent years where the landlords’ holdings have been exploited
after centuries of depression. The Soviets he said had had problems of
a similar nature in the Asiatic areas of Russia, which had continued
right on through until 1930. There were similarities here—of race, of
peoples who move back and forth across borders, of the relationship
between peasants and landlords. Today in Afghanistan he recognized
that perhaps not many of the people are in favor of the Russians, but
they are in favor of the social changes in recent years. A real civil war
is going on in Afghanistan between the old and the new, and it is not
all that simple to define. If the main U.S. concern is that the Soviets are
pushing to the Ocean, the Soviets could settle this by giving guarantees
because they don’t have that objective. If it is a question of borders
and the future of Pakistan, then why not have it talked out along the
lines of the Babrak proposal?
The Secretary said of our concerns that Pakistan was a buffer state
and we could live with it, but now it is not, and the Soviets have 85,000
troops there.3 The fact is that the Soviets are on the borders of Pakistan—
3 An unknown hand bracketed “Pakistan,” and wrote “Afgh” above it and placed
a question mark in the margin to the right of the paragraph; a suggestion that Vest had
inadvertently confused the two countries.
