Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
199
47.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 28, 1977
SUBJECT
1976–1980 Goals for US Foreign Policy
Our overriding goals are to make the world safer and more hu-
mane. There are thus three general concerns which animate our foreign
policy:
—Pursuit of peace.
—Promotion of equitable economic development and well-being.
—Protection of individual rights.
These are long-term goals. What is most notable about your ap-
proach to foreign policy is precisely your emphasis on undertaking
now so many major efforts aimed at the quality of life in succeeding
generations.
This means a very ambitious and far-reaching agenda. Many of the
beginning steps now being taken will not bear tangible fruit for some
time to come. But unless we start now, there will be no prospect of
success.
PURSUIT OF PEACE
The pursuit of peace operates at several levels. Above all it in-
volves the evolution of relationships with the Soviet Union. The opening
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Out-
side the System File, Box 63, Goals: Four Year: 4–7/77. Confidential. Lake sent an earlier
version of the memorandum to Vance under a June 27 action memorandum. In it, he
noted: “The President apparently asked some time ago, in a marginal note, for a memo
from you on our four year policy goals. The White House asked for it again last week.
Neither the White House Staff nor S/S have a record or copy of his request; we are not,
therefore, sure of exactly what he wanted.” Lake then explained that S/P attempted to
“describe such goals in an overall framework” to avoid a “flat listing” that would turn
complicated issues into a “simple scorecard.” (National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Plan-
ning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981: Lot 82D298, Box
1, Misc: re Issues & Priorities ’77) Notations on Lake’s action memorandum indicate that
the Department reworked the four-year policy goal memorandum as a memorandum
from Tarnoff to Brzezinski and sent it to the White House on June 28. (Ibid.) Although
Brzezinski did not initial this copy of the memorandum, he did transmit another copy of
the memorandum to the President under a July 5 cover memorandum, commenting: “As
you can see, it does not advance our thinking on this subject much beyond the more com-
prehensive NSC paper which was prepared on this subject.” Carter wrote on the memo-
randum: “Let Cy assess your more comprehensive goals. J.” (Carter Library, National Se-
curity Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Outside the System File, Box 63, Goals: Four
Year: 4–7/77) The previous paper is Document 36.
