Human Rights
245
under the Immigration and Naturalization Act (INA) from 17,400 to
20,000 and admit additional refugees in emergent situations as condi-
tional entrants, permitting them to adjust their status to that of perma-
nent residence after two years.
We should oppose provisions in H.R. 7175 that would impose nu-
merical limitations on the numbers of such refugees who may be ad-
mitted by the President in emergent situations under certain circum-
stances and the requirement that other countries must accept
resettlement of their fair share of the refugees involved before the ad-
mission of such refugees into the United States.
We recommend a more liberal use of the Attorney General’s au-
thority to admit individual refugees and groups of refugees who do not
qualify under the INA. Specifically, we believe that the Attorney Gen-
eral and the INS in considering applicants for parole into the United
States should be more forthcoming with respect to innocent victims of
authoritarian regimes. Such a change in policy would be a concrete
demonstration of the sincerity of our commitment to human rights.
While the process of consulting with Congressional leaders before
using the parole authority is not required by law, we would want to no-
tify them before liberalizing our policy. There is likely to be some nega-
tive Congressional reaction to a liberalized parole policy.
Dissidents in repressive countries, to the extent they may be able to
proceed to free countries, should generally be considered as refugees.
Most such dissidents would qualify as refugees under the new defini-
tion of refugees contained in the pending legislation that we support.
F. Substantive and Procedural Initiatives the U.S. Could Take in Various
International Forums.
There are important advantages to pursuing our human rights ob-
jectives through multilateral institutions. Because of the clearly defined
human rights responsibilities of multilateral organizations, examina-
tion of the human rights practices of all countries can be properly pur-
sued and, since the responsibility for initiatives in multilateral bodies is
shared, individual country situations can be considered in a manner
less likely to bring the U.S. into direct confrontation with the country
concerned.
Increased use of multilateral institutions will improve their ca-
pacity to deal effectively with human rights problems and enhance
public support for them.
1. The United Nations.
The United Nations can be a valuable forum for developing multi-
lateral cooperation on behalf of human rights. It has broad repre-
sentation and mechanisms for protection of human rights. Specific doc-
uments such as the Charter, the Universal Declaration, and the UN
