Venezuela  1285
Without commenting specifically on the projects which comprise 
the ICA program in that country at this time, the Bureau of Inter-
American Affairs considers that to terminate the program in Venezuela 
would be contrary to the best interest of the United States.
Although, as your memorandum pointed out, the per capita 
income of Venezuela is in excess of that of most other countries in Latin 
America, this figure is misleading when viewed either as a measure of 
the economic and social development of the country or as a measure of 
its ability to carry forward in economic development without outside 
technical assistance. In spite of the country’s high per capita income, 
the majorities of Venezuelan people, and especially those in rural areas, 
have a standard of living which is roughly equivalent to that prevailing 
in the rest of Latin America. The economic development of the country 
as a whole, excluding two or perhaps three urban centers, is in a rudi-
mentary stage. Moreover, standards in health, education, agriculture, 
public administration and other technical fields vital to economic prog-
ress are still low.
Venezuela, like most of Latin America, has a one-­product econ-
omy, and is dependent on this commodity, petroleum, far from 60 to 
70 percent of the Government’s annual revenue. Although marketing 
conditions for petroleum have been reasonably favorable in recent 
years, so that the country has been outwardly prosperous, relatively 
little progress has been made either in diversifying the basic economic 
pattern or in moving ahead in the technical fields enumerated above. 
We believe that this situation is due in large part to the developmen-
tal emphasis which the dictatorial regime, which until recently gov-
erned Venezuela, placed on the largest urban areas, with little attention 
to basic nationwide problems. The present government, which was 
installed subsequent to the overthrow of the dictatorship by revolution, 
is a constitutional regime brought into power through free elections. It 
has wide popular support and is pledged to a broad program of general 
economic improvement and diversification.
The foregoing indicates that Venezuela’s need for outside technical 
assistance is likely to be greater in the immediate future then has been 
the case in the past. The opportunity for the United States to partici-
pate in a sound and meaningful program is correspondingly greater. 
Although the Venezuela Government has not progressed to the stage 
of consulting this Government with respect to possible technical coop-
eration in its economic development effort, the fact that there have 
been several approaches in the field of health and sanitation indicate 
that other and more significant approaches in broader fields may well 
be forthcoming. Consequently, this does not seem to be the appropri-
ate time to adopt a policy which would make it more difficult to take 
advantage of the opportunity when it is offered.
