Peru  1121
PE–44.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge 
of Peruvian Affairs (Poole)1

Washington, June 21, 1960.
SUBJECT
Assistance for Prime Minister Beltran’s Program
PARTICIPANTS
Pedro Beltran, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance of Peru
Douglas Dillon, Under Secretary of State
Theodore C. Achilles, Counselor of the Department of State
Edwin M. Martin, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs
Richard A. Poole, Officer-­in-Charge of Peruvian Affairs, WST
Summary. Prime Minister Beltran explained that, having concen-
trated his first year in office on the re-­establishment of financial stabil-
ity, he was now turning to the urgent problem of developing programs 
which would bring direct benefit to the underprivileged people, espe-
cially in the fields of land and housing. In the former his principal 
emphasis was on the resettlement of new lands, which he described 
in some detail, although he was not opposed to breaking up unused 
or under-used large landholdings. He emphasized the urgency of the 
problem in the face of Castro and Communist agitation of discontent. 
He explained that his problem was to find financing for roads to reset-
tlement areas, resettlement costs and housing, including the establish-
ment of new savings and loan associations. Beltran said that the IBRD 
seemed very interested in studying ways of assisting, but that immedi-
ate financing was needed from U.S. sources, over the next six months—
perhaps $20 million—with more during the next two years. Mr. Dillon 
replied that the atmosphere in Washington was receptive to more assis-
tance in Latin America, including the fields of agrarian reform and 
housing, and he indicated that roads and savings and loan associations 
would seem to be particularly susceptible of U.S. assistance. He said 
that extra priority would be given to countries such as Peru which had 
done a conscientious job of helping themselves. He stated that our cur-
rent thinking is along the lines of projects in which the DLF would meet 
local currency costs in conjunction with the Eximbank (rather than the 
IBRD) to meet dollar costs, with the IBRD operating independently. He 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 823.16/6–2160. Confidential. The source 
text bears the notation: “Approved in U 7/9/60. OK. R[obert] C. B[rewster]” Briefing 
memoranda on this meeting for Under Secretary Dillon from Theodore C. Achilles, 
Counselor of the Department of State, June 17, and from Assistant Secretary Rubottom, 
June 20, are in Rubottom-Mann Files, Lot 62 D 418, “Peru 1960.”
