672 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI just the complete prohibited item, but at producing any components unique to the prohibited item. The emphasis would, of course, be on “unique” in this formulation. There are such unique components for some prohibited systems—­a first stage for a new type of heavy ICBM, launch tube segments for a heavy SLBM, etc. Both the practical and legal implications of all these possibilities need careful consideration. One further angle to think about is that, depending upon how the long-­awaited decision on initial accountability of ballistic missiles deals with early flight tests, we could end up legalizing several flight tests of a prohibited missile. Liquid-Propellant Mobile ICBMs 14. We pushed the Soviets last week on our proposed ban on liquid-­ propellant mobile ICBMs. This issue has been dormant for a long time and we were surprised to encounter strong Soviet resistance. Our DOE analysts here say this could be related to Soviet concerns about SDI. [5½ lines not declassified] Heavy Bomber/ALCM Exhibits 15. There seems to still be some confusion on this topic. As I read the treaty, all strategic systems, including the B–2, are subject to OSI during baseline inspections. These inspections are to bear some relationship to technical characteristics specified in the MOU. In addition, as new types of heavy bombers and long-­range ALCMs appear in the future, they will be exhibited. On our last visit to SAC, we were told there were no problems with this. However, the JCS people here say that this is not agreed and seem determined that no Soviet inspectors will be allowed near the B–2 or ACM. JCS is also resisting any display of the B–2 as part of cooperative measures to assist NTM. Since the U.S. language now in the treaty provides for both baseline OSI and exhibits of new systems, if this is no longer the U.S. position, we need to be instructed accordingly. If we pull back on these heavy bomber/ALCM provisions, it will be very difficult to sell the analogous provisions we want for ballistic missiles. In any case, clarification is needed. Deep Reductions in START II? 16. You may have noticed the interesting TV interview given by Akhromeyev. He defined “reasonable sufficiency” as requiring only 400–500 ballistic missiles with one-­megaton warheads, plus 200 in reserve. As I recall, this is roughly what Alexi Arbatov came up with in an article some time ago. The Soviet del here continues to trash Akhromeyev, but his remarks could be a preview of future Soviet positions. He apparently did not say what would be done about third-­ country forces under such deep reductions. Burt
