Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1083 If you can come to us on downloading, I can move substantially on new types: — I can accept a throw weight number substantially lower than at least 30%, as in the President’s letter. — And I can agree to use the same number for the cap on the throw weight of existing missiles, something Obukhov raised with Reg in Geneva. — We would need to agree on rigorous ways of measuring both the increase in throw weight and the change in length. That will need to be part of the package. Reg and the others can spell this out in more detail, but that will need to be nailed down. This is a big move on our part, and involves real risks. It will make the treaty harder to verify, and harder to defend. We are only prepared to do this if we are at the end of the negotiations and you can come around on downloading. (In the context of resolution on downloading:) We can close with 22.5% as the throw weight number in the new types definition, and the same number for the throw weight cap on existing types. This solution is contingent on agreement on a rigorous way to measure and compare the throw weights of the new missile and its predecessor, and a rigorous way to measure and compare the length of the new missile and its predecessor. We don’t have an agreement on new types until this is settled; experts need to resolve this. Data denial This needs to be resolved now, not put off to subsequent negotiations. We need the data denial provisions in the treaty so that we will know—and be able to demonstrate to our legislatures—how we will verify missile characteristics and warhead limits that are central elements of the treaty. We are encouraged by the statement in President Gorbachev’s letter that he shares our view on the importance of unimpeded access to telemetric information, and by his commitment to work out substantive and mutually acceptable solutions before signature of the treaty. Three weeks ago the US put forward in Geneva a complex proposal on data denial. Last week during the Bartholomew/Obukhov talks the Soviets side countered with a complex proposal of its own. The Soviet approach fell well short of what we need, but it did contain an important new element—exchange of telemetry tapes. The Soviet approach would use this only in exceptional circumstances. But it is now part of the Soviet position. That decision has been taken.
