654 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement received a majority, it devolved upon the MDN-­controlled Congress to choose between Ydígoras and Cruz. Again Ydígoras threatened mob violence if he were denied the presidency. Thereupon, in effect, Cruz withdrew from the contest in return for Ydígoras’ promise to take the MDN into his government. The Political Situation and Trend 12. The 62-­year-­old president comes of an upper-­class family and is basically authoritarian in point of view. He is a professional soldier and graduate civil engineer whose governmental experience was gained as a departmental governor and as highway director under the Ubico dictatorship (1931–1944). He has been out of the country most of the time since the Revolution of 1944, in honorific exile as Minister in London (1945–1950) under President Arévalo and as Ambassador in Bogotá (1954–1957) under President Castillo, and in ordinary exile plotting against the Arbenz regime (1950–1954). 13. Ydígoras’ political appeal is essentially personal. He is strongly supported by various organizations representative of property interests (large landholders, manufacturers, and businessman) who count on him to rule firmly, to maintain sound financial policies, and to suppress Communists and labor agitators. However, his party, Redención, has no effective political organization outside of Guatemala City. Ydígoras’ popular support is attributable to a widespread desire for a strong ruler who would maintain stability and order and to his success in persuading ordinary voters that he would adhere to the basic tenets of the 1944 Revolution. 14. Ydígoras is handicapped by lack of assured party support in the new Congress, where Redención holds only 16 out of 66 seats, as compared with 17 held by the MDN, six held by the PR, and 27 held by independents and minor parties. Effective collaboration with the MDN in accordance with his pre-­election agreement might have relieved him of this difficulty, but, once in office, he proved unwilling to concede to any party an effective voice in his administration. His cabinet includes only one MDN member, and is composed essentially of personal adherents who are, for the most part, individually capable but politically unknown. 15. Disappointed by Ydígoras' failure to carry out his pre-­election agreement, the MDN in Congress has asserted its independence of the administration. Meanwhile, in the country side, its members are gravitating to the PR at a rate which has alarmed the MDN party leadership. The moderate MDN will probably dissolve as an effective political force. Some members are likely to be drawn to support the administration, for reasons of patronage or in the interest of stability and order. Others are likely to adhere to the PR, out of resentment toward Ydígoras or in
