The correct interpretation of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, as a whole, and it might almost be said, of every word thereof, has been ably and ingeniously debated between the Parties for years, and is again ably and ingeniously discussed in their Cases and Counter Cases. Into the refinements of this debate it is not necessary to go, inasmuch as they do not, in the opinion of the Arbitrator, affect the considerations which are controlling in the determination of the issues in this arbitration. LAPSE OF TIME At the outset, it should be observed that the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 do not provide for the termination of their obligations by lapse of time. The Article contains no provision for forfeiture. It fixed no period within which the plebiscite must be taken. The plebiscite was to be had “after the expiration of that term,” that is, after the ten years but no limit was defined. It was to be taken pursuant to a special agreement which it was left to the Parties to make. But no time was fixed within which the special protocol for the plebiscite was to be negotiated. Whatever may have been the reasons for leaving the matter thus at large, the fact remains that it was left without prescribed limit of time and the obligations of the Parties under the treaty must be determined accordingly. If it be suggested that such an agreement—an agreement to agree with no time specified and no forfeiture provided—is unsatisfactory or meaningless, a three-fold answer presents itself, first, that the Arbitrator is not empowered to alter the treaty or to insert provisions, however salutary they might be in his judgment viewing the matter retrospectively, which the High Contracting Parties did not see fit to include; second, that the Treaty of Ancon was a peace treaty—the parties were engaged in a devastating war. Apparently the Parties in 1883–1884 thought it better to agree that they would agree at some unspecified time in the future than to agree to disagree in the present. They may well have taken into account the fact that failure to agree upon the terms of a plebiscite when the matter came up again for adjustment would leave unsettled one of the great issues of the War of the Pacific, and they may have believed that inasmuch as a reopening of hostilities on this account after a lapse of at least ten years was improbable and an amicable agreement would be in the interest of both parties, it was at once unnecessary and inadvisable to prescribe a time limit for the negotiations. Finally, the present arbitration is the best evidence that the agreement, elastic as it was, was not without force, since these great States, in response to its provisions, having failed again and again during the course of years to make the contemplated protocol, have now submitted to arbitration the question of the plebiscite and its conditions. It may further be observed that the Parties at the time of the making of the treaty must have realized that they could have no assurance of the result of a plebiscite which was not to be held until after the expiration of ten years. That result was left to hope and conjecture. It might be that wise and beneficial administration might dispose the voters
