Venezuela 1233 such a revision imperative. An American professor was in Venezuela for several months earlier this year to study the tax structure and report on it to the Government. What was surprising was the fact that, in contrast to previous actions affecting the petroleum industry, the income tax reform was kept secret until promulgated, and neither the oil industry nor other affected interests were given an opportunity to present their views to the Government. Moreover, despite our overriding interest in matters affecting Venezuela’s oil industry, we were neither consulted nor given any advance notification. This was all the more surprising in view of the fact that Assistant Secretary Mann was in Caracas when the decree was promulgated, having gone there for the second time this year to consult on U.S. oil imports policy.2 Moreover, Mines Minister Julio Diez left a three-­hour meeting with Mann to go directly to the television studio to participate in the announcement that the income tax decree had been formulated, without mentioning to Mr. Mann the reason for his departure from the Meeting. Mr. Mann stated that when he had expressed surprise that the Venezuelan Government had acted as it did, the Ministers of Finance and Mines had adopted an aggressive position, maintaining that the action taken by their Government was an act of national sovereignty. However, they became almost apologetic and defensive after Mr. Mann had expressed himself strongly, stating that Venezuela’s unexpected and unilateral action on an issue as sensitive as this, which not only affected directly U.S. investments but which could set off a chain reaction in other parts of the world and which is not unrelated to Western Hemisphere security, is inconsistent with Venezuela’s insistence on consultation before U.S. unilateral action affecting Venezuelan interests. Consultation, Mr. Mann informed the Venezuelans, is a two-­ way street. The Foreign Minister took the position that this was a general tax measure affecting all Venezuelans and therefore within the sovereign power of the Venezuelan Government. Mr. Mann and Ambassador Sparks replied that we did not question the sovereign right of the Government to take action; they emphasized the long established practice of American States and particularly Venezuela and the U.S. to consult in matters affecting important interests of the other. They pointed out that while the U.S. has the sovereign right to impose import restrictions on Venezuelan oil we nevertheless seek 2 Assistant Secretary Mann was in Caracas, December 18–21, 1958. The purpose of his visit was to explain and discuss the current oil imports situation and to explore informally future means to deal with problems, including possible tripartite arrangements. (731.11/12–1858) A summary of his conversations with Venezuelan officials is contained in ARA/EST Files, Lot 61 D 319, “U.S. Oil Legislation.”
