990 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II what wider forum. There is already a debate about the use of military sources for “civic action” type programs, now euphemistically called “nation building.” Some of these policy issues, in fact, may adversely affect what we are trying to do in many of these countries in the human rights field. There appears to be no acknowledgement of that harsh reality in the report. In addition, there are important implications for AID (let alone for our DOD budget) in some of the proposals for significant increases in military assistance and increased personnel for this sector. (See pages 306–307.) With respect to international organizations, as noted above, the report does not really examine how the WHO and other related organizations can be improved. While the report quite correctly raises the issue of the limit of US funding for international organizations at the 25% level, it does not specify what levels would be appropriate and how they might be directed for high priority programs. The report does not raise any of the more serious and important questions with respect to our relationship to WHO and other health related organizations. For example, it does not raise the issue of what relationship WHO should have with UNDP and UNICEF. The report rightly raises the question of the impact of health on “global systems issues”10 but it does not go beyond mentioning this harsh reality and relate health specifically to how these global systems issues might be resolved by specific health related programs. For example, there is no analysis of the relationship between health services, population growth and food availability. (While it mentions OSTP’s role in such global systems issues it should also include CEQ which is now coordinating a Presidential study on population and environment. Turning to the specific recommendations of the report, the following appear to be the appropriate State responses: The establishment of a Bureau of International Health: We would best note that this is an almost impossible bureaucratic and resource task and would probably be counter-productive since it would isolate health from a number of other issues. It would also create a difficult bureaucratic situation among the nonhealth constituencies that would not look with favor on placing such items as nutrition and population under health. Rather, we should support the establishment of an Office of International Health in OES and under the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Environment and Population.11 In this way environmental and population health matters can be integrated at that level and related also to the entire spectrum of our foreign policy concerns. 10 An unknown hand underlined the phrase “‘global systems issues’.” 11 An unknown hand placed a tick-mark in the margin next to this sentence.
