Colombia 349 Oficial promptly in order to be effective. In the August, 1958, session, the Amendment breezed through both houses (122 to 3 in the House, 75 to 0 in the Senate) and was published in the Diario Official on August 30. It must now come up again after Congress convenes in July. After it has passed both houses and has been signed by the president it becomes law. Opposition has arisen to the alternation provision in the Liberal Party. The so-­called leftist group, especially former followers of Gaitán, want the Liberals to keep control of the Government, since the Party demonstrated in the last election that it controls many more votes than the Conservatives. Moreover they do not trust Laureano Gómez and his followers and fear the Conservatives will perpetuate themselves in office if they get in again. Lleras cannot permit his party to take a stand against alternation; to do so would be to deny his own handiwork as co-­founder of National Union. A National Liberal Convention has been called to fight this issue out, and it has been in session since March 16. Alfonsito López just returned from semi-­exile in Mexico, who is said to be supported by his father, ex President López, is leading the fight against alternation. Carlos Lleras Restrepo has resigned as sole chief of the Liberal Party, feeling that his leadership is not being supported. Alfonsito López is said to have described him as an “oligarch” and “autocrat” and wants him replaced by a man from his own faction. Ex-President Santos has come strongly to the defense of Lleras and his determination to stand by the National Front and demands that he be urged to reconsider his resignation. This seems to align Santos and López, the two ex-Presidents against each other. President Lleras has also been having some trouble within his cabinet, for which the factionalism within both parties is partly responsible, and also differences of opinion as to how to deal with transportation, labor and the recent demonstrations against raised bus fares and prices of food-­stuffs. All his cabinet officers and governors have now resigned to give him an opportunity to appoint men he can rely upon. The bitter feuding between followers of Conservative ex-Presidents Gómez and Ospina has already been a serious problem for President Lleras to handle. It will be a worse headache if he has to cope with a feud between the two ex-Presidents of his own party and their supporters. Meanwhile there are rumors of Rojistas and Communists getting together to oppose the National Union in every way possible. Lleras has a stormy situation confronting him, but predictions are that he will ride it out. His recent threat to resign office if the alternation provision is defeated will cause his opponents, as well as “neutral” Liberals, to pause before forcing him to this decision.
