National Security Policy  653
Enclosure
Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense
Washington, undated
Questions for Consideration
1. Strategic Nuclear Striking Force
a. What will be the effect of the appraisal of the relative merits of 
alternative target systems, directed by NSC Action No. 2009, upon the 
size and composition of the striking force?
b. In the light of the appraisal referred to in a above, what is the 
most desirable mix of missile systems from the point of view of our 
optimum strategic nuclear striking capacity on the one hand, and from 
the point of view of the greatest degree of invulnerability on the other 
hand, and can these be easily reconciled?
c. Is there a valid requirement to develop another generation of 
strategic bombers, taking into account the probable capabilities of 
enemy defenses and the problems of maintaining such aircraft in an 
alert status?
d. Would it be desirable to extend the effectiveness of POLARIS 
missiles by adapting them for use on surface vessels, and on land bases, 
assuming the development of an appropriate mobile launching unit?
e. Should further priority be given to MINUTE MAN by the ear­
lier establishment of a production capability and by seeking to afford it 
more mobility? What effect would further emphasis on MINUTE MAN 
have on the TITAN and ATLAS missiles program?
f. What is the proper balance between procurement of additional 
retaliatory weapons and expenditures to protect those now available 
against surprise attack?
2. Continental Defense
a. What are the best means for defending the striking force? What 
mixture of active defenses, hardening, dispersal, and quick reaction 
leads to the greatest certainty of survival for the striking force? How 
does this best mix change with Soviet capabilities?
b. Assuming that point defenses will be required, what areas are to 
be protected—SAC bases or urban industrial areas, or both?
c. In the light of the changing nature of the Soviet attack capability, 
how should air defenses be allocated as between the manned bomber 
threat and the ballistic missile threat?
d. Are our present programs for early warning against aircraft and 
missiles adequate to the changing threat? Will our communications
