August 8–September 17, 1978 139 Barak referred to Article 21 of the Begin Self-rule Plan4 and suggested that there be agreement in advance on the flow of immigration of displaced persons and on the number of settlements. (Note: Article 21 establishes a committee to determine the “numbers of immigration.”) Secretary Vance said he did not understand equating Israeli settlements and returning displaced persons. Dr. Brzezinski, in concluding, enumerated the significant points on which the Egyptians had made concessions—a transitional period, Israeli security presence in the West Bank, no independent Palestinian state. He felt that asking them to allow for a continued program of expanded Israeli settlement is “overloading the circuit.” Secretary Vance said that to have everything founder on this issue would be tragic. 4 On the Palestinian self-rule plan proposed by Begin in December 1977, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978. An undated paper outlining the differences between this plan and the proposed Framework for Peace in the Middle East is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 8, Camp David [Summary]: 9/6–9/78. 37. Memorandum of Conversation1 Camp David, September 8, 1978 SUBJECT Egyptian Delegation’s Views on US Suggestions PARTICIPANTS American Side2 The Secretary Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs William Quandt, National Security Council Hermann Fr. Eilts, US Ambassador to Egypt Denis Clift, Vice President’s Staff 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David Memcons, 9/78. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Eilts on September 16. The meeting took place in Holly Lodge. According to Document 28, the meeting took place from 3 p.m. to 5:30 p.m., September 8. 2 Brzezinski is not listed among the participants on the U.S. side, but he participated in the discussion.
