Bolivia 207 the Matilde Mine. Hence the Government of Bolivia will be looking abroad for public capital. The Embassy anticipates that approaches will be made to the United States Government for substantial assistance to rationalize Comibol’s operations. It seems most probable that overtures will be made at the same time, also, to Iron Curtain countries for assistance and that, therefore, the United States Government will be in a squeeze, threatened with the prospect of important Czech or possibly Soviet Union economic (and political) inroads into this country, if we do not come to Comibol’s assistance. [text not declassified] In summary, the problem which Comibol poses for the United States is as follows: Our substantial program of economic and financial assistance is designed to assist Bolivia in improving its economy, a condition, precedent to political stability, the introduction of a reign of law and order in the country, and the consolidation of a purely national revolution which has promise of being a most valuable counterweight to the Castro revolution in Cuba. Yet Comibol constitutes an enormous drain on the resources of the country and, to a large extent, vitiates progress in other sectors of the economy which is being made with our help. Comibol is the key to the economic health of Bolivia, yet our share in economic development here does not touch it. American public funds cannot accomplish all that is desired until a program of reform and recapitalization of Comibol is begun and carried through. The interests of a small number of investors in the United States, the holders of Patiño stock, which dictate that United States public funds not be made available to Comibol, appear, therefore, to conflict with the broader interests of the mass of American taxpayers whose money is not accomplishing, and not likely to accomplish, what is desired here so long as Comibol remains such a heavy drain on the country’s economy. I believe that the United States Government’s interest lies in assuring that the Bolivian Revolution remain a national one and that it succeed along the general lines which it has now taken. I am confident that within a short time the Embassy will be asked what will be the nature and extent of United States cooperation with the Government of Bolivia in reorganizing and recapitalizing Comibol. I should, therefore, appreciate receiving promptly guidance from the Department concerning the nature of my response to this question.3 Carl W. Strom
