764 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Karpov: I am still trying to find a solution, to take us out of this dead end. It seems to me if we do not continue to argue on the number and take into account our readiness to state that this aircraft will not be given intercontinental capability, that would put behind us the problems you raise. We can give a Soviet assurance that this aircraft will not be upgraded or converted so that it becomes a strategic bomber. Bartholomew: I appreciate your move on in-­flight refueling. If we believed that alone would be sufficient assurance, we would have stopped at that. Since you have proposed a number, take a half step more, tell us it covers all Backfire. The reason we need a number is that then if there are concerns, if there is a crisis or sometime in the future a situation develops, we know aircraft can be rapidly upgraded but in any event the number will not exceed 400. This is not a matter of challenging the good faith of the Soviet Union, we are talking about a future situation. Karpov: A funny thing is, there is no proposal on limiting to a certain number the TU–22M either in START or CFE. There is no limit on the number of aircraft of other types either, both within START or Frontal Aviation at CFE. Therefore limits on aircraft that are not strategic bombers are artificial, and look that way. Bartholomew: I know your side does not like it, I don’t like it, but Backfire has come to occupy a special sui generis place and needs a special sui generis solution. It is a problem for both of us, and we need a practical solution. My last point concerns the naval arms question. You have your position, we have our position. Let us not import that question into this problem of Backfire. I propose that we return to the original agenda, and take up the joint statement on future negotiations. I note that we have important differences on heavy ICBMs and non-­circumvention that need to be discussed as well. Karpov: I wonder whether we could arrive on a common solution on TU–22M, without prejudice to CFE, and do away with numbers, by assuming a commitment not to give this aircraft intercontinental capability. Bartholomew: We need both. One is not enough. Karpov: I would like to hear your response on the future joint statement. There are several clearly defined points of difference. Bartholomew: I have a proposal on defense and space that could put us back on track. We propose that you drop the phrase on “related issues,” and accept “without delay.” I could accept “the relationship” and drop “cooperative transition.” Karpov: That leaves us with heavy ICBMs and mobile ICBMs. Bartholomew: I propose that we drop “stabilizing reductions.”
