1382 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX body representing the various peoples of the area in order to develop and use the water resources for the benefit of all those peoples. In connection with security, it is agreed that the inhabitants of both the territories and Israel require assured internal security and public order during the transitional period. Accordingly, it is recognized that the strong local police force, to be constituted by the SGA (AC), must help provide such security. Specific arrangements for liaison between the local police and Israeli security authorities on such security issues, as called for in the Camp David Framework, will be worked out in the course of the negotiations and will be implemented in such a way as to ensure that security is preserved. To assure external security, and in the absence of Jordanian participation as envisioned in the Camp David Framework, the responsibilities for external security set forth in the Framework must be borne by Israel. The precise arrangements remain to be specified and further discussion will be required on how to enable Israel to fulfill fully its responsibilities while minimizing the impact on the inhabitants. The parties plan the establishment of a Continuing Committee with Egypt, Israel and the SGA (AC) as members (Jordan has, of course, the option of joining under the provisions of the Framework), and with the United States also invited to participate. The Committee would decide by agreement on the modalities of admission of persons displaced in 1967, together with measures necessary to prevent disruption and disorder. The Committee would also deal with other matters of common concern, such as economic cooperation. The Committee would operate on the basis of unanimity unless otherwise agreed by the parties. As you know so well, troublesome problems still remain to be resolved and difficult negotiations still lie ahead. It is significant, however, that on December 18, 1980, President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin together issued a statement reaffirming their commitment to the Camp David peace process as “the only viable path toward comprehensive peace in the Middle East today.” With the determined efforts of both parties and with continued active participation on the part of the United States, I firmly believe that the negotiations can be successfully concluded. Respectfully submitted, Sol M. Linowitz6 Personal Representative of the President for the Middle East Peace Negotiations 6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
