Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America 1151 keep you informed about our discussions on nuclear matters with the government of Argentina. Sincerely. Cyrus Vance. Unquote. 4. In delivering this letter, Ambassador is requested to make following points: —I know you are aware of our concern about FRG requirements for nuclear supply to Argentina. We have not raised this concern recently at a high level while your negotiators have been discussing the matter with GOA officials. Naturally, we are anxious to learn as soon as possible of any Argentine response to your proposal, which we were gratified to learn, included the issue of Argentine adherence to the Treaty of Tlatelolco. —The Secretary also has written to Federal Councillor Aubert on this subject.3 Although we have had no formal reply to the letter, we understand that Sulzer signed a contract with the Argentines on March 14. —In light of the Swiss decision, it is all the more important that the FRG holds to the strongest possible safeguard conditions. —I understand that the FRG Nuclear Cabinet met last week and decided to continue nuclear negotiations with Argentina, during which it would seek the best possible safeguards conditions. (FYI: FRG Ambassador Hermes called Ambassador Smith March 19 to report this. In subsequent conversation with Department officer, FRG Embassy Science Counselor refused to go beyond Hermes’ report, other than to say that no deviation from position expressed by Lambsdorf to Smith February 15 was intended.4 Department assumes FRG position to be that expressed by Lambsdorff, i.e., that FRG has resolved to complete reactor sale and will settle for best safeguards conditions obtainable. End FYI.) —In addition, Ambassador Gerard Smith will be visiting Buenos Aires March 24–25. He will be discussing a range of subjects, following up on General Goodpaster’s earlier visit. He does not intend to discuss the subject of Argentina’s negotiations with other nuclear suppliers. We wish to assure your government the US will insist that Argentina confirm that all of its facilities are safeguarded as a condition of any nuclear supply from the United States. As mentioned in Secretary Vance’s letter, we will continue to provide you additional details concerning our position through your Embassy in Washington. Vance 3 Vance’s letter to Aubert is in telegram 45004 to Bern, February 20. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800088–0863) 4 Not found.
