Human Rights
469
141.
Memorandum From Robert Maxim of the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to the Assistant Secretary
of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(Derian)1
Washington, May 1, 1978
SUBJECT
AID and Implementation of Section 116 (e) of the Foreign Assistance Act:
Derian-Moose Meeting with Governor Gilligan
The following are suggested talking points for your meeting today
with Governor Gilligan:2
—To date there has not been one single project implementing Sec-
tion 116 (e) of the FAA for Fiscal Year 1978 which provides for $750
thousand to be spent in development assistance programs “which will
encourage or promote increased adherence to civil and political
rights”. A record of non-accomplishment that is potentially highly em-
barrassing for an Administration that has placed human rights at the
center of its foreign policy. (About $100–200 thousand will be given to a
South African legal defense fund but this is not an AID-originated
activity.)
—After weeks of discussion a request for ideas was sent out on
April 22 (attached)3 by AID’s African bureau. We are unaware if other
geographic bureaus did even this much. Although this message did en-
dorse an Embassy Gaborone (Botswana) it was a proposal submitted
months ago.4
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs, Chron and Official Records of the Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Hu-
manitarian Affairs, Lot 85D366, AID. Limited Official Use. A handwritten notation at the
top of the memorandum reads: “Monday, May 1, 12:15.”
2 Minutes of this meeting have not been found.
3 Attached but not printed is telegram 102727 to multiple African diplomatic posts,
April 22.
4 Reference is to telegram 3067 from Gaborone, December 5, 1977, wherein the Em-
bassy transmitted various proposals “to accord positive recognition to Botswana for its
outstanding human rights record,” including an invitation from Carter to President
Khama to visit the United States in 1978; a visit to Botswana from a “well-known USG of-
ficial or legislator;” the endowment of chairs in political science and law at universities;
establishment of scholarships at American universities for students from Botswana;
procurement of funds to purchase a “mobile movie theater and library” dedicated to
showing human rights films; an endowment to establish a room at a local university
“equipped and staffed to assist in study” of civil and political rights; funding of a human
rights lecture series; and financing of a study group of citizens from Zimbabwe, Namibia,
Botswana, and South Africa charged with devising a human rights-based curriculum de-
velopment project. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770453–
0249)
