1980  775
significant negative factor in considerations of OSD, the President, and 
the Congress. I will be visiting them on a monthly basis from now on, 
and will invite them to join me in some M–X site visits. Gov ­Matheson 
is sponsoring a two hour TV debate that will be nationally broadcast 
(PBS) on 24 April. I proposed that Dave Aaron, Toni Chayes and I 
represent the Administration’s position (Policy, Public Interface, and 
Military/Technical). Bill Moyer will be the moderator and will select 
three “Doves” and three “Hawks” to round out the debate. Sounds 
interesting.
d. Public Information (U)
(S) We also are coordinating through the Steering Committee a 
series of public speeches with local groups in Nevada and Utah. I’ll 
have a schedule for your review soon. Also, Tom Ross is preparing a 
schedule for one-­on-­one interviews with influential journalists.
4. Tactics (U)
(S) I believe that we should take the initiative with our design 
changes. We should be able to settle on them when the Defense Science 
Board review is completed (in a few weeks). At that time, we should 
brief the committees and be sure that the FY 81 language is consis-
tent with this design. Ichord and McKay in the House, and Nunn and 
­Warner, in the Senate, will probably take the lead in reviewing and val-
idating that these actions are desirable and responsive to the Stevens 
Amendment.
(S) I don’t have a plan yet on dealing with the split basing prob-
lem. I feel that the initiative on that should come from the Congress 
through language in the 81 bill. I will discuss this further with McKay 
and Nunn. If we were to ultimately go with split basing, there would 
be some “credit” which probably should go to Gunn McKay and 
shared somewhat by the governors. If split basing were ultimately to 
be rejected on cost, it is better not to raise expectations and to put this in 
the clear perspective of something to which we are giving a fair hearing 
but about which we are not optimistic.
William J. Perry
