186
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
First are studied the personal characteristics and ambitions of Dr.
Mosadeq. He has identified his own ambitions with national aspira-
tions. By winning popular support for his emotion-charged policies “in
the nation’s interest” he has succeeded in winning political power.
The nature and profundity of the national emotions to which Mo-
sadeq appeals are then considered. Nationalism, social discontent and
political irresponsibility are basic elements in Iranian politics today.
Iranian nationalism is not unlike other fervent, though usually ill-
defined, nationalist sentiments in Asia. The social discontent and xeno-
phobia of the Persians is also similar to such phenomena in other
countries. Peculiar national vanity and political irresponsibility lead
Iranians to support a Premier who insists that the rest of the world
must accept his uncompromising point of view.
The final chapter of this paper describes Mosadeq’s realism in di-
recting the National Front’s rise to power. His understanding of the
vulnerabilities of his opponents allowed him, by simple opposition, to
cripple previous Governments, to turn a disorganized and selfish
Majlis into an emotional pro-Mosadeq, pro-nationalization group, to
terrify the Shah and, so far successfully, to deal with the entrenched in-
terests in Iran, the communists and other foreign influence.
Mosadeq’s new design for politics in Iran, a country so long ruled
by a clique of old-line politicians, must be known in detail in order to
understand Iranian politics of the past two years and in order to realize
that the future trend of Iranian politics is towards nationalistic leader-
ship of a more or less dynamic character.
I. Introduction
When Mohammad Mosadeq walked upon the scene of recent his-
tory, a new act in Iranian politics commenced. His political techniques
and the national emotions he aroused are power factors for the future.
New leaders will undoubtedly arise, but all will have to charge their
programs with emotion for a mass appeal, and must claim that they
represent Iranian national forces rather than limited cliques or
interests.
Mohammad Mosadeq’s great success came from his recognition of
the power inherent in national and religious prejudices and in popular
acclaim. He removed Iranian politics from the closed arena of corrupt
self-centered intrigue into a broad field in which it was possible to ex-
ploit the passions and credulity of the ignorant and irresponsible
masses. Study of the techniques which he used and the emotions he
appealed to is necessary for observers of Iran’s future.
II. Political Characteristics of Mohammad Mosadeq
Iran is not easily comprehensible to westerners. Iranians have
many different values, respond to different appeals, have customs and
