The cause of constructive economy requires that the Government should
cooperate with private interests to eliminate the waste arising from
industrial accidents. This item, with all that has been done to reduce it, still
reaches enormous proportions with great suffering to the workman and
great loss to the country.
WOMEN AND CHILDREN
The Federal Government should continue its solicitous care for the
8,500,000 women wage earners and its efforts in behalf of public health,
which is reducing infant mortality and improving the bodily and mental
condition of our citizens.
CIVIL SERVICE
The most marked change made in the civil service of the Government in the
past eight years relates to the increase in salaries. The Board of Actuaries
on the retirement act shows by its report that July 1, 1921, the average
salary of the 330,047 employees subject to the act was $1,307, while on
June 30, 1927, the average salary of the corresponding 405,263 was $1,969.
This was an increase in six years of nearly 53 per cent. On top of this was
the generous increase made at the last session of the Congress generally
applicable to Federal employees and another bill increasing the pay in
certain branches of the Postal Service beyond the large increase which was
made three years ago. This raised the average level from $1,969 to $2,092,
making an increase in seven years of over 63 per cent. While it is well
known that in the upper brackets the pay in the Federal service is much
smaller than in private employment, in the lower brackets, ranging well up
over $3,000, it is much higher. It is higher not only in actual money paid,
but in privileges granted, a vacation of 30 actual working days, or 5 weeks
each year, with additional time running in some departments as high as 30
days for sick leave and the generous provisions of the retirement act. No
other body of public servants ever occupied such a fortunate position.
EDUCATION
Through the Bureau of Education of the Department of the Interior the
Federal Government, acting in an informative and advisory capacity, has
