States, an alternative draft treaty, and that in an address which he
delivered on April 28, 1928, before the American Society of
International Law, the Secretary of State of the United States
explained fully the construction placed by my Government upon
the treaty proposed by it, referring as follows to the six major
considerations emphasized by France in its alternative draft treaty
and prior diplomatic correspondence with my Government:
[For the text of the paragraphs here omitted, see the six points as
contained in the Department’s telegram No. 118, April 23, 5 p.m.,
to the Ambassador in France, printed on page 34 [Pg. 34 includes
portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc. 25].]
The British, German, Italian and Japanese Governments have
now replied to my Government’s notes of April 13, 1928, and the
Governments of the British Dominions and of India have likewise
replied to the invitations addressed to them on May 22, 1928, by
my Government pursuant to the suggestion conveyed in the note
of May 19, 1928, from His Majesty’s Government in Great
Britain. None of these Governments has expressed any dissent
from the above-quoted construction, and none has voiced the least
disapproval of the principle underlying the proposal of the United
States for the promotion of world peace. Neither has any of the
replies received by the Government of the United States
suggested any specific modification of the text of the draft treaty
proposed by it on April 13, 1928, and my Government, for its
part, remains convinced that no modification of the text of its
proposal for a multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war is
necessary to safeguard the legitimate interests of any nation. It
believes that the right of self-defense is inherent in every
sovereign state and implicit in every treaty. No specific reference
to that inalienable attribute of sovereignty is therefore necessary
or desirable. It is no less evident that resort to war in violation of
the proposed treaty by one of the parties thereto would release the
other parties from their obligations under the treaty towards the
belligerent state. This principle is well recognized. So far as the
Locarno treaties are concerned, my Government has felt from the
