960  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
I believe we should take our various proposals to the President for 
decision on a fairly urgent basis. If you would let me know in the next 
few days, after you have had the opportunity to consider this letter, 
we could then arrange a mutually convenient appointment with the 
President for this purpose.
With warmest personal regards,
Most sincerely,
Christian A. Herter
PM–41.	
Editorial Note
On April 12, 1960, Robert K. Gray, the Secretary to the Cabinet, 
transmitted the text of Cabinet Paper 60–108, entitled “Isthmian Canal 
Plans—1960” to the Members of the Cabinet. In his covering memoran-
dum, Gray indicated that this document was scheduled for Cabinet con-
sideration at the Cabinet meeting planned for April 29, 1960, and that 
the Secretary of the Army, acting in his capacity as “the stockholder” 
and, as such, the senior official of the Federal Government supervising 
the Panama Canal Company, was complying with the Cabinet decision 
of May 22, 1959, to present, on behalf of the Board of Directors of the 
Panama Canal Company, a report to the President and the Cabinet on 
the feasibility of constructing an alternative Isthmian sea-level canal.
CP–60–108, prepared with the assistance of the Atomic Energy 
Commission and the Department of State, concluded that: 1) a new 
sea-­level canal was the most advantageous, least vulnerable, and most 
practical solution of the problem of the over-­used Panama Canal; and 
2) that conventional construction of a sea-­level canal would cost three 
times as much as nuclear excavation at a location remote from the pres-
ent Canal Zone. The report also recommended that the Panama Canal 
Company and the Atomic Energy Commission promptly initiate con-
struction plans for a sea-­level canal at a remote location using nuclear 
excavation; however, if the nuclear construction of a sea-­level canal 
could not be completed before the early 1970s, the report recommended 
that the Panama Canal Company use conventional methods to build a 
new sea-­level canal in the Canal Zone.
Documentation in the Department of State concerning the ques-
tion of the construction of a new sea-­level canal is in ARA/PAN Files, 
Lot 65 D 176, and at the Eisenhower Library, it is in the Whitman File, 
Cabinet Series.
