442
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
neva on our experience and the SCC Working Group prepared a de-
tailed PNE paper for transmittal to Gromyko. As a result of Brezhnev’s
offer of a PNE moratorium on November 2,3 we deferred transmittal of
our PNE paper to Gromyko pending Soviet elaboration of their new
PNE position in the December round of the CTB negotiations.
Although the main PNE issue is settled, it is clear from those dis-
cussions that considerable work remains on the issue of duration of the
PNE Protocol and its linkage to the CTB treaty. The Soviets have infor-
mally indicated in Geneva that, due to the size of their PNE program,
any provision for extension of the PNE moratorium poses difficult bu-
reaucratic problems for them. As a result, it would be useful to forward
our PNE report at this time to demonstrate good faith in continuing
PNE discussions and keep the Gromyko channel open in the event it is
needed for resolution of the remaining PNE issues.
In an earlier comment on a Weekly Report item,4 you indicated
that you wanted to read the PNE paper, and a brief summary is at-
tached for your review at Tab A.5
RECOMMENDATION
That you authorize transmittal of the PNE report to Gromyko.6
3 See footnote 2, Document 176.
4 Not found.
5 Attached but not printed is a paper entitled “U.S. Perspectives on Peaceful Nu-
clear Explosions.”
6 Carter wrote a check mark authorizing the transmittal of the PNE report to Gro-
myko. Underneath this sentence, Carter wrote “use ‘private industry’ vs ‘industry’,” re-
ferring to page one of the PNE report that noted that “Experimental programs (including
nuclear experiments) have been conducted jointly with U.S. industry on the most inter-
esting ideas and there have been careful evaluations of both technical feasibility and cost
effectiveness.” Despite twenty years of such programs, “no application has been identi-
fied by the United States where PNEs offer important, clearcut advantages over alterna-
tive approaches, and the United States no longer funds any PNE activities.” Vance sent
the PNE Report under cover of a February 14 letter to Gromyko. (National Archives, RG
383, Records of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Accession #383–98–0120,
Box 1, US Perspectives on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions, February 1978.
