1068 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Budget; the Acting Attorney General (Walsh) (Items 1 & 2); and the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission (Items 1 & 2). Also attending the meeting were the Acting Director of Central Intelligence (Cabell); General Thomas D. White for the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Under Secretary of State; the Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs and for Security Operations Coordination; Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; Assistant Secretaries of Defense John N. Irwin, II and Charles C. Finucane; Charles Haskins, NSC; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC. There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the main points taken. 1. U.S. POLICY ON CONTINENTAL DEFENSE: PORT SECURITY (NSC Actions Nos. 1862–­g, 2051 and 2075; NSC 5802/1, paragraph 19; Memo for NSC from Acting Executive Secretary, same subject, dated May 16, 1960; Memos for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated June 15 and 21, 1960) Mr. Gray recalled that members of the Council had recently con­ curred by Memorandum Action in a revised Port Security paragraph (Paragraph 19; transmitted by the reference memorandum of May 16, 1960), proposed by the Secretary of the Treasury for inclusion in U.S. Policy on Continental Defense (NSC 5802/1). Mr. Gray said he had subsequently discussed the revised paragraph, as well as the revised port security program developed by the Secretary of the Treasury to carry out the new policy paragraph, with the President in a meeting also attended by Secretaries Herter, Anderson and Gates. The President approved the revised Paragraph 19 of NSC 5802/1, rescinded the port security program which he had approved on April 21, 1958, and autho­ rized the Secretary of the Treasury to place in effect such port security programs as are necessary and appropriate to implement the revised policy, in consultation with the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Attorney General, and the Director of Central Intelligence (keeping the Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference and the Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security informed). In discussing the revised port security program, the President had indicated his desire that occasional boarding and searching of Sino-­Soviet Bloc vessels before their entry into U.S. ports should be continued. Mr. Gray said the sub­ ject was placed on the agenda of this Council meeting in order that the Council may note the action taken by the President, as reflected in the draft NSC Action transmitted by the reference memorandum of June 15, 1960. Mr. Gray said that the Secretary of the Treasury might at this time wish to make some remarks regarding the implementation of the new port security program and that the Council might wish to note these remarks.
