808 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement HO–6. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart)1 Washington, March 3, 1959. SUBJECT Expulsion of Colonel Velasquez from Nicaragua PARTICIPANTS Señor Dr. Céleo Davila, Ambassador of Honduras ARA:OAP - C. Allan Stewart Ambassador Dávila said that the Honduran Government on Friday2 had requested the GON to expel Colonel Velasquez and four other persons, in view of their revolutionary activities against the Honduran regime. Expulsions can be requested under terms of the agreement signed by representatives of the two countries on February 26.3 Ambassador Dávila said that Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa had assured him that Velasquez and his cohorts would be asked to leave the country immediately after the signing of the agreement. Dr. Dávila said that President Villeda had telephoned him this morning to say that the expulsion action had not taken place. Dávila said he would call it to the attention of Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa but the President had suggested that he talk instead with the Department. I told Dávila that I had inquired of our Chargé in Managua4 yesterday whether Colonel Velasquez had been asked to leave the country and was told that as far as he knew no action had been taken at the time. He said the Nicaraguan Government had informed him that when the expulsions were affected the Embassy would be notified. The Chargé said he had an appointment with President Somoza on March 3 and would bring up the matter with him. I told Ambassador Dávila that if the Department had no word from our Embassy on this matter before the opening of business on March 4 we would again make inquiries. I said we had been slightly concerned about a report that President Villeda did not intend to take further action about inducing Honduran emigres now being fed and housed by the Nicaraguan Government to return to their homes. Ambassador Dávila said he had suggested to the President this morning that the Honduran Government should make every effort to assure means of transportation for those people who 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 715.00/3–359. Official Use Only. 2 February 27. 3 Documentation concerning United States interest in the negotiation of this agreement is in Department of State files 615.17 and 715.00. 4 Louís F. Blanchard.
