Dominican Republic  479
has not touched in some manner. They are, however, quick to empha-
size their economic well being derives from the Trujillo regime and 
openly state they would be most reluctant to move against it or effect 
drastic changes, even after Trujillo’s demise. They would prefer and 
will probably demand a transition to a much more democratic regime 
through which their personal interests would continue to be protected.
Politically significant discontent exists in several segments of the 
population. The Embassy does not consider that such discontent is likely 
to erupt in overt revolution under present circumstances. Elements 
of disconent have been discerned within the professional classes, the 
younger military officer class (not considered to be extensive and dif-
ficult to estimate), the non-Trujillo middle class merchant group, the 
well to do agriculturists of the Cibae. Recently, an Embassy officer has 
observed a nucleus of potential disaffection within the group of high 
level business associates of the Generalissimo. Members of the two lat-
ter groups must be classified as opportunists who will swing with the 
tides of fortune.
The Embassy considers the most important political development 
since January 1 affecting the Dominican Republic was the downfall 
of Batista, Castro’s action in placing numerous military supporters of 
Batista before the firing squad doubtless converted many Dominicans 
who previously adhered to his cause to active enemies, through fear of 
any Castro inspired action against the Dominican Republic.
The anticipation of violence marking the end of the “Era of Trujillo” 
inclines most people to “bear the ills they have rather than fly to others 
they know not of”, particularly when the present economic and politi-
cal situation is compared to the pre-Trujillo one and the choice between 
retrogression and painful advance is contemplated. There seems little 
doubt that a greater degree of unity was achieved by Trujillo during 
the months of January, February, and March of this year than has been 
previously observed within recent years. Fear of Castro has probably 
accomplished for Trujillo what nothing else could have.
Since the conference of American ambassadors at San Salvador 
and the intervention of the OAS in Panama, this unity has dissipated 
somewhat, motivated primarily by the adverse economic picture and 
lessening tension. However, in view of the recent slight increase over 
the previously existing rock bottom price for sugar and the encouraging 
upturn in the U.S. economy which sooner or later should be reflected 
in the Dominican economy, some improvement in the economic situa-
tion here is foreseen. Therefore, if the Dominican Government exercises 
even a modicum of restraint with respect to its purchases of weapons 
abroad, it appears probable that a reasonable degree of political stabil-
ity may be contemplated for the Dominican Republic for the foreseeable 
future. A most important prerequisite for the validity of this prediction 
is that the Dominican Government will take no overt step to exacerbate
