554  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Mr. Aaron then made the point that we must focus on how certain 
types of preparations to fight nuclear war might actually undermine 
deterrence. (C)
General Jones said that he sees the basic thrust of of the study as a 
push for much more flexibility and in the future for more endurance, 
not only for our forces but for our C3I systems. He noted that there were 
a number of narrower issues that we can and should get on with. He 
cited the issue of how we should target China as an example. He said 
that we can make some useful decisions without solving all the broad 
problems. (TS)
Admiral Turner said he thinks of the study in terms of three ques-
tions: how does our targeting policy affect (1) Soviet diplomacy; (2) 
Soviet deterrence; and (3) Soviet war fighting? (C)
Dr. Brzezinski said that he agreed with Mr. Aaron’s suggestion that 
we should focus on some of the more important issues and then test 
them against the larger framework he had proposed. As a first issue, he 
proposed discussion of whether or not China should be removed from 
the SIOP. As a second issue, he proposed a discussion of the problems 
involved in targeting population/leadership/C3 and the idea of target-
ing to achieve regionalization of the Soviet Union. (TS)
General Jones suggested that the population targeting issue be 
dropped because population targeting is illegal under international 
agreements to which the US is a party. (S)
There were several comments to the effect that retaliation for 
attacks that killed civilian population was not illegal. Secretary Brown 
noted that while our current efforts to minimize collateral damage 
to population bias our targeting away from residential areas, strikes 
against industry may cause many fatalities. (S)
Secretary Brown then noted there is a real issue here—­do we want 
to be able to hit an evacuated Soviet population? (TS)
Admiral Turner asked what the group believes really deters the 
Soviets most. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski responded that it is the threat to the Soviet popula-
tion, and Secretary Vance agreed. (S)
Secretary Brown expressed some skepticism, and also noted that 
the population fatality calculations that are done currently reflect only 
fatalities due to prompt nuclear effects, and thus might be quite low. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski reiterated his belief that Soviet leadership is con-
cerned about the survival of its population, and noted that it is appro-
priate to discuss the population issue in terms of the importance of 
assuring that there are no significant asymmetries in the population 
losses that might be suffered by the two sides. (TS)
