Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  317
Some in OSD and the JCS argue that a high range threshold is still 
necessary to protect the option for a theater nuclear ALCM, particu-
larly if the B–2 program is significantly reduced. They argue that such a 
weapon is necessary because of INF eliminations and a CFE agreement 
that would increase range requirements by pushing Warsaw Pact forces 
back from the inner-German border. But there is no program, or formal 
military requirement, for such a missile. Given the political difficulties 
we face in deploying a shorter-­range nuclear ALCM in Europe as well 
as a follow-­on to the Lance missile, a new theater nuclear weapon does 
not appear realistic.
At the Moscow Summit, and at later Ministerials, we told the 
Soviets that we would consider an ALCM range threshold somewhat 
below 1500 km in the context of agreement to other ALCM issues. A 
specific threshold, however, was not discussed.
Soviet Position. The Soviet position is that all nuclear-­armed ALCMs 
above 600 km in range—­the threshold used in the SALT II agreement—­
should count against START limits. The Soviets have also asserted that 
their agreement to the counting rule for heavy bombers carrying only 
gravity bombs and SRAMs was predicated on agreement to the 600 km 
threshold, although the ALCM threshold was not specifically dis-
cussed. The Soviets have continued to stress 600 km as the key ALCM 
issue for them, and they have threatened to reopen the other counting 
rule if a 600 km threshold is not agreed.
Finding a solution. The U.S. interest in discounting ALCMs appears 
greater than our interest in a high range threshold. This is particu-
larly true given Soviet agreement not to count conventional ALCMs in 
START. As part of any package for resolving ALCM issues, however, 
we must insist on Soviet agreement to our position that future nuclear 
and conventional ALCMs must be distinguishable only by NTM. (The 
Soviets currently propose that such ALCMs must be distinguishable by 
functionally-­related and externally observable differences.) All agen-
cies agree that we do not have any flexibility on this issue.
Although our position on distinguishability would not give us 
confidence that ALCMs that are declared to be conventionally-­armed 
are not in fact equipped with nuclear warheads, we have to date been 
willing to accept the associated risks given that extra ALCMs are likely 
to be an area of U.S. advantage.
Package Solutions to Remaining ALCM Issues
Because they are highly interrelated, the issues of ALCM count-
ing, range threshold and distinguishability should be settled as part of 
a package deal. In addition, we may want to incorporate some of the 
other less central ALCM and heavy bomber issues in such a package. 
The accompanying ALCM paper outlines a range of possible package 
proposals.
