540 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 9. The Soviets also hope that radical anti-Western nationalism in the Middle East can eventually be given a revolutionary turn toward Communism. While they probably intend for the present to support Nasser’s claim to leadership of the Arab nationalist movement, they regard him as a “bourgeois nationalist” whose role is a transitory one. Given a favorable opportunity in some Arab country, they may encour­ age local Communists to capture the nationalist movement and attempt a seizure of power. An open conflict between Soviet revolutionary pol­ icy and Nasser’s claim to leadership of the Arab nationalist movement may occur during the period of this estimate. 10. In South Asia and the Far East, Soviet and Chinese Communist policy will probably continue to emphasize governmental contacts, supported by programs of economic aid and cultural exchange and an active propaganda, with a view to encouraging neutralist policies and where possible openly anti-Western ones. Short of a favorable opportu­ nity to establish Communist power in a key country, the Chinese and Soviets will probably continue to put their main reliance on diplomatic action intended to influence governments rather than to overthrow them, and if possible to associate them with the Bloc against the Western Powers. As regards Africa and Latin America, the Soviet Government apparently views with optimism its prospects for successful diplomatic and economic penetration and, in keeping with a current trend, can be expected to intensify its efforts in these areas. 11. Soviet policy in Europe appears to be aimed more at consolidat­ ing the USSR’s position in Eastern Europe than at an early expansion of Soviet power beyond the frontiers of the bloc. Soviet policy toward Western Europe is concerned mainly with breaking up the NATO polit­ ical and military alliance and the defense structure located in that area. This is the main purpose of their maneuvers and proposals aimed at achieving “European security.” Apart from the ever-present aim of creating discord among the NATO allies, the more immediate Soviet objectives are to prevent an increase of West German military strength and to prevent the establishment of additional missile bases in Western Europe. 12. The current Soviet diplomatic offensive over the status of Berlin is the most striking example of Khrushchev’s activist foreign policy. It appears designed to strengthen the East German regime as well as to stimulate a more receptive atmosphere for other Soviet proposals on Germany and to create divisions among the NATO allies. The Soviet leaders probably intend to be cautious and tactically flexible. We believe that they will try to direct Soviet and East German maneuvering in a manner which will avoid military conflict with the Western allies, while at the same time they will be prepared to take advantage of any signs of weakness on the part of the West, or of inclinations to compromise
