Chapter 2, January–June 1989  253
breakout capability. Decisions in this complex and difficult area require 
considerable further study, and should not be taken now.
(S) One of the most important START issues before you is whether 
to retain the existing U.S. position on mobile ICBMs. I strongly recom-
mend that you retain the ban, until we agree in Geneva on effective 
verification, and obtain a firm Congressional commitment to required 
U.S. mobile deployments. If we agree now to permit mobile ICBMs 
under START, we will lose all leverage to persuade the USSR to accept 
effective verification for those systems. Moreover, Congressional sup-
port for U.S. mobile ICBMs will increase if we make it clear that we 
will not accept a START Treaty which gives the USSR a monopoly in 
those systems. If we rescind the ban on mobile ICBMs now, we would 
run a real risk that START would result in a unilateral Soviet mobile 
ICBM force whose limits could not be verified. Such a Treaty could 
not be ratified.
(S) Mobile ICBMs present the greatest verification problems for 
START, because of the inherent difficulty of the task and the extent of 
the cheating threat. However, other important START areas—­for exam-
ple, warhead counts and definitions of new types of ballistic missiles—­
also pose serious verification concerns. Overall improvements to our 
proposals for verifying START and limiting Soviet cheating require fur-
ther analysis. We should redouble our efforts to find means for effec-
tively verifying permitted strategic forces.
(S) Our current position in the Defense and Space Talks is designed 
to preserve full SDI testing rights during the period of non-­withdrawal 
from the ABM Treaty, and to preserve our options to deploy defenses 
at the end of that period. Thus, our current DST position fully supports 
your SDI decision, and I strongly recommend that you reaffirm it. That 
would send a strong signal to the Soviet Union regarding your com-
mitment to the SDI and to eventual defenses, and lead to a Defense 
and Space Treaty which facilitates both the development of defensive 
options and the deployment of defenses when they are ready.
(S) The Soviet Union claims that our goals in START and Defense and 
Space are incompatible. In fact, just the opposite is true. The SDI program 
helps to preserve stability by deterring the Soviets from breaking out of the 
ABM Treaty. Over the longer term, defenses may contribute more directly 
to maintaining a robust deterrent against qualitative Soviet force improve-
ments that cannot be constrained by START. We must not accept a START 
Treaty at the expense of the SDI. Neither can we accept inadequacies or 
inequities in START on the assumption that defenses or other future force 
improvements will eventually redress them.
  (U) The attachment at TAB A provides my views on the specific 
START and Defense and Space issues that have been considered.
Dick
