Human Rights Western governments. But one including LDCs almost certainly would make some human rights judgments sharply at variance with our own. In sum, Zbig’s idea certainly needs to be pursued, if only because Don Fraser will propose a Human Rights Foundation if we don’t and we both want to influence its shape, and get some credit for it. But we need to give a lot more thought to just what we want, and how to accomplish it. At this point, I think the President should endorse the idea in general (perhaps in a telephone call to Fraser) but indicate that State and the NSC would like to think through the details first within the Administration and then discuss it with Fraser and other key Congressmen. 118. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, February 15, 1978 SUBJECT Transmittal to the Senate of Four International Human Rights Treaties Attached for your signature (Tab A) is a letter of transmittal to the Senate asking for its advice and consent to ratification of three UN human rights treaties: —The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, signed on behalf of the United States on September 29, 1977; —The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, signed on behalf of the United States on October 5, 1977; —The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, signed on behalf of the United States on October 5, 1977; and the American Convention on Human Rights, signed on behalf of the United States on June 1, 1977. Together with your letter of transmittal, State will send to the Senate reports outlining the recommended reservations, under- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1978. No classification marking. Sent for action. Tab A, the letter of transmittal, is attached but not printed. In a January 25 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tuchman requested that Brzezinski sign an earlier draft of memorandum to the President. Tuchman’s handwritten notations, added to the memorandum on February 6 and 10, indicate that the draft underwent subsequent revision and clearance before Brzezinski initialed the February 15 version printed here. (Ibid.)
