893.5045/96: Telegram [Document 516] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, June 19, 1925—6 p.m. [Received June 19—5:35 p.m.] 237. My telegram number 217, June 12, 6 p.m., paragraph 2. Number 1. Our delegation at Shanghai departed last night for Peking since unable to come to agreement with Chinese Government commission in regard to fixing the basis for possible accord between the diplomatic representatives concerned and the Chinese Government in respect of Shanghai incidents. We had restricted our delegation to the following four points: (1) indemnity to the victims, (2) simultaneous suspension of the Chinese chief of police and the inspector of Louza police station, commencement of [pending?] an administrative inquiry by the Municipal Council into the subject of the technical responsibility of the inspector, (3) agreement by the Chinese authorities to maintain order in all the Chinese districts of Shanghai outside the concessions and agreement for a return to work, this return to work to be followed automatically by (4) reembarkation of all the landing force and the complete demobilization of the International Concession. The Chinese delegation had received instructions to negotiate for a settlement on the spot believing that the Mixed Court question, representation on the Municipal Council and the like were questions directly connected with the Shanghai incidents, whereas we had limited our delegation’s authority as above. These divergent instructions prevented successful negotiations at Shanghai. 2. At meeting of the Heads of Legation this morning the senior minister was authorized to inform the Chinese Government immediately that the interested diplomatic representatives decided to begin negotiations without delay; that in their opinion the immediate return [settlement?] of the Shanghai incidents themselves on basis of equity and justice must be object of the first agreement; that likewise if the Chinese Government expresses the desire the interested diplomatic representatives are disposed to request of their respective Governments authorization to discuss in the most friendly spirit the propositions presented to their delegation at Shanghai concerning both the [re]organization of the International Settlement and the administration of justice in the said Settlement. This is being given widest publicity in the hope
