98
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
clothes man, became very upset over this request for a delay, and
insisted that he was under orders to strike immediately. Flatin then
talked with Bakhturin who had in the meantime come upstairs, and
stressed our strong American interest in the delay. Bakhturin said that
he agreed time was also a good idea. He then talked with the senior
Soviet police advisor. The situation then became temporarily calm on
the second floor. It was at this point that Bakhturin revealed that the
Afghan police were working under time deadlines which had been
imposed by the kidnappers. The original noontime deadline had
already passed, and the police now thought they had an extension
until 1300.
21. About this time, firemen with picks and axes arrived on the
scene and joined the police. Then at this time, a photograph of the
Ambassador was displayed to all members of the security strike forces.
One of the commandos then asked, “Is that the terrorist?” He was told
that it was the Ambassador whom he was to avoid shooting.
22. Events at the Interior Ministry: At 1145, at the Interior Ministry,
Mr. Taylor again asked the secretary to remind commandant Taroon
that he was waiting to see him. Mr. Taylor told the secretary, a police
captain, that it was important that the U.S. Embassy representative see
Taroon in order to know what the Afghan Government was intending
to do. The secretary came from Taroon’s office and Mr. Taylor was
told to continue waiting.
23. For some reason the strike plans were apparently again relaxed
and the American officers were able to again consult the Embassy.
At an earlier stage in the morning’s operation the Americans had
recommended that the police bring the third terrorist, as demanded,
to his colleagues in order to elicit further demands from them. The
police decided to bring the third man up to the room but this gesture
was not sufficient; the terrorists wanted the return of his weapon too.
24. At 1207 the Afghan police requested that the American medical
personnel and stretcher be brought upstairs and placed in readiness
near the corridor of room 117.
25. Immediately thereafter the third terrorist was brought up the
stairs hooded. It was clear to EmbOffs that a strike was being prepared.
The Embassy was informed and again DCM urgently requested that
EmbOffs seek further delays. The EmbOffs repeated their earlier advice
to the Embassy that nothing could evidently be done with the police
officials at the scene, as they were repeatedly arguing that they were
already under orders from high officials elsewhere. At one time the
Americans were told they were under orders of the “Prime Minister”
himself. This was in response to the Embassy officer’s statement that
Mr. Amstutz was still trying to reach Mr. Taroon.
26. At this stage, the Soviet Embassy security officer and three
Soviet police advisors were all present, but hanging back, trying to
