customs receipts in excess of 3,000,000 and because internal revenue taxes
on national products are now as high as the industries can stand. The
decision of the Department that the imposition of internal revenue taxes on
imported articles constitutes a modification of the tariff infringing the terms
of the convention of 1907,17 makes it impossible for the Government to
increase its revenues by establishment of a luxury or excise tax. In view of
the difficulties which it has encountered, I believe that the financial
administration of the Provisional Government has been eminently
successful and the actual financial situation of the Government
demonstrates that there is no basis for the concern shown by the Military
Government.
With reference to the opinion of Mr. Denby that an “American financial
adviser in the Dominican Republic is imperatively needed,” I am strongly
of the belief that the suggestion by the United States Government, even
made informally, would tend to destroy the beneficial effects of the
Department’s policy here. It was because of President Henríquez’s refusal
to accede to our instructions on this point that his resignation and the
resignations of the members of Iris Cabinet were forced in 1916,
resignations which brought about the establishment of a Military
Government.18 I feel certain that the President especially would refuse to
assume the office to which he has been elected rather than accept it under
such conditions. Furthermore, were it possible to induce the Dominican
Government on its own apparent initiative to request the appointment of an
American financial adviser, such an appointment would destroy public
confidence in the good faith of the Government of the United States since it
would undoubtedly be believed that it had not been sincere in stating to the
Dominican people when the Plan of Evacuation was adopted that it desired
no control over this Republic other than that provided in the convention of
1907. In conclusion it is my belief that such an appointment is neither
necessary nor desirable.
WELLES
17 See Foreign Relations , 1911, pp. 139 ff.
18 See Foreign Relations , 1916, pp. 220 ff.
