634  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
has no record of correspondence from Liu’s wife. Department’s first 
information concerning her existence and interest in Liu’s return con­
tained in Wang’s letter.
Dulles
441.	 Telegram 1362 from Geneva1
Geneva, January 12, 1956, 4 p.m.
1362. From Johnson.
1. I opened 32nd meeting today with prepared statement as follows:
A. You will recall that at our last meeting I said I would hope to be 
in position at this meeting to make further comments with regard to 
your counterproposal of December 1 for declaration by our two gov­
ernments concerning renunciation of force.
B. However, I regret to note that your government has during 
interval since our last meeting undertaken most violent and unfounded 
propaganda campaign instead of taking any constructive action with 
regard to our agreement September 10 which would genuinely con­
tribute to understanding between us. These unfounded propaganda 
attacks against my government appear to indicate an intention on part 
of your government to misuse agreement of September 10 to foster mis­
understanding rather than to contribute to understanding between us. 
In view of this, I would think it well to devote this meeting solely to 
purpose of clarifying this situation and pointing out facts with regard 
to which side has thus far really failed to carry out September 10 agree­
ment. Nevertheless, in light statements which I made at our last meet­
ing, I will first discuss this morning your December 1 counterproposal 
with regard to renunciation of force.
C. I think it well to recall it was my government which initiated sug­
gestion for clear understanding between us and public announcement 
on basic and fundamental question of whether our differences would be 
permitted to lead to war. You will recall I introduced this question first 
at September 28 meeting and again at meeting of ­October 5. Then more 
than three months ago at meeting of October 8 I made very carefully 
drawn statement fully setting forth position of my government in this 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–1256. Confidential; Niact; 
Limited Distribution.
