342  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
258.	 Telegram 823 to Geneva1
Washington, October 3, 1955, 7:15 p.m.
823. For Johnson.
Your 798. Guidance for 19th meeting Oct 5.
1. You are reminded that your basic instruction provides that no 
legitimate basis be given for Wang break off talks.
2. Failure Communists to implement agreed announcement 
should be strongly pressed. British report no RPT no word from any 
imprisoned Americans so far and no RPT no indication of Chinese 
Communist disposition to give detained Americans access to Brit­
ish Charge. In view conspicuous absence of any Chinese Commu­
nist move to carry out terms of Agreed Announcement as regards 
remaining detained Americans 3½ weeks after Agreed Announce­
ment issued, Communist non-­compliance with their obligation under 
Agreed Announcement should be principal topic next meeting. You 
should call Wang’s attention appropriate portions London’s 1212 and 
1312 to Dept. Ask for explanation of evident inability imprisoned 
Americans communicate with O’Neill. Make it clear that in our view 
Announcement not being implemented by PRC and that Chinese 
Communist neglect so far to give imprisoned Americans benefit of 
Agreed Announcement makes it meaningless. Anyone in jail would 
certainly desire to be repatriated and in fact we know that at least 15 
of imprisoned Americans applied for exit permits even before they 
were seized and imprisoned by the Chinese Communists.
3. You have authority to discuss subjects which might consti­
tute Item Two and order of priority. First priority should be renun­
ciation of force. Accounting for US military personnel should be 
placed next but may be placed below PRC item on QTE question of 
embargo UNQTE. If in your judgment it should be done, you are 
given discretionary authority to make revised presentation which 
has been telegraphed to you on renunciation of force, although it 
may be preferable hold off on this until following meeting. We must 
insure that presentation on military personnel is made at some 
stage but this can be put over until another meeting if you consider 
that this may safely be done. (Text revised presentation telegraphed 
separately.)
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2855. Secret; Priority; Niact; 
Limit Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Sebald; cleared in substance by Phleger.
