Afghanistan 457 158. Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 PA M 80–10020 Washington, January 1980 [Omitted here are a title page, a security information page, and a cover page.] The Invasion of Afghanistan: Implications for Soviet Foreign Policy ([classification marking not declassified]) Key Judgments Soviet decisions on the scope and timing of the intervention in Afghanistan were dictated largely by the situation in that country, but—once Moscow decided to invade—it presumably anticipated geopolitical gains that extended beyond Afghanistan. The naked display of Soviet military strength, moreover, will generate opportunities and costs that will affect Soviet foreign policy on a global basis. In moving into Afghanistan, Moscow probably calculated that, in view of the decline in Soviet-American relations in recent years, it did not have much to lose in its relations with the United States. The Soviet leaders knew that they would have to pay a price in their relations with the West and that their actions would create deep suspicions about Soviet policy within the Third World. Past precedents, however, probably gave the Soviet leaders—most of whom participated in the decision to invade Czechoslovakia—ample reason to believe that, over time, their willingness to use military force in Afghanistan would enhance their efforts to extend their worldwide influence. Moscow will attempt to show that it can wait out any US retaliation by turning to third country suppliers of embargoed or restricted goods. It may also undertake some retaliatory steps of its own, such as increased pressures on dissidents, harassment of US citizens in the USSR, and efforts to isolate the US politically from its allies and from the Third World on the issue of Afghanistan. In the face of increasing US pressures, it might take further steps—in Cuba, Berlin, or on arms control—to exacerbate relations with the United States. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977– 81), Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A statement on the cover page reads: “This assessment was prepared by Melvin Goodman and [name not declassified] of the Office of Political Analysis. It has been coordinated with the National Intelligence Officer for USSR-Eastern Europe and the National Intelligence Officer for Near East South Asia.”
