978  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
and in most countries prospects for any substantial improvement are 
not bright.
78. Communist prospects in Latin America are improving as a result 
of the area-­wide reaction against autocratic or oligarchic rule, the more 
open political atmosphere, and economic adversity. The major threat 
of communism lies, as in Cuba at present, in its infiltration of national­
ist and revolutionary movements. Soviet Bloc trade and aid programs, 
and contacts with Communist China, are likely to increase moderately, 
but will be essentially secondary elements in the Communist threat.
79. In Latin America as a whole we look for some expansion in 
Communist influence over the next few years, although such an expan­
sion will probably not be widespread, especially in view of the possi­
bilities for US action. However, there is a possibility that one or another 
country, notably Cuba, could fall under Communist control. Moreover, 
the Communists or other extremists may achieve such influence that 
they can put through programs seriously threatening US interests or 
even security. In any event, the US will be under increasing pressure, 
and Latin American support for the US, for example in the UN, will 
almost certainly continue to decline.
80. Summary. The complex force of nationalism and growing desires 
for a better life will be powerful forces shaping the course of events in 
countries of the underdeveloped world. These countries will continue 
to expect help from the richer countries, and will be inclined to accept 
such help, regardless of whether it comes from East or West. Inasmuch 
as these countries generally lack the experienced leadership, the stable 
political and social institutions, and the material resources to cope with 
their many problems in orderly ways, there will remain the possibility 
of violent upheavals and local conflicts. While these outbreaks may not 
stem from the East-­West struggle, they can be expected often to involve 
the interests of the two sides and to afford opportunities for exploita­
tion. Thus, the underdeveloped world will continue to be a principal 
area of the contest between the Bloc and the West.
VI. US INFLUENCE AND PRESTIGE
81. Recent Soviet scientific and economic achievements, viewed 
against a background of steady growth of the relative power position 
of the USSR, have erased the picture of unique US power that prevailed 
between World War II and 1957. The immediate consequences, how­
ever, have been mitigated by other events. The course of the Lebanon 
and Quemoy crises, and to a lesser extent of the Berlin issue, has 
demonstrated to the world that the US remains able and willing to take 
firm action; the US entry into high-­level contacts and negotiations with
