550 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII way we want to be able to help on a limited basis. Some suggest that we do not have the power. In fact we have the capacity to do a lot of damage. In Baluchistan, for example, US air power could be quite decisive. Also our conventional capability in the region is substantial. We are not obliged to respond in a way where the Soviets choose the time and place of their own choosing. There are other places in the world where we can do things where we have a preponderance of power. We do not necessarily have to match the Soviets gun for gun in this area. We have the means and our country has the will. We are no longer a country paralyzed by the Vietnam war. We are ready to demonstrate that we mean what we say. Like the Soviets the imperialist Germans said they were trying to avoid encirclement but their diplomacy was so inept they did not succeed and brought the whole world against them. Prince Saud said they think they can succeed in making the Soviets not succeed. Dr. Brzezinski said as far as Afghanistan is concerned it requires continuing discussion. Prince Saud said that if we could help with the Indians that would be a good thing. Dr. Brzezinski said we sent Mr. Clifford to India and his age was the equivalent of the two of us put together.6 Prince Saud said that the Pakistanis worry a lot about the Gromyko visit to India. They hope that the Indians can be persuaded. We the Saudis have no influence. They buy some oil from us and some other Arab countries. Even Iraq sends them some oil. We will do what we can but you must also act. Dr. Brzezinski said that Mrs. Gandhi feels deeply about the shabby treatment she got from the US press. Prince Saud said that is the same way that General Zia feels. Dr. Brzezinski said the press has not paid much attention to General Zia, except during the Bhutto affair and the Bhutto incident was not a beautiful period of Pakistani history. Mrs. Gandhi is a different situation. There was a long love affair with India in the United States and there has subsequently been a disillusionment especially among the Left intellectuals. The conversation continued after the group sat down to lunch. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the Afghanis are very tough. He had visited a refugee camp. However he feared that the Soviets would be more effective than the British had been a hundred years ago when only one out of ten thousand men returned from an engagement. 6 See Document 190.
