184
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
followup programming overseas by US Missions with Agency and CU
support.
The Conference should be structured to maximize constructive ex-
changes of experience and views in the human rights field, and to mini-
mize polemical or political confrontations.
8. Establish a Human Rights Alert Service, which would use Agency
radio and press facilities to call attention to human rights abuses and
progress where and as they occur.
In order to ensure that the U.S. effort is fully implemented in the
field, the Department should consider establishing a human rights
coordinating committee at overseas missions. The committee would
consist of representatives from the embassy’s substantive elements in-
cluding USIS. Its purpose should be two-fold: (1) report on the status of
human rights issues in the host country and (2) recommend programs
designed to increase understanding of U.S. human rights policies
(public affairs goal) and, equally important, encourage promotion of
human rights in the host country (political goal). USIS posts would
designate a human rights officer who would be a member of the mis-
sion’s human rights committee. This officer would help identify target
audience members and organizations committed to strengthening
human rights (e.g. religious groups, the bar, labor unions, political
parties). The USIS human rights officer would also plan and implement
public affairs efforts involving human rights.
To take advantage of audience data gained in this way, posts will
be asked to broaden their audience lists to include human rights
opinion leaders to be reached with program materials and through per-
sonal contact.
Specific Agency actions in particular countries will be determined
by the political and other factors in the Department’s human rights
plan of action for each country. Pending the issuance of these plans, the
following approaches could be taken regionally:
LATIN AMERICA
In Latin America, the Agency will attempt to make our policies
better understood, particularly in view of the bilateral disputes that
have arisen over human rights between the United States and many
governments in the hemisphere.
Because Latin American posts continue to have regular access to
mass media outlets, the Agency will rely heavily on the press, radio
and television to influence opinion leaders and the public at large. This
is particularly useful in countries where the United States is engaged in
human rights questions with authoritarian governments and where we
may not be able openly to sponsor lectures and seminar discussions on
