488
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
people there. The PLO can make trouble in the West Bank, and that is
why it will take more time. This is why we want to give a model. We
want to be able to defend our agreement in front of the entire world.
The President: The idea is generous, but it could create new
problems. Israel distrusts Egypt and when you say that Gaza should go
first, Israel sees Egypt as wanting Gaza back. We hope that you can
consult with the Saudis and the Jordanians if possible. I don’t know
what their reactions would be. I would guess that they would resent
any unilateral move in Gaza. Let me clarify my understanding of your
position. You want to sign the peace treaty, and as soon as it is ratified
Israel will be able to use the Suez Canal and to enjoy free passage in the
Gulf of Aqaba. Within one month, negotiations will begin on the West
Bank and Gaza, and the Egyptian delegation will include some Pales-
tinians from Gaza, and maybe some from the West Bank also. The ne-
gotiations will define the duties and responsibilities of the new gov-
ernment, and will establish modalities for the elections—how voters
should be registered, and how the elections should be carried out. Then
voters will be registered, and the election will take place and the self-
government will be established. The self-government might not be
completely representative. Some people may boycott the election.
Maybe only ten percent of the voters will vote in the West Bank and
fifty percent in Gaza. We hope that Hussein will join and the Saudis
will support this process. But if all of this is done in good time and in
good faith, whenever those elections are completed, you want to have
the self-government established, and then simultaneously you want
the interim withdrawal in Sinai to take place. One month after the in-
terim withdrawal, you are prepared to exchange ambassadors with Is-
rael. Then there would be another two or three years before full with-
drawal in Sinai—the earlier the better from our point of view—and
then within five years of the establishment of the self-governing au-
thority, the final status of the West Bank and Gaza will be determined
in negotiations. You prefer to see the West Bank and Gaza kept to-
gether, but if Hussein and the PLO prevent the establishment of self-
government in the West Bank, then you favor progress in Gaza because
of Egyptian influence there. If there is no progress in the West Bank, but
there is some in Gaza, this would be adequate for your to conclude the
interim withdrawal and to exchange ambassadors. Is this correct?
Vice President Mubarak: Yes.
Secretary Vance: When the peace treaty is signed, will the Suez
Canal be opened to Israeli ships immediately?
Vice President Mubarak: Yes, there is no problem. The only point is
the full autonomy in Gaza.
The President: I am trying to minimize what you demand from the
Israelis. In the Camp David Agreement, it says that the military gov-
