260
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
2. (TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Additional
ground force activity also seems to indicate continuing Soviet prepara-
tions for operations in or near Afghanistan.
—[less than 1 line not declassified] provided the initial identification
of an airborne unit at Balkhash airfield located some 650 km northeast
of the Afghanistan border. At least 14 BMD airborne assault vehicles
and other airborne associated equipment were [less than 1 line not
declassified] at the airfield and may have been there as early as the 24th.
—Additional fuel storage equipment [less than 1 line not declassified]
near Termez and Kushka both located on the Afghanistan border. These
locations are areas where the 360th Motorized Rifle Division and the
5th Guards Motorized Rifle Division have probably been deployed
since 19 December. Stockage of fuel supplies would indicate further
preparations for operations by these units.
—Finally, a convoy of at least 60 trucks [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] near Termez, probably indicating that Soviet resupply activity into
Afghanistan by motor convoy is continuing. Frequent activity of this
nature has been [less than 1 line not declassified] near Termez.
3. (S [codeword not declassified]) From the above evidence, it appears
the Soviets are nearing the completion of preparations for a major
introduction of new combat units into Afghanistan. [6½ lines not declassi-
fied] some facets of operations in or near Afghanistan. [2 lines not
declassified]
94.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, December 26, 1979, 0552Z
8592. Subj: (LOU) Massive Soviet Air Operations Into Kabul
Continue.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary: Massive Soviet air operations into Kabul began Christ-
mas morning and have not stopped yet. AN–22s, heavy jets, and AS–
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Box 1, Afghanistan: 12/23–26/79. Confidential; Immediate; Sensitive. Sent for informa-
tion to Ankara, Athens, Beijing, Islamabad, London, Moscow, New Delhi, USNATO,
Paris, CINCPAC (also for POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD). Printed from a
copy received in the White House Situation Room.
