International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
543
actor issue with a request that he play as helpful a role as possible in
moving us toward the MTN outcome we desire by the December 15
deadline.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, Subject File, Box 37, Memcons: President: 11/78) Special Repre-
sentative for Economic Summits Henry Owen also urged this course on
Carter in a separate memorandum, also dated November 18. (Ibid.)
In a November 21 memorandum to Brzezinski, National Security
Council Staff member Robert Hunter discussed Carter’s telephone con-
versation with Giscard, which had taken place that morning. Hunter
reported that Carter “did not follow the suggested scenario” of linking
the nuclear reactor sale and the trade negotiations, noting that Carter
“went straight to MTN, and got an essentially negative response from
Giscard.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, Country File, Box 23, France: 1–12/78)
Owen reported to Carter on November 22 that the EC Council of
Ministers had decided on November 21 “by a vote of eight to one that
the European Commission would try to complete negotiations with the
US and others by December 15, which is just what we wanted. The
French objected but did not block action. The issue will come up again
at the EC Summit December 4–5. Giscard could try to block action there
if he wished, depending on how much he was moved by your call. We
will be trying to figure out what additional actions we can take to influ-
ence the outcome of this December meeting.” Carter initialed Owen’s
memorandum. (Memorandum from Owen to Carter, November 22;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 23, France: 1–12/78)
In a November 28 memorandum to Carter, Owen urged Carter to
telephone West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt before the De-
cember 4–5 meeting of the EC Council in order to discuss France’s posi-
tion on the multilateral trade negotiations. Owen wrote: “Up to this
point Schmidt has not wanted to use his capital with Giscard on MTN,
since he thought that the US could bring Giscard around. It is impor-
tant that he realize this hasn’t worked, and that it’s now up to him to
persuade the French. Our ambassadors in Europe believe that he has
the influence to do so, if he wants to. He will likely want to if he be-
lieves there is no other way to save MTN—and if he realizes that col-
lapse of MTN could affect wider US-European relations.” Owen noted
that the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations, the Department
of State, and the Department of the Treasury all concurred in his recom-
mendation. Carter disapproved Owen’s recommendation, writing on
the memorandum: “Draft message instead.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 28, Hotline: Ger-
many: 4/77–11/80) On December 2, Carter sent a message to Schmidt,
urging him to speak to Giscard about the MTN. (Message WH81566
