The attitude of the American Delegation, throughout the debates described
above, was, in view of its instructions, a passive one. Of the two proposals
as to the method of carrying on work of the Conferences, the American
Delegation considered the Spanish resolution placing the task in the hands
of the Presidential Committee of the Habana Conference much more
desirable than the Cuban resolution perpetuating the Rome Committee
under the name of the International Office on Emigration and Immigration
at Geneva, and it went to the extent of asking authorization from the
Department to support the Spanish resolution openly in the commission
meetings and the plenary sessions, should developments appear to justify an
active intervention in the proceedings on the part of the United States.
However, the Department was of the opinion that any departure from the
attitude previously taken by the Delegation would be undesirable and
accordingly withheld the authorization which the Delegation had requested.
However, by the time that the Department’s views had been signified to the
Delegation, any necessity which might have existed for positive action on
the part of the American Delegation had been obviated by the
overwhelming support given the Spanish proposal, notably by the Pan
American nations, and accordingly the Department’s decision to deny this
authorization was in no sense a source of embarrassment to the Delegation.
As will appear from the foregoing, there will not be a Third International
Conference on Emigration and Immigration until a majority of the
interested nations (i. e., those represented at Habana) express their desire
for such a Conference. In the meantime the task of preparing the agenda of
a third Conference is left in the hands of the Presidential Committee of the
Habana Conference, of which the United States is technically a member
through the election of Mr. Husband as one of the ten Vice Presidents of the
Habana Conference. The only question left for this Government to
determine is whether it shall continue to hold its right to a place on this
Committee. In some respects it might, on the surface, be more consistent
with the attitude of the United States toward the consideration by
international gatherings of problems of immigration, which it regards as a
purely domestic question in which the authority of Congress is exclusive,
for this Government formally to withdraw from the Habana Committee.
However, on the general question of American policy as to immigration, the
statements and actions of the American Delegation have left no room for
