Venezuela 1277 4. Although the Embassy had not received the pertinent documents, Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges understood that the charge of murder contemplated in the extradition request may well have referred to the assassination of Colonel Delgado Chalbaud, who at the time of his assassination was head of the Venezuelan junta of government and therefore the Chief of the Venezuelan State. The two Venezuelan representatives gave an account of the circumstances surrounding this assassination. They commented that as far as they knew the “Intellectual authorship” of the crime had not been proved up to now. They said, however, that should this be the murder charge which is being lodged against Pérez Jiménez, he would not be able to avoid extradition proceedings on political grounds, inasmuch as the treaty exempts the assassination of heads of state from the list of political crimes. They added that at the time of his assassination Colonel Delgado Chalbaud was head of the military junta which governed Venezuela and was therefore the Chief of the Venezuelan State. After some further desultory conversation Mr. Neidle came in and presented the Department’s note to Minister Rojas,3 whereupon he and Mr. Gil-Borges took their leave. 3 The note, which was attached to the source text, is not printed. VE–32. Telegram from the Ambassador in the Dominican Republic (Farland) to the Department of State1  Ciudad Trujillo, August 25, 1959, 4 p.m. 124. Reputable confidential source has advised that Luis Chafardet Urbina, former Perez Jimenez Ambassador to Dominican Republic and who for last 18 months has resided Spain, has returned Ciudad Trujillo. Presence Chafardet here possibly presages (1) return Perez Jiminez to Dominican Republic to avoid extradition or following deportation by INS; or, (2) Chafardet may be offering his services for propaganda or other type campaign against Venezuela or Betancourt personally. If aforementioned assumption (1) correct Embassy suggests efforts be 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/8–2559. Confidential. Repeated for information to the Embassy in Venezuela.
