convention, with the regulations, and with the resolutions of the
Board, to which body he shall be responsible. The Director
General shall attend, in an advisory capacity, the meetings of the
Governing Board, and of the Committees appointed by the Board
for the purpose of giving such information as may be required.
The Director General also shall attend in his official capacity the
future International Conferences of American States. The
expenses of the Director General and his assistants incurred
through attendance at these Conferences shall be met out of the
funds of the Pan American Union.”
Article VI, Paragraph 1, provides that the originals of diplomatic
instruments signed at the International Conferences of American States, the
minutes of their meetings, and all documents connected with the holding of
the Conference, shall be placed under the custody of the Pan American
Union. At present all original documents signed at International
Conferences of American States are placed in the custody of the
government in whose capital the Conference is held. Some advantages
might be expected from having all conference minutes and documents
collected in one place instead of scattered among various capitals, as is the
case today. At the present time it is very difficult to ascertain what countries
have ratified the various Conventions, and you may therefore support this
Article.
Article XIV provides that the states members of the Union “in so far as
their internal legislation permits, shall take measures for sending to the
Library of the Pan American Union one copy of each work published in the
country”. While it is not thought possible that the United States without
legislative action can carry out the procedure contemplated in this Article it
is thought that the clause reading “in so far as their internal legislation
permits” is a sufficient safeguard that the United States is not assuming any
obligation which it is unable to perform.
Article XV provides that each of the Government[s] members of the Union
shall establish a committee composed of persons of experience in Pan
American affairs, or an office attached to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to
be entrusted with Pan American matters.
