1978  469
It also proposes measures to strengthen the strategic reserve forces. 
These measures are designed to enhance deterrence by posing to the 
Soviets the prospect that they would not only suffer severe damage 
in a nuclear war, but be unable to achieve their military objectives or 
gain any other advantage. The proposals also would provide a broader 
range of options should deterrence fail.
The study places considerable emphasis on enhancing the flexi-
bility of the SIOP through the development of more discrete building 
blocks of like targets. By breaking down the present target base into 
smaller increments, the President would have a broader range of 
options should we ever have to consider SIOP-­type attacks. A number 
of practical problems must be resolved, however, before deciding pre-
cisely how to implement the concept. The SIOP probably cannot be put 
together by taking an arbitrary linear combination of building blocks; 
the interactions need to be considered.
Endurance is another issue of considerable importance, not only 
in forces, but also in command, control, communications and intelli-
gence. Very few of the objectives listed above in terms of an extended 
exchange, withholds, etc. can be achieved without endurance, both in 
forces and in C3I. We need to consider the kind of endurance we need 
and the rate at which we should proceed in acquiring a more enduring 
strategic posture. Inasmuch as some of these issues relate to acquisition 
policy, I have recently initiated studies designed to identify the prob-
lems and lead to specific development and procurement actions. In the 
meantime, we should take care to assure that adjustments in targeting 
policy are phased to match improvements in endurance.
We have also attempted to deal with the guidelines for targeting 
the Soviet nuclear threat—­more effective targeting of Soviet military 
and war-­sustaining capacity, and targeting to threaten [less than 1 line 
not declassified]
The study also addresses non-SIOP options (LNOs and RNOs) and 
suggests strengthening procedures to assure that both political and mil-
itary considerations are brought to bear in the development of these 
options, and in any consideration of their use.
In all these cases—­but especially endurance and flexibility—­there 
are some initial steps that can be taken with the existing establishment, 
but to realize the concepts fully will require acquisition decisions. In 
other cases, some concepts appear promising, but require more analysis 
before we can decide on concrete actions. One example of an interest-
ing idea where feasibility has not been determined is a “regionalizing” 
strategy, to threaten continued central control of the USSR by isolating 
its constituents from each other through a retaliatory nuclear strike.
I believe that the study (whose Executive Summary I hope you 
have time to read) makes it clear that, while we have made substantial
