Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 213 the one on non-proliferation that seem to strike at their economic interests. This contrary European reaction has happened in past Administrations—and it will happen again. Unlike times in the past, however, the relative economic and political weight of the United States is not enough on its own to carry the day—against the ambivalence of Europeans, but perhaps to their ultimate self-interest. Now, more than before, U.S. leadership must involve prodding, cajoling, consulting—and a lot of stroking. At times it will be valuable to accept European views of policy that are different from ours— simply as part of the relationship (as we did in not objecting to the most recent EC statement on the Middle East). You are the only Western leader with a firm mandate for the next four years—and you pay the penalty that weak European leaders will lean upon you, while at the same time trying to have their own way. There will be a further failure of European will if we seem not to respond to European needs, but little thanks if we do. Above all else, you (and the government behind you) must convince the Europeans that you know what you are doing, that you have a sense of where you are going—and can articulate it—and have the strength to carry it through, beginning at home. You must convince them that you have some economic answers—even though they clearly do not; and you must convince them that you can manage all those other relations (with the Soviet Union, and in the Middle East) on which for them so much depends. But even with economic recovery—and with a clear demonstration of your competence, purpose, and openness—the Europeans must do the rest for themselves (and you can encourage greater European leadership). But their doing this is complicated by the fact that the particular leaders you are dealing with this year have their own agendas of simply staying in power. We must find a way to reach beyond their short-term needs, to build relations with countries that will outlast this group of leaders.
