Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX bombings inside Israel. The bomb which exploded Wednesday in the Jerusalem market only helped underscore his point. But once again he was not prepared to move first. He argued strongly that the PLO would use any period of quiet to rest, regroup, and re-equip. 6. My two meetings with Burg5 and a meeting with the Israeli team for the autonomy negotiations6 produced two positive developments: first, Burg himself said he would propose that the plenary session in Alexandria September 26/27 approve his scheme to establish a number of sub-groups under the two existing working groups to deal with specific issues in the negotiations on the modalities of elections and on powers and responsibilities of the self-governing authority. I elaborated on his idea by suggesting that using more experts on various subjects could deepen the discussion of particular issues, and he responded positively. Both of us said publicly after the meeting with the Ministerial team that we hope that this could be done and that it would enable us to move the negotiations into “second gear”. Second, Burg said that he would go to the Alexandria plenary with a timetable for the plenary sessions for the rest of the year. This will impose certain interim deadlines on the working groups. 7. One intervention by Arik Sharon during this meeting with the Ministerial team provided interesting insight into his thinking. If we did not, he said, Israel would face a situation at the end of the negotiations in which it would be pressed to make concessions because by that time only one or two issues might stand between the negotiations and an agreement. Recognizing that Sharon’s intent was patently unconstructive, Burg turned him aside. 8. The combination of technical discussions to shape the issues for political-level consideration by the end of the year and work schedule for that same period is consistent with Khalil’s timetable of moving toward the difficult issues only at the beginning of next year. So out of these discussions here and in Cairo we have managed to shape the talks as we predicted in June, putting ourselves in position by the end of the year to show that the issues crucial to the Palestinians will be dealt with seriously in the negotiations. It also enables us to define and discuss these contentious and emotional issues in a non-political setting where progress can be made. 5 No other records of Strauss’s meetings with Burg have been found. 6 No other record of Strauss’s September 12 meeting with the Israeli Ministerial team for the autonomy talks has been found. Remarks made by Strauss and Burg to the press following this meeting were reported in telegram 2928 from Jerusalem, September
