3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
289
2. The Brezhnev letter is a reply to the President’s letter of January
,3 and matches the President’s letter in its blunt tone, and
round-up coverage of a number of issues. However, it is in line with re-
cent Brezhnev speeches that express concern about the state of
US-Soviet relations and a desire to seek an improvement. It probably
was written before the Brezhnev speeches of last week, and lacks the
upbeat suggestion of steps to infuse a new dynamism in the
relationship.
The letter expresses disappointment at the lack of progress in the
SALT negotiations since the Gromyko visit to Washington last Sep-
tember, and protests what he sees as our use of domestic opposition to
SALT to gain bargaining advantages.
On the neutron bomb, the letter also expresses disappointment
with the President’s reply, and repeats the concern that the neutron
bomb would lower the nuclear threshold.
He remonstrates US linkage of arms control negotiations with
other issues, particularly the Horn, and repeats that Soviet objectives in
the Horn are limited to helping Ethiopia resist Somali aggression.
On the Middle East, the letter responds by saying that it is the US,
not the SU, that has departed from the common approach agreed upon
in the joint statement of October 1, and has encouraged separate negoti-
ations between Egypt and Israel. Other Arab states will not participate
even if these bilateral negotiations succeed, he says, and therefore only
a comprehensive settlement at Geneva can resolve the situation.
3. The Secretary asked if Dobrynin had a report on the Assad con-
versations in Moscow. Dobrynin said he had not yet received the infor-
mation, but would hope to be able to convey a report shortly.
4. ASAT. The Secretary informed Dobrynin that the US is prepared
to begin discussions on this subject in April at Geneva, and covered the
other points set forth in the agreed talking points.
Dobrynin replied that, as Brezhnev had said in a previous letter,
the ASAT discussions should cover not only the satellite versus satellite
problem, but also the shuttle system versus satellite situation.
5. Sparkman Letter on Compliance. The Secretary then conveyed to
Dobrynin excerpts from a statement made 2/28 by Senator Sparkman,
Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, in putting into
the Congressional Record the paper prepared by the State Department
on the record of compliance with the SALT I agreement. Dobrynin re-
plied with satisfaction to Sparkman’s statement absolving the Soviet
Union of the charge of cheating on the agreement.
3 Omission is in the original. Carter’s January 25 letter is Document 77.
