504 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII associated economic missions would confirm in the eyes of the Afghan public, in a most telling way, the lack of legitimacy of the Babrak regime. It would be a humiliating blow to the DRA. I hope, therefore, that the Department will give serious weight to this recommendation— and if possible, get it implemented by, say, the end of Feb. 7. Were though the Department to press such a recommendation on UNHQ, it should be aware that there are UN elements here who would resist it. One, of course, would be the Bulgarian UN res rep, Yuli Bahnev, who will use every argument Moscow and Sofia can supply him to oppose it. At the very least he will urge that a UN office be maintained with the flag boldly flying, so as to maintain an unmistakeable presence and to honor past contractual aid commitments. I think both arguments should be resisted. The UN office should be made to close and the total UN presence withdrawn. Nothing less than hauling down the UN flag is required to have the kind of political impact this govt and the Soviets deserve. As for other local UN sources of opposition, some among the UN experts would be fearful for their jobs, and for self-serving reasons would oppose the cancellation of their contracts. 8. My second recommendation, as mentioned in the summary, there may come a time when the Soviets appreciate that their involvement here is too costly and they may welcome a face-saving way to exit. If this were to occur—and it would likely only happen if the insurgents can carry on an effective fight against the Soviets and the Babrak government—then the Soviets might be amenable to some facesaving suggestions. One that occurs to me is for either UN SecGen Waldheim or the Indian Government to propose the posting of UN troops in Afghanistan to replace the Soviets. But were this done, care would have to be taken to make sure the UN troops were not here merely to sustain the despised Babrak government. Hopefully, a UN presence would be conditional on its monitoring a relatively free election to choose a new, legitimate government. 9. During a discussion this week with Indian Ambassador Jaskaran Teja (who last served as DCM in Moscow and is suspected among Western diplomats as being pro-Soviet and a Communist sympathizer), Teja said he was sure the Soviets would never accept the idea of the UN replacing its troops here. He could be right. Certainly, the success of the Soviets at the end of WW II in Eastern Europe gives them some reason to think they can get away with it again, but I still think my suggestion worth bearing in mind. 10. Comment: I hope these two basic ideas are helpful. Amstutz
