4. During the interim period mentioned in the preceding paragraph, China
may levy on articles of import a surtax as authorized in paragraph 2 of article
3 of the Washington treaty.
5. During the same interim period, China, on the one hand, and the other
contracting powers, on the other, shall conclude severally treaties, which may
incorporate reciprocal conventional tariffs to be applied on certain special
articles if so desired by both parties. The new treaties so concluded shall
continue in force for a certain definite period.
6. The national tariff law mentioned in paragraph 3 shall become operative,
so far as the treaty powers are concerned, simultaneously with the
enforcement of the treaties above mentioned.
7. The new treaties to be concluded shall supersede the existing treaties
between China and the other contracting powers in matters relating to
customs tariff.”
Following this presentation Mr. MacMurray, on behalf of the American delegation,
proposed the following plan:
“The Chinese delegation have asked, in Dr. Wang’s speech at the opening
session of this conference, on October 26, that the powers declare their
respect for the principle of China’s tariff autonomy and agree to the removal
of tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties. They have affirmed that it
is the intention of the Chinese Government to abolish likin. They have asked
that interim surtaxes be levied and that agreements which may be concluded
at this conference shall be made effective at an early date.
Desiring to follow out as closely and as far as possible the programme which
has been proposed by the Chinese delegation, and hoping that this conference
may arrive at agreements which will make possible the realization of China’s
aspirations and at the same time properly safeguard the legitimate interests of
all powers and people who will be affected:
We are prepared, in accordance with the provisions of the Washington treaty,
to authorize at once the levying of the surtax of 2½% and, as soon as the
requisite schedules can be prepared, to authorize the levying of a surtax of
5% on luxuries.
We are prepared to proceed at once with the negotiation of such an agreement
or agreements as may be necessary for making effective other provisions of
the Washington treaties of February 6, 1922.
