Eastern Europe Region
155
lists” and seeking allied agreement to them. In our consultations with
others, we ought to confine ourselves to general observations along
the above lines rather than trying to get specific as we are on the Soviet
case. Our public posture in the event of a Warsaw Pact intervention
ought to be to place the blame squarely on the Soviets while acknowl-
edging that our attitude toward Eastern European participants cannot
help but be affected by the nature and enthusiasm of the support they
provide to Moscow in any actions taken against Poland.
General Considerations
—As a general rule of thumb, we believe that our policy response
toward Eastern European participants ought to concentrate on refusing
to do things in the political and economic area rather than imposing
sanctions or embargos which will be difficult to lift in the future.
—Obviously our political relations with Warsaw Pact participants
will worsen after an intervention and we will want to take steps—in
the UN, at Madrid, and in US and allied public statements—taking
them to task for their violation of Polish sovereignty while making it
clear that we hold the USSR—not the peoples or Governments of East-
ern Europe—to blame.
—It will be very much in our interest to measure our response in
terms of the amount of intervention; thus, a token participation by an
EE country would logically call for a lesser response than what we did
vis-a-vis Moscow.
—While not imposing a ban on high-level contacts with Eastern
Europe—which make Moscow uncomfortable—we will want to hold
back for several months.
—Yet we would want to continue and even expand where possible
less visible cultural exchanges and mutually beneficial scientific and
technical exchanges.
—We would not want to extend to Eastern Europe our policy of
terminating or suspending US-Soviet bilateral agreements. This would
mean keeping MFN in place for Poland, Hungary and Romania as well
as bilateral civil aviation and maritime agreements.
—However we would no longer be able to differentiate between
the USSR and the rest of the Warsaw Pact (except Romania) in the area
of technology transfer. Assuming Romanian opposition to intervention
in Poland, we would want to develop a really meaningful differentia-
tion in the US Government and in COCOM.
—We would not propose an embargo on grain sales to Eastern
Europe, as neither the Allies nor the American farmer would support
such a move. At the same time we would shift to a “cash-and-carry”
policy where appropriate to place maximum burden on the Soviet
economy to feed Eastern Europe. We would also continue to warn that
