280 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 95. Telegram From the Embassy in Bulgaria to the Department of State1 Sofia, September 30, 1980, 0918Z 2607. Subject: Questions About Bulgaria. 1. S-entire text. 2. What follows is an attempt, as I end my first year in Sofia, to set down the most important current questions about Bulgaria, from the viewpoint of American interests, and to give my frankest answers. 3. First, how solid is Bulgarian loyalty to Moscow? 4. Very solid. I see no sign of important change on the horizon, in this respect. By and large, the relationship works well for Bulgaria’s leaders, and the people accept it more readily than any other people in Eastern Europe.2 Nevertheless it is good to remember that no relationship is eternal, that Bulgarians are less attached to Russia than is commonly supposed, and that there are strains in the relationship (e.g. on economic issues, on Soviet policy towards other East European countries, on defense spending, on some foreign policy issues such as Bulgaria’s Balkan policy) which could grow with time. And I do not believe the Soviets have any infallible, ironclad system of keeping Bulgaria loyal. Still, it would be wishful thinking to expect any early deviation from the familiar pattern of loyalty to Moscow, and I expect this pattern to continue for years. 5. Second, how secure is Zhivkov’s position? 6. Very secure. He seems in excellent health, in full vigor, and benefits now from very long experience. In particular, he is senior enough and canny enough to cope with any changes in the Kremlin. (He seems to be in the process of decorating each Soviet Politburo member, one by one, and observers here say his bets are placed on all possible winners in the succession sweepstakes.) I am not aware of the existence of meaningful opposition factions, although Lilov seems a 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800469–0660. Secret. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bonn, Bucharest, Budapest, London, Moscow, Paris, Prague, Vienna, Warsaw, West Berlin, and USNATO. On a copy found in the Human Rights Bureau files, Hugh Simon (HA/EUR) wrote “Excellent Cable HS.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1980— Human Rights and Country Files, Lot 82D177, Box 3, Bulgaria 1980) 2 The Embassy reiterated the strength of the Soviet-Bulgarian relationship in telegram 2352 from Sofia, September 4. While acknowledging that the ties between the two countries were very strong, the Embassy wrote: “there are elements of Bulgarian national pride which are not satisfied by the relationship with Moscow.” The Embassy concluded: “US interests are best served by recognizing a Bulgarian identity apart from its ideological fealty to Moscow.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800425–0542)
