94 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI the proposed ban on mobile ICBMs and we should retain that card until an effective verification regime is identified and agreed. Another view is that the U.S. proposed ban on mobiles has had little effect on the Soviet approach to mobile ICBM verification. There is agreement, however, in attempting to establish an effective verification regime, that the risk to the security of U.S. forces and weapon programs posed by additional verification provisions should not outweigh the benefits offered by additional verification measures. The Risk of No Start Treaty (S) The U.S. has consistently maintained that failure to secure a START treaty is preferable to acceptance of a treaty which cannot be effectively verified. Despite the internal and international pressures which may be brought to bear in the near term, this position should remain unassailable. Conclusion (S) With regard to verifiability, it is premature to render a judgment at this time. DEFENSE AND SPACE TALKS (DST) Question #4 In light of the President’s decision on SDI, should the United States retain the fundamental objectives of DST—­to preserve the right to pursue SDI within the ABM Treaty; to discuss a cooperative transition; and to establish a future right to deploy defenses without further reference to the ABM Treaty? Should it do so even if this risks blocking a START agreement? DST Objectives (S) The U.S. goal in the Defense and Space Talks (DST) has been to help set the stage for a possible future decision to deploy defenses. DST objectives have been: a) to preserve the U.S. right to pursue the SDI program within the obligations of the ABM Treaty in order to determine the technical feasibility of advanced strategic defenses; b) to discuss with the Soviet Union a cooperative transition to effective strategic defenses; and c) to establish the right to deploy strategic defenses if we choose to do so, at a future time without further reference to the ABM Treaty. However, there are two views on whether some of the DST objectives are more important to the SDI program and future U.S. deployment options than others. (S) DST Objectives Have Equal Value—One view is that no useful distinction between objectives can be made in terms of their importance to any SDI program structured to support relatively near-­term deployment decisions and options. According to this view, the DST objectives
