662
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
favored a stabilization of the Shah’s position. In fact, they were trying
to help by giving Iran some diesel oil, which it had requested. (S)
Meeting between Blumenthal and Ceausescu, December 9
The next day the Secretary met with Ceausescu for a discussion
which lasted about one and a half hours. Besides myself, present were
Romanian Foreign Minister Andrei and US Ambassador Aggrey. My
notes of the discussion are at Tab B.9 After Blumenthal presented the
talking points, Ceausescu made a long speech in which he: (C)
—noted the improvement of Romanian-US relations recently, and
expressed his strong desire to see relations further broadened, espe-
cially in the economic field. (However, he only obliquely referred to
MFN, in part because this had been so extensively covered by Burtica
in his talks with Blumenthal the day before); (S)
—made a strong pitch for increased efforts towards disarmament
both in SALT and MBFR. In this regard, he called for a re-examination
of the decision taken at the May Summit to increase NATO defense
expenditures by 3 percent; (S)
—called for a global solution to the Middle East talks and appealed
for a convocation of the Geneva conference with the participation of
Jordan, Syria and the Palestinians. This would diminish the danger of
Egypt’s isolation, which he saw as increasing; (S)10
—noted Ethiopia’s willingness to grant Eritrea a degree of autonomy
within the framework of a unified Ethiopian state, and the desire of the
Ethiopian leadership to expand economic relations with the US; (S)
—reiterated his country’s firm determination to continue to pursue
an independent policy, while remaining a member of the Warsaw
Pact. (S)
General Assessment
The visit was an important symbol of US support for Romania’s
independent policy and was greatly appreciated by the Romanians.
While the symbolic significance of the visit was in many ways more
important than the substance of many of the meetings, the trip offered
a useful opportunity to gain a clearer understanding of the dimensions
of the dispute and the issues that contributed to it. (C)
Unfortunately, there was little time to discuss the events of the
past weeks with the US Ambassador or the Embassy staff, whose
substantive reporting has been of a generally high quality. Such discus-
sions at some point would be quite useful. In fact the Ambassador
9 Attached but not printed. The Embassy reported on the conversation in telegram
8808 from Bucharest, December 10. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780509–0095)
10 Ceausescu made the same points in his September 23 letter to President Carter
which was delivered by Foreign Minister Andrei to Brzezinski on September 30. See
footnote 2, Document 208.
