1252  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
the publishers of the various papers and expressed his opinion that 
if material of this kind were handed personally to the publishers, he 
felt sure that the newspapers would carry it. He mentioned specifi-
cally Miguel Angel Capriles4 in this connection. He also mentioned EL 
UNIVERSAL as being a newspaper which he believed would be recep-
tive to this kind of approach.
Speaking of the newspapers apparently reminded him of the 
front page story carried by LA RELIGION today concerning the immi-
nent arrival in Venezuela of ex-President Arévalo of Guatemala. He 
went to his desk to get this newspaper and indicated his surprise that 
LA RELIGION, of all papers, would carry such a complete story on 
Arévalo’s visit. Proceeding from this, President Betancourt opened up 
the entire field, of discussion concerning Arévalo’s trip to Venezuela. 
The President said that Arévalo will not be here in any kind of official 
capacity, but that he has rather been invited to Venezuela by the Central 
University to deliver “some lectures”. Betancourt will see Arévalo pri-
vately he said, and perhaps entertain him in his home but he will extend 
no official honors to Arévalo and will not receive him at the Palace. The 
President expressed an opinion to the effect that he sees no reason why 
Arévalo should not come to Venezuela—­that he is not a Communist 
although he is used by the Communists. President Betancourt expects 
there will be increasing activity on the part of Venezuelan Communists 
but he feels that this situation can be handled and that he will soon be 
able to bring it under control. In later conversation on the same subject, 
during lunch, Ambassador Sparks observed again that Arévalo is bit-
terly anti-American and that he is a disturbing element for the Americas 
in general, but particularly in the Caribbean area. Ambassador Sparks 
in this connection referred to Arévalo’s visit to Bolivia in 1953 and to a 
three-­hour speech which he delivered in La Paz in which he included 
innumerable false statements about the United States designed to spread 
sharply anti-American feeling. Betancourt said that he intends to talk to 
Arévalo when he arrives, to explain clearly the situation in Venezuela, 
to warn him that the ambiente here is not conducive to anti-American 
propaganda, that the Venezuelan Government position is definitely 
anti-Communist, and so on. Betancourt will make clear to Arévalo that 
he should restrain his activities in Venezuela or that he will not be able to 
remain here. President Betancourt in this connection said that Arévalo 
only has a three-­month visa. He admitted that he is a friend of Arévalo 
but not an intimate one; it was clear from the conversation that they are 
on first name terms. Betancourt explained Arévalo’s anti-Americanism 
by saying that Arévalo “discovered” anti-­imperialism very late in life, 
4 Proprietor and editor of the Caracas newspapers, La Esfera, El Mundo,
and Ultimas Noticias.
