March 1952–February 1953
393
138.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated.
STUDY OF CIA CAPABILITIES IN IRAN
REFERENCE
Memorandum for the Senior NSC Staff Entitled The Position of the United States
with Respect to Iran, dated 13 October 19522
A. CIA Capabilities Under Present Conditions (Para. 4.d., 13 October
draft NSC 107/2)3
1. Current special political operations in Iran are designed to coun-
teract Tudeh activities and reduce Tudeh influence. While these opera-
tions have had some success in delaying the trend toward Tudeh domi-
nation, they have not succeeded in reversing that trend, primarily
because of the widespread anti-Western feeling which makes Iran so
fertile a field for Tudeh exploitation. CIA has been unable to attack suc-
cessfully this more basic problem because of the Iranian reaction to past
and present U.S. and U.K. policies toward Iran. In its operations, CIA
has been forced to rely on strongly nationalistic elements. While these
elements are strongly motivated against the Tudeh threat, they share
the common Iranian views that all British influence must be eliminated
from Iran and that the U.S. has supported the U.K. in the oil contro-
versy. Because of this situation CIA has been unable to mount opera-
tions designed to reduce anti-Western feeling in Iran.
2. Under present conditions, CIA is in a position to influence spe-
cific political, military and religious leaders to speak out strongly
against the Tudeh threat on particular occasions and to induce certain
political and military leaders to institute administrative and security
actions to curb Tudeh activities (demonstrations, strikes, etc.) on spe-
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Disaster File Series, NSC Staff Papers, Box 65, Iran
Section. Top Secret; Security Information; Eyes Only. There is no drafting information on
the memorandum, which is attached to a memorandum from the Deputy Director of In-
telligence, Loftus E. Becker, to Lay, November 3. According to Becker, this memorandum
was “prepared in connection with the current revision of NSC 107/2, ‘The Position of the
United States with Respect to Iran.’”
2 Reference is to a draft revision of NSC 107/2, prepared and ciculated by the NSC
Staff, October 13. (National Archives, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
Policy Papers, Box 210, NSC 136 US Pol re Iran)
3 Paragraph 4 and sub-paragraph d of the draft revision of NSC 107/2, October 13,
read: “To prevent communist capture of power in Iran, either through perversion of the
nationalist movement or by armed uprising, and to promote a government in power in
Iran capable of maintaining internal order and determined to resist Soviet aggression, the
United States should: . . .d. Continue special political measures designed to assist in
achieving these purposes.”
