680 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement rather than by penetration during flight, it can be expected to speed up our responses; if for example it added ten minutes to our warning time in mid 1961, this would be worth 120 aircraft. A similar value attaches to a bomb alarm system in this period. Either type of warning would have a much greater effect were we to assume a more sharply timed Soviet attack. Doubling SAC’s take-­off rate would add 100 or more aircraft in 1961, perhaps 50 in 1963, under the attack postulated for this chart. It could have more value in a more highly coordinated attack, and it is always insurance against damage to, or accidental clogging of, runways. To summarize our views then: We feel that it is very clear, and for good technical reasons, that the most effective way for the United States now to invest its resources in military measures is to proceed in the direction of hardening, dispersal, and increasing dependence upon protected forces of intercontinental ballistic missiles. For the near future we must also look to further meas­ ures for the protection of our aircraft. There are programs now in the Department of Defense aimed at increasing our security, which simply do not attack the heart of the problem as we see it. We have raised ques­ tions about some of these programs in an earlier discussion of techni­ cal factors relating to the Defense budget. We feel that if some of these programs were given their proper emphasis, most of the steps that we have here emphasized as important could be implemented effectively and without adding to the Defense budget. 146. Briefing Note for the March 5 NSC Meeting1 Washington, March 2, 1959 MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES AND POLICIES, 1958–1963 AND ESTIMATE OF THE WORLD SITUATION In the Planning Board we are now starting upon the annual review of Basic Policy. As a first step, and by way of background, we have been discussing two National Intelligence Estimates—Main Trends in Soviet 1 Source: NIEs 11–4–58 and 100–59. Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File.
