748 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Recommendations 1. That you sign the attached letter to the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Mr. John N. Irwin, II,2 recommending that Marine Corps personnel be assigned to Haiti on a training mission provided that the Haitian Government agrees to let the mission operate under conditions deemed satisfactory by the Department of Defense and by this Department. An essential condition to be met prior to despatch of mission personnel is that the Haitian Government agree to take measures designed to allay current political tensions. Further, the letter states that the Haitian Government should be informed that if there is a recurrence of internal violence of political origin, the training mission’s activities may be curtailed or the mission possibly withdrawn in order to avoid any appearance of U.S. involvement in Haitian domestic matters. The letter also expresses the Department’s belief that the training mission should not become involved in training or advising the Haitian police. The letter suggests finally that a representative of the Department of Defense visit Haiti in the near future to inform President Duvalier of our decision and the conditions attached to it. 2. That you initial the attached telegram3 informing Ambassador Drew of our views on the assignment of a Marine Training Mission to Haiti. 3. That you initial the attached memorandum4 informing the Under Secretary of our conclusions and requesting his concurrence in your letter to the Department of Defense and the telegram to Port-­au-Prince. 2 Not printed. The letter from Rubottom was sent on September 9 to Mansfield D. Sprague, who had replaced Irwin as Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs during the interim. In addition to the contents described in the August 28 memorandum, the letter sent to Sprague on September 9 included a paragraph indicating that the Department of State’s approval of the assignment of Marine Corps personnel to Haiti did not mean that the Department approved of all of the recommendations of the military survey team, especially those concerning material or financial support of the Haitian military. (738.59/9–958) 3 Not attached to the source text and presumably the same as telegram 99 to Port-­au- Prince, drafted by Warner on August 28 initialed by Snow, and transmitted on September 5. (Not printed; 738.58/9–558). 4 Not printed. No indication has been found that the memorandum was sent.
