National Security Policy 881 the Director, Office or Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also present and participating in the Council actions below were the Acting Secretary of the Treasury (Scribner); the Acting Attorney General (Walsh) (Item 1); the Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Chairman Atomic Energy Commission (Item 4); and Mr. Philip Ray for the Secretary of Commerce (Item 1). Also attending the meeting were the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Under Secretary of State (Dillon); Special Assistants to the President for Foreign Economic Policy, for National Security Affairs, and for Science and Technology; the White House Staff Secretary; Assistant Secretary of Defense John N. Irwin II; from the Atomic Energy Commission Brig. General Alfred D. Starbird, Edward J. Block and Bruce Mercer; Howard Furnas, Department of State; the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; the Executive Secretary, NSC; the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC; and Mr. Charles Haskins, NSC. There follows a summary of the discussion and the main points taken. [Omitted here are agenda items 1–3.] 4. STATUS OF NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS AS OF JUNE 30, 1959: THE ATOMIC ENERGY PROGRAM (NSC 5912; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, subject: “Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy” transmitting Report by AEC and State on Implementation of NSC 5725/1, dated September 2, 1959) Mr. Gray said the Planning Board was examining all of the status reports, but had decided that some of them need not be scheduled for Council discussion. However, the Planning Board thought the AEC Report should be discussed by the Council because it deals with one of the major national security programs. Mr. Gray then called on Mr. McCone. Mr. McCone said he would treat the highlights of the AEC pro­ gram of $2-¾ billion, 70–75 per cent of which is designed to meet Defense and military requirements, the balance being intended for peaceful purposes. Turning to uranium procurement and deliveries, Mr. McCone displayed and discussed a chart setting forth estimated uranium deliveries based on domestic, overseas, and Canadian com­ mitments. He indicated that through recent stretch-­out agreements with domestic suppliers and the Canadian Government we would be able to reduce our requirements in 1960, 1961 and 1962, increasing them in 1963, 1964 and 1965, thereby substantially decreasing and leveling off appropriations for uranium deliveries. Despite the reduction in ura­ nium procurement, the U–­235 production rate would be maintained by the CASCADE improvement program and by a recycling the cost of which would be only half the cost of uranium procurement. Savings between uranium commitments for 1960 as against 1967 would amount
