Yugoslavia
897
motive behind our escalating cost quotations. I pointed out that the
LOA on the 1,000 Dragon purchase was still valid, and would remain
so until the end of the year. Thus, if the Yugoslavs were to change
their minds, the 1,000 missiles were still available.
3. General Pekic replied that he had always believed that the reason
for the change in price quotations was inflation, and that there was no
political motivation behind our actions. But, he said, there were some
(he clearly meant Ljubicic) in the Yugoslav military who did not agree,
and thought we had been playing games with the Yugoslavs. He added
that General Ljubicic would not repeat not be prepared to reconsider
the Yugoslav decision on Dragon this year, but that the GOY might
“come back to the Dragon or TOW” next year. He admitted that the
Yugoslavs were to some degree at fault because—given concerns over
the need to notify Congress—they had not reacted fast enough when
we first made our offer. It is now time, he said, to forget our problems
over the Dragon, to learn some lessons from the experience, and to
move on to further cooperation.
4. With regard to the future, the General made three points:
A. He reiterated their desire for modern electronic warfare equip-
ment and complained about our unwillingness to sell the Yugoslavs
sophisticated GEA. (I understand that the Yugoslavs agreed at the
recent Washington meetings to present us a list of specific electronic
warfare needs.)
B. On anti-tank weaponry, he indicated that their interest in the
Viper remains high. He acknowledged that even though this system
would probably be denied them for the present, they would be very
interested in an advanced or follow-on Dragon system. (I told him that
I had no knowledge of plans for an improved Dragon.)
C. On radars, he said that he could see no reason why the U.S.
should withhold up to date equipment from Yugoslavia, since we know
it would never be used against us. Aside from the air defense radars
now under negotiation, he indicated an urgent need for an anti-aircraft
fire control system such as “Skyguard” for adaptation to weapons in
the 30–40 mm class (knowledge nil here on this system). The General
further stated that they would be happy to give a manufacturer their
required technical specifications for a fire control system to see if any-
thing could be worked out. If none of this is possible, he would like
us to provide a list of radar systems adaptable to 30–40 mm anti-aircraft
guns and allow them to decide for themselves which most suited
their needs.
5. Comment: We can forget about Dragon sales to Yugoslavia, at
least for the time being. Pekic’s statement that Ljubicic would not
reconsider this year was straightforward and unqualified, and would
not have been made unless he knew whereof he spoke. Nor do I see
