1957 1439 U.S. in the direction of Government to Government arrangements or agreements. Final decision has not been made yet as to whether Wirin’s passport will be validated but I believe it will be approved. Another month has gone by and no Chinese Communist corre­ spondent has applied for a visa. Their inaction supports the specula­ tion in your letter of October 9 that they may not really desire to admit American correspondents to mainland China at this time. If this is the case we can expect Wang at the next meeting simply to repeat his old accusations that we refuse to grant equality and reciprocity and that no exchange can take place until this obstacle has been removed. I have a feeling that they take this insistence on reciprocity rather seriously and to the extent they feel their overall international position is growing stronger they will be less inclined to act with flexibility to bring about actions toward breaking down U.S. restrictions on relations with them unless such actions could be taken on a plane of equality and reciproc­ ity. The aftermath of the “sputnik” may make them more adamant in this respect. The manner in which they handle future developments in the Powell passport case may afford some clues to their thinking. I am enclosing another copy of our memo of September 30 on Chinese Communist motivations and intentions with respect to travel of Americans so that you will have one in Geneva. Of course it is true that it was pressure from the American press which brought about our change in policy on passports for correspondents and not Chinese Communist pressure. The intent of the last paragraph of the memo was to say that looking at it from Peiping’s point of view since their rather clever and dramatic act of approving visas for a large number of American correspondents set in motion the whole train of events lead­ ing to our change in policy, they must give themselves a considerable share of credit for that result. I sent you and Ed copies of a memorandum to Mr. Robertson regard­ ing our position with respect to Chinese aliens sentenced to prison sub­ sequent to May 31, 1956. In brief it seems to me we have to have a cut-off date beyond which we cannot go in offering Chinese aliens the choice of deportation to Communist China. If we were to make a con­ tinuing operation of extending the terms of the Agreed Announcement to Chinese aliens regardless of his date of sentence, we might get into a situation where any Chinese would have carte blanche to commit any crime in the book. Or so it might seem to Justice and to the various State authorities. At the same time, I feel we should not be deprived of our flexibility in this regard, and for that reason I recommended that we not state our position to Immigration and Naturalization Service at this time. So far as we know there is only the one case (Lee Poy) of a Chinese sentenced after May 1956 desiring to return to Communist China under
