1977  195
proceeding may be necessary in order to gain sufficient support for 
ratification of the emerging SALT II agreements. On balance, I believe 
that you should hold off full-­scale development for the present, and 
reassess your position later if the SALT situation requires it. If we are 
going ahead with full-­scale development of the M–X, we should make 
the current opponents of SALT earn it.
The fourth paper (Tab D) looks at DOD plans for replacing or com-
plementing the B–52 force with a new strategic bomber. Our impression is 
that the B–1 cancellation has created a state of confusion in Air Force 
planning that is far from being sorted out. Current planning places too 
heavy an emphasis on the possibilities of purchasing the FB–111H or a 
wide-­bodied transport as a follow-­on bomber. I believe that the appro-
priate course of action would be to (1) fund the B–1 and FB–111H pro-
grams at the minimum level acceptable to Congress; (2) provide just 
enough funding for the wide-­bodied transport cruise missile carrier to 
establish its feasibility ($40–45M in FY 79); and (3) provide initial fund-
ing ($5–10M in FY 79)3 for development of an advanced strategic attack 
aircraft. This new initiative is militarily justifiable, could have very pos-
itive political effects, and would have low near-­term costs ($50–60M or 
less) in the first two years.
The final paper (Tab E) suggests some questions you could raise 
in the course of the budget review to encourage the Services to work more 
effectively together. We believe that the Services’ reluctance to employ 
other Services capabilities to satisfy very jealously guarded primary 
missions makes them less effective than they should be, particularly in 
responding to crisis contingencies. We intend to address this problem 
in the DOD reorganization studies, and possibly in further Presidential 
reviews.
	
Tab A
	
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4
Washington, undated
Level of Defense Spending
Issue: What overall level of defense spending should your FY 79 
budget call for?
3 Next to the figure “$5–10 million in FY 79,” Carter drew an arrow to the figure and 
wrote “?” in the margin.
4 Secret.
