Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 133 ing. In that case, it is clearly inadvisable for the U.S. to become involved. On the other hand, events in Africa can also be seen as part of a broad East-West struggle, with pro-Western regimes being challenged by the pro-Soviet regimes. This dictates resistance to Soviet efforts. Both interpretations are probably right, and they point to the conclusion (in my mind) that we should press the Soviets to desist but do so outside of Africa, through diplomatic leverage, trade denial, etc., but not through direct involvement in Africa per se. In the meantime, the situation remains grave and it is possible that pro-Soviet developments in Ethiopia may soon be matched by a collapse of the pro-Western government in Zaire. This, together with the likelihood of very little progress in Southern Africa, portends a rather dark future. Defense Our basic position is strong, and a comprehensive reassessment of our force posture and fundamental strategic concepts is now under way. Under Brown’s direction, I feel quite confident that by late summer we will be well under way towards a renovated and relevant strategic doctrine. However, in the conventional field and in long-range rapid strike capabilities much remains to be done, and NATO standardization is not moving forward as much as it should. North-South Relations We are yet to define our basic position. You made a good start in your UN speech,7 but the basic North-South strategy is yet to be shaped. I think it is quite clear that on this issue there will be major divisions within the Cabinet, and probably a tough fight in Congress. However, if one looks ten or twenty years ahead, it is clear that the United States needs desperately to fashion a comprehensive and long-term North-South strategy. Such a strategy is an essential component of your wider architectural effort. International Economics The Summit will be vital in this respect, especially with protectionism becoming increasingly appealing.8 The United States has to 7 See Document 29. 8 See Document 38. In his April 9 weekly report, Brzezinski indicated that he would focus the President’s attention “on what needs to be done to give greater meaning to the ‘architectural’ notion with which your foreign policy has been associated.” He continued: “The forthcoming summit will be an important test. Without some broader initiatives, the Summit may not live up to expectations no matter how much we seek to deepen them. The main reason our allies wanted the Summit is because they are concerned that the public—particularly in Europe—has lost faith in the liberal democratic political and economic system that has provided both prosperity and social stability. The purpose of the Summit is both to reaffirm our collective faith in that system and to take concrete steps to demonstrate its viability. As of next week we will be concentrating on this issue.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 125, Weekly National Security Report: 2–4/77)
