144  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
	
Tab 1
	
Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense3
Washington, July 20, 1977
POINT PAPER  
ON  
CONTINUATION OF BOTH ALCM AND  
TOMAHAWK PROGRAMS
The principal considerations are:
1. Risk: The risk represented by the ALCM program is different 
from that of the TALCM (TOMAHAWK Air-Launched Cruise Missile) 
program. The ALCM is less mature in its development and test pro-
gram, having had only six flight tests of which four were successful, 
although all tests have been in conjunction with a B–52 bomber. The 
TOMAHAWK, on the other hand, has had 22 flight tests, 18 of which 
have been successful; however, it is untested and unevaluated in the 
context of the B–52 operational weapon system.
The cruise missile will now be crucial to maintaining the bomber 
leg of the TRIAD. I am therefore convinced that it is appropriate to 
minimize the risk by maintaining both of these programs in parallel 
until either or, preferably, both have completed comprehensive tests in 
the B–52 environment. Furthermore, cancellation now (or soon) of a 
cruise missile program could raise questions about the B–1 decision, 
and about our determination to pose a severe air-­breathing threat to 
the Soviets into the 1990s. In the long run it may indeed prove to be 
economical to pick only one for the inventory, though depending on 
the number of different applications (ALCM, GLCM, SLCM—­nuclear 
and/or antiship), several different designs may be appropriate for the 
inventory.
2. Competition: Continuing both ALCM and TOMAHAWK in 
RDT&E will create a healthy competition between the two missile con-
figurations as strategic air-­launched cruise missiles. We expect, as a 
result, both programs will achieve better performance and lower cost 
than if there were only one program.
At about $1M per missile in recurring costs (for a buy of 3000 to 
5000 missiles), even a 10 to 15% cost reduction by virtue of competition 
will realize a savings to the government of $300M to $750M. Such a 
savings in procurement costs, together with the importance of reducing 
3 No classification marking.
