Negotiating Channels and the right of Iran to seek extradition was recognized, the American hostages would be released. The “New Panamanian Channel”. He said that the third possibility was the “Panamanian channel” which was opened by the visit of the Panamanians to Iran. He said that they recognized the great pressure that Panama was under from the United States to accept and protect the Shah. He said that he and Khomeini realized that it would be impossible for them to extradite the Shah. He said that his own lawyers had researched the Panamanian law and found six separate legal arguments that would prevent the Panamanians from actually extraditing the Shah. But, Ghotbzadeh argued that it was the “principle of extradition” that was important to he and the Ayatollah. And that if the Panamanians could begin the legal process of extradition, that would be enough for the Ayatollah to go [to] the students and insist that they release the hostages. Ghotbzadeh said that he wanted to go to Panama to personally deliver the papers of extradition. He said also that he wanted to meet with me (Jordan) secretly as I had two of the three important relationships—a relationship with President Carter and General Torrijos, but not with him (Ghotbzadeh). He said because of the Waldheim trip and the upcoming elections, he did not know if there was time for such a mission now. It is late—almost 4:00 a.m.—and I need to wrap this up and give you some thoughts and recommendations. I was skeptical at the outset about Marcel and his visit to Iran, but the more I heard the more realistic and plausible it all sounded. Specific things that Ghotbzadeh said to him all seem to reinforce things that we had heard through other channels. The larger question relates to the fact that for better or worse, the Iranians have opened a channel of communication with the Panamanians. At best, I think you could argue that the Iranians did this consciously to have a second channel open to them to pursue in a serious way negotiations leading to the release to the hostages and/or to reinforce the contacts that they are having with Waldheim. At worst, and much more likely, the Iranians have made contact with the Panamanians to see if they can use the leverage of the unrest in Panama and their (Torrijos’) relationship with us to soften our negotiating posture on the critical questions. You might speculate that while the UN channel might be producing enough for Ghotbzadeh to live with, it was not enough for the Ayatollah, and the Foreign Minister is hoping to move the thing further along with the Panamanians. This contact between the Panamanians and the Foreign Minister is both an opportunity and a potential problem. To the extent that we
