910  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
portal continuous monitoring (PPCM), and ALCM/heavy bomber ver-
ification. These issues are all extremely complex (the ALCM/bomber 
issue, for example includes some thirty sub-­issues) and all will require 
difficult decisions on our part. For this reason, they will probably be 
impossible to resolve during your ministerial, unless there has been 
significant, cabinet-­level discussion in advance.
(S) 6. Perhaps the most crucial of the three issues is data denial. We 
now differ on power levels to be broadcast [less than 4 lines not declas-
sified] Soviets), and the number of exemptions (which we may be able 
to solve in Geneva). Until recently, I thought I saw the outlines of a 
deal in this area. My recent soundings in Washington, however, suggest 
that the technical types in both the Pentagon and the intelligence com-
munity may make a deal impossible. Unlike any of the other remain-
ing issues, if data denial does not come out right, ratification could be 
jeopardized.
(S) 7. In both PPCM and ALCM/heavy bomber verification we 
face a choice between tight and loose verification measures. We need 
to decide whether we want tight verification of solid rocket motor pro-
duction badly enough to offer intrusive ALCM and bomber inspections, 
including inspection of the B2, which my sources tell me the chiefs have 
personally decided is unacceptable even if it means no START treaty. 
The uncompromising Soviet stand (they refuse to even consider mon-
itoring solid rocket motor plants and claim that inspection of the B2 
is a treaty breaker), as well as the competing equities within the U.S. 
Government, mean that these two issues won’t be solved short of your 
level.
(S) 8. I understand that in the end-­game there is always a tendency 
for negotiators to be alarmist and that you heard similar words from 
Vienna before CFE was completed. CFE was a great accomplishment 
and I confess I was surprised that the United States was able to pull it 
off. I do not believe, however, that the CFE end-­game will be a model 
for START. Unlike CFE, we can’t send some smart people into a room 
and tell them to solve it: the issues in START are technically more com-
plex. Of greater concern, in CFE we didn’t have to make painful, last-­
minute decisions affecting U.S. programs and capabilities; in START we 
will have to.
(S) 9. Thus, my bottom line: it is my strong view that if we don’t 
put in place a cabinet-­level decision process before your ministerial we 
cannot expect to resolve enough issues during your two-­day meeting 
to give the President and you confidence that a START treaty can be 
signed in January. I recognize that your schedule between now and the 
ministerial is crowded. Despite this, I recommend you speak to your 
colleagues about setting such a process in motion. Without it, we won’t 
sign START—­in January or ever.
(S) 10. Best regards, Rick
