32
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
exchange rates.5 There is no prospect of any early return to fixed ex-
change rates—divergencies in economic experience among nations are
too great for that. But we still have much to learn regarding the effec-
tive operation of a system of fluctuating exchange rates. We must take
steps to avoid large and erratic fluctuations, without impeding the
basic monetary adjustments that will be necessary among nations for
some years to come. It will be useful to strengthen the role of the Inter-
national Monetary Fund as a center for observation and guidance of the
world economy, keeping track of the interactions among national econ-
omies and making recommendations to governments on how best to
keep the world economy functioning smoothly.
Beyond economic and political cooperation, we have much to
learn from one another. I have been repeatedly impressed by the
achievements of the Japanese and the Europeans in their domestic af-
fairs. The Japanese, for example, have one of the lowest unemployment
rates and the lowest crime rate of any industrialized nation, and they
also seem to suffer less than other urbanized peoples from the modern
problem of rootlessness and alienation.
Similarly, we can learn from the European nations about health
care, urban planning and mass transportation.
There are many ways that creative alliances can work for a better
world. Let us mention just one more, the area of human rights. Many of
us have protested the violation of human rights in Russia, and justly so.
But such violations are not limited to any one country or one ideology.
There are other countries that violate human rights in one way or an-
other—by torture, by political persecution, and by racial or religious
discrimination.
We and our allies, in a creative partnership, can take the lead in es-
tablishing and promoting basic global standards of human rights. We
respect the independence of all nations, but by our example, by our ut-
terances, and by the various forms of economic and political persuasion
available to us, we can quite surely lessen the injustice in this world.
We must certainly try.
Let me make one other point in the political realm. Democratic
processes may in some countries bring to power parties or leaders
whose ideologies are not shared by most Americans.
We may not welcome these changes; we will certainly not en-
courage them. But we must respect the results of democratic elections
and the right of countries to make their own free choice if we are to re-
5 Presumable reference to the January 1976 meetings in Kingston, Jamaica, of the In-
ternational Monetary Fund’s Interim Committee (January 7–8) and Development Com-
mittee (January 9). See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy,
1973–1976, Documents 128 and 129.
