393.116/310
[Document 563]
The Secretary of State to the Foreign Secretary of the American
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (James L. Barton)
WASHINGTON, April 1, 1924.
SIR: The Department has received your letter of March 18, 1924, stating that
there exists among American missionaries in China a growing spirit of
opposition to the extraterritorial conditions and to government protection of
missionaries thereunder, and making certain inquiries with regard to the
right of American citizens to waive such privileges, if they so desire. In
general, I may state that American citizens are not entitled to waive rights
of the character to which you refer. The treaties concluded between China
and the United States are contracts between the two governments. They
expressly provide that American citizens in China shall enjoy, with respect
to their person and property, the protection of the local authorities of
government, and that they shall be exempt from the processes of Chinese
law. The observance of these provisions of the treaties this Government has
a right to insist upon, and doubtless would insist upon, irrespective of the
wishes of particular individuals who may be influenced by religious or
other beliefs. It has been repeatedly held that a citizen cannot by his
independent act control the right of his government to intervene or afford
protection in an appropriate case. In this connection, you may be interested
to refer to Moore’s International Law Digest, Vol. VI, p. 293.
With reference to the exercise of extraterritorial rights, Congress has,
furthermore, enacted legislation extending to American citizens in China
the laws of the United States. No American citizen in China, so long as he
remains such, can waive the application to his person or property of such
laws by the claim of a preference to be subject to the laws of China.
I think you will agree with me that the surrender of such rights by a portion
of the American community in China, even if by a very small number of
individuals, would seriously impair the whole system of the treaties as
