1020  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
have as close to 4900 ballistic missile warheads as possible, and that 
such a difference would not have to be from a new SLBM—­it could be 
from a modification of any existing ballistic missile, for example.
7. Turning to the Soviet chart on Soviet forces, Ladygin said that it 
should come as no surprise that heavy bombers had been added because 
the negotiations covered all strategic offensive arms. By adding these 137 
platforms, the Soviet side could have 1096 additional warheads avail-
able for breakout, given the current ALCM counting rules. Consequently, 
by adding the breakout potential from ballistic missiles, the Soviet side 
would have 3052 warheads available for breakout.
8. Regarding U.S. forces, Ladygin said that the same principals were 
used. He said that the Soviet side fully recognized that the Trident-II 
SLBM was accountable for eight warheads under START, but the fact 
remained that it had been tested with 12 warheads and, therefore, 
when discussing breakout potential these additional warheads would 
have to be considered. He emphasized that the Soviet side was not say-
ing that the U.S. side would implement such a tactic, but that this must 
be considered in the hypothetical situation of breakout. As a result, the 
U.S. side would have 2328 warheads available for breakout on ballis-
tic missiles. When adding in heavy bombers—­which amounted to a 
breakout potential of 4090 warheads—­the U.S. side could have 6418 
warheads available for breakout.
9. Ladygin then asked the rhetorical question, “Who should be 
more concerned about breakout under these conditions?” He said that 
it was clear that the Soviet side should be twice as concerned. He added 
that both sides could make many inferences from such “scholastic cal-
culations.” However, both sides had real, vice hypothetical, concerns 
and the U.S. side should refrain from hypothetical arguments and do 
“real work.” He said that the combination of NTM and OSI would rule 
out a covert breakout scenario. Ladygin stated the Soviet side’s under-
standing that, in Houston and Washington, the trade-­offs had been 
made between B–1, B–2, and Downloading/SS–N–18, and asked that 
the U.S. side work to finalize these agreements.
10. Brooks stated that the U.S. government did not agree with the 
Soviet side’s interpretation of the Houston agreements and that there 
were no agreements made on downloading. Regarding Ladygin’s sug-
gestion that a side only signed a treaty in order to comply with it was an 
assumption. This was not to say that the U.S. side was questioning the 
motives of the Soviet side, but that there had been cases where treaties 
had not been followed and that if a nation could get an advantage by 
not following a treaty, it might not.
11. Brooks then stated that what the U.S. side had thought was to 
happen was that it would present an understanding as to what Soviet 
and U.S. forces could do under downloading and explain why it was
