Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I of a very tiny group within the executive branch of Government about the prospective success. But what did happen should not be a surprise to anyone. The congressional views were well known to me. My views were well known to the Members of Congress. “Mr. Cronkite. Mr. President, what was the need for such haste? Why could you not have consulted with the congressional leaders first, before making the final commitment? “The President. Well, Walter, my experience in negotiating sensitive and complicated agreements with foreign leaders, including the experience at Camp David and otherwise, is that to negotiate through the news media, through public pronouncements and with wide divergencies of views expressed by different leaders in a country, is not conducive to success. And I’m authorized and directed by the Constitution and my responsibility is to conduct negotiations of this kind. “We did not depart from the established policy of our country that’s been extant since President Nixon went to China in 1972. And I think had we caused a public debate in our country about all the ramifications of the negotiations at the very time we were trying to conclude these discussions with the Chinese, it would have resulted in failure. And our country would have lost a wonderful opportunity to a great stride forward and all the benefits that will be derived from this agreement. “So, I don’t have any doubt that what I did was right and correct. I don’t have any doubts that had we made a public issue of it, it would have complicated the issue unnecessarily.” Cronkite followed Carter’s answer with a question regarding the U.S.–Taiwan Defense Treaty, before concluding the interview with a question related to the Senate’s confirmation of the SALT II treaty: “Mr. Cronkite. Do you think that putting the Chinese question on the agenda of the next session of Congress might complicate the confirmation of a SALT treaty? “The President. No, I think not. What we will ask the Congress to do next session is to pass special legislation to permit us to continue our cultural relations with Taiwan, our trade relations with Taiwan, the application of the Eximbank, and the support of loans to China—to the people of Taiwan, rather, and also to authorize us to sell weapons to Taiwan after the defense treaty expires. “So, I think that even those who oppose the normalization of relations with China will favor the continued relationships with Taiwan, which this legislation will have to authorize. So, I don’t think this will complicate the other issues in Congress. They’re almost as complicated as they can get anyhow. I don’t think this will hurt at all.” (Ibid., pages
