3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
15
of them individually lies not in competition in the field of armaments
but on the way of disarmament and elimination of material basis of
war. We shall continue to direct our efforts as well at achieving that
goal.
Now I shall briefly touch upon some other issues.
An important direction of joint or parallel efforts of our countries,
given their objective roles and responsibilities in world affairs, is to fa-
cilitate solution of problems causing international tensions. The task
here, in our opinion, is to eliminate the initial causes producing those
problems.
Of prime importance in this respect as you, Mr. President, also
rightly noted, is the establishment of just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. Almost ten years have elapsed since the war of 1967. This
“jubilee” acutely reminds us not simply of the time wasted for the reso-
lution of the Middle East conflict but also of the possibility of new dan-
gerous outbreaks—as it happened in October of 1973, and quite re-
cently in Lebanon.
Meanwhile, we are convinced that if in dealing with the Middle
East problem the legitimate rights and interests of all sides—both of
Arabs, including Palestinians, and of Israel—would be realistically and
objectively taken into consideration, then the reliable elimination of
this permanent source of international conflicts would be quite pos-
sible. Finding a necessary understanding between the USSR and the US
on this matter and in particular on the resumption of the Geneva Con-
ference will undoubtedly contribute to the success of a major under-
taking which is the achievement of a political settlement in the Middle
East.
Cooperation of our two countries would be of essential impor-
tance, as we believe, on other international questions as well—be it fur-
ther steps to strengthen European security on the basis of decisions
adopted in Helsinki,5 strict observance of the Quadripartite agreement
on West Berlin,6 or, say, a settlement in Cyprus.7
In your letter, Mr. President, you mention the problem of Southern
Africa. Our position of principle on this question is well known: we are
in solidarity with the struggle of the peoples of Southern Africa for
their freedom and independence. We can recognize the right of nobody
5 Reference is to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe Final Act or
Helsinki Accords. For the text of the Final Act, see Department of State Bulletin, Sep-
tember 1, 1975, pp. 323–350.
6 See footnote 6, Document 3.
7 For information on the 1974 coup in Cyprus, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol.
XV, Soviet Union, June 1972–August 1974, Documents 201–207. As of February 1977, a
settlement had not been reached.
