Chapter 1, 1988 15 the Vice President’s personal participation in the policies of the current U.S. administration. The Soviet side was in favor of a continuation of this policy without interruption and in favor of making it a dynamic one in all areas. The Vice President thanked the Foreign Minister for his words and said that he and Secretary Shultz had just been recalling their first meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev when the latter had just become General Secretary. There has been a heated discussion about one of the areas that had subsequently become one of the pillars of our relationship, i.e. human rights. He and the Secretary of State saw that the General Secretary was clear in what he said about the subject. He knew where he stood, and that was good. But it was at that meeting that the General Secretary proposed that both sides get to work on this issue and start looking at each other’s records on this. This is a difficult area, but a lot of progress has been made on it, and the Vice President would like to build on that progress. The Vice President continued that he was aware of the progress which had been made in the area of arms control. He wished that the Foreign Minister could have been with him in East Texas the other day. Ambassador Bessnertnykh had probably told the Foreign Minister that East Texas was a very conservative part of the country. It was rural America. Historically, the people there had been very cautious about foreign affairs (Shevardnadze interjected that Bessmertnykh had told him about Texas, but not that it was conservative). There there had been a symbolic ceremony of missiles being destroyed, as the Foreign Minister was aware. The Vice President was interested in seeing the reaction of the people of East Texas—­not the bigshots, but the ordinary people. He was interested in how the local newspaper would depict this historical event and how the mayor, the county commissioners and the policemen would react. The reaction was a positive one. The local newspaper welcomed the Soviets as friends and approved of the agreement which had been worked out between the Foreign Minister and the Secretary of State and between the General Secretary and the President. It had been interesting to see what people at the grass roots were saying. The Vice President continued that people were still wondering how far the changes in the Soviet Union would go, and some historical differences still persisted at the grass roots level, but a big change had occurred. Among the sophisticated political right there was a feeling that we could no longer return to the standoff stance vis-à-­vis the U.S.S.R. that had existed before, and the Vice President shared this conviction. Some right-­wingers were critical of this, but it was not so at the grass roots.
