462.00 R 296/746: Telegram
[Document 368]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BRUSSELS, December 4, 1924—12 noon.
[Received 3:48 p.m.]
118. Yesterday I called on the Minister for Foreign Affairs at his request and he
explained that Belgian Government was greatly concerned over attitude of the British
Treasury experts in Paris. According to the Minister it is feared that British delegates
are seeking to do away with Belgian priority to German payments held by the
Comptabilité Centrale de Gages at Coblenz. Allied Powers had always admitted
[payment?] of army costs out of these funds. British experts now assert that Belgium is
not entitled to receive priority payments from these funds held at Coblenz and must
hereafter accept her proportion of payments in kind instead of in cash.
Belgian Government is anxious to be protected from extreme view of British Treasury
and asks intervention of delegate of the United States in support of the Belgian equities.
The Minister reminded me that the Government of the United States had from the first
favored idea of Belgian priorities; that Belgium had been very sympathetic to recent
American claim to right of participation in Dawes annuities to cover claims of
American citizens in addition to army costs;6 and that Belgian Government had taken
initiative in turning over to the United States 25 percent of any sums paid to Belgium
even before ratification of Army Costs Agreement of May 25, 1923.7 The Minister said
that he referred to these three points in the hope that the Department would at present
time find it possible to come to Belgium’s assistance and to protect her from British
Treasury’s ultra rigid attitude. He also referred to critical situation which would be
created here in political circles were the Government forced to abandon its just claim to
priority payments; it is evident that both he and the Prime Minister are alarmed at
course events have taken in Paris and foresee that there will be decided reaction against
the Government in the forthcoming elections should Belgium be forced to abandon her
present priorities.
Copy of this telegram sent to Logan.
PHILLIPS
6 See Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. II, pp. 1 ff.
