246
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
that the provision for displaced persons should help us to start dealing
with that problem immediately.
Fahd said that is fine but what is needed is something tangible. The
Secretary said he understood and said he would see if we could do
something to help. He would be meeting with the President Monday7
and would convey his remarks. Fahd urged him to do so and reiterated
that if he had this from the President he would invite the Palestinians to
talk. The rejectionists are now meeting and Saudi Arabia needs some-
thing to counterbalance. Fahd said that three days ago he had talked
with Palestinian representatives, urging them to be calm and work for
peace. He felt that he had calmed them somewhat but he was missing
something in his presentation to them because they lacked assurances.
The Secretary asked as a hypothetical question whether, if the U.S.
could resolve the problem it has in talking with the PLO, a dialogue
with them would be helpful.
Fahd said the PLO would be delighted. Saudi Arabia would ar-
range the meeting. He asked that we think about it.
Fahd asked if the Secretary could confirm that Sadat had written
Assad that the Golan solution would be the same as the Sinai solution.
The Secretary said he didn’t know whether or not there had been a
letter but that Sadat had said that the Sinai agreement could be a model
for the Golan agreement.
Fahd asked if Golan were discussed at Camp David.
The Secretary said there was no real discussion of the Syrian as-
pect, just reference to Syria and the fact that we had to have a frame-
work applicable to all the countries.
Fahd expressed appreciation for the Secretary’s patience with the
Saudi concerns. He assured the Secretary that Saudi Arabia would like
to support anything that the United States embarks upon. He ex-
pressed appreciation for the invitation to go to the U.S., saying that he
was actually packed when he learned that the King had to go for med-
ical treatment, thus he had to stay in Saudi Arabia. He said he was re-
serving the invitation as a rain check.
The Secretary said that Fahd had a standing rain check. (At this
stage Fahd asked his advisors if they had questions and Mansouri
asked about Jerusalem.)
Fahd said that Jerusalem is another large and urgent problem.
There is no mention in the agreements of Jerusalem. This gives the im-
pression that it is ignored and Israel is free to work its will. The Secre-
7 September 25. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Vance met with Carter,
Mondale, Brown, Brzezinski, Eilts, and Warnke from 7:31 to 8:46 a.m. (Carter Library,
Presidential Materials)
