Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
43
—Interference with the operation of any of the other side’s space
systems, including (during peacetime only) electronic warfare (EW)
against satellite systems.
—Permitted
—Testing of EW ASAT systems in space and against space objects.3
—R&D and ASAT testing short of space or ground-to-space
testing.
However, the provisions will not be used in the early stage of ne-
gotiations. Rather, Secretary Vance will contact the Soviets informally,
suggesting—as a first step—that the US and the Soviets negotiate an
agreement that defines an attack on a satellite of the other side as a hos-
tile act. Secretary Vance will also suggest that, as an indication of good
faith, both sides should immediately forego further ASAT testing in
space or against space objects. Appropriate Congressional leaders are
to be briefed on the US initiative, but the initial approach to the Soviets
will be informal, unpublicized and low-key, pending indications that
these negotiations have reasonable prospects for success.
Relative Impact of a Treaty on Both Sides
The Interagency Working Group (IAWG) is tasked to prepare a
study of whether it would be more advantageous to negotiate a Treaty
that would accept the current US/Soviet ASAT asymmetry in favor of
the Soviets, or let the ASAT testing continue on both sides until capabil-
ities on both sides have become more symmetrical.
Verification
Recognizing the difficulties in verifying an ASAT Treaty using cur-
rent national means, the IAWG is tasked to study whether the US
should devise new systems and procedures allowing improved verifi-
cation. Included in the study will be an examination of various satellite
survivability techniques that the US might employ to improve verifica-
tion of any ASAT Treaty provision that prohibits hostile actions against
the other side’s satellites.
Press Releases/Public Statements
The IAWG will clear all press and public statements concerning
ASAT negotiations, capabilities and other activities.
3 In the right-hand margin, Carter wrote “seems in conflict” and drew arrows
pointing to be the first sentence under the heading “Prohibited” and the first sentence
under “Permitted.”
