772
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
is a moral issue, rather than one of international law and diplomatic
immunity and can only be resolved when the issue is addressed in
those terms. At a minimum, Iran is demanding that the US acknowledge
the justice of this moral indignation.
Third, the hostages are probably serving as insurance against possi-
ble US retaliation. When the hostages were first seized, Iran was not
concerned about this insurance issue, but as the crisis has dragged on,
it is becoming an increasingly important factor. The Iranians are riding
a wild tiger on which they cannot safely remain, but from which they
are equally fearful of dismounting.
The Course of Events: Because Khomeini has decreed that the Iranian
people acting through the Parliament must decide the hostages’ fate,
no real progress toward resolving the crisis can be expected until that
body convenes. The final round of elections will be held May 9. Optimis-
tically, the new legislature will meet by the end of May and begin the
hostage debate by the end of June. (The intervening month will be
used by the Parliament for organizing internally and the selection of
a new cabinet.) The hostages debate could easily extend through the
summer, particularly if legislative sessions are suspended during the
holy, fasting month of Ramadan, which commences on July 17.
If Khomeini dies or is totally incapacitated soon, the prospects for
a negotiated settlement in the intermediate future will be almost nil.
Without Khomeini’s legitimizing influence, a weak coalition composed
of Iran’s various competing forces will not be able to reach an authorita-
tive decision on this issue. Thus, the hostages will have to wait until
a new, dominant power center is established which will have the
strength and legitimacy to find a solution to the hostage problem. That
process could, under the best of circumstances, take several months to
come to fruition.
Implications for the US: The previous discussions suggest several
conclusions:
—The crisis is essentially self-contained and not subject to manipu-
lation by an outside force. Although outside power and pressures can
be projected into the political arena, they will have little impact on the
key players. This is particularly true if the reward for releasing the
hostages is the mere cessation of outside pressures, such as the current
economic measures taken against Iran.
—The hostages are intimately linked to the domestic political proc-
ess. When a majority of the key players believe the hostages are a
liability, a framework for negotiations can be established; however,
—No single individual has the authority to negotiate on this issue;
therefore, it is a mistake to look for such a leader with whom normal
diplomatic relations can be initiated and pursued. What is needed is
