First Responses
33
away in response to coercion would be an act of acquiescence to black-
mail unprecedented in American history. (S)
5. Economic. Secretary Vance presented a paper on possible eco-
nomic countermeasures.9 Other studies are also under way. (S)
6. Military Contingencies. Further study has been given to the rescue
option. The JCS does not believe it is viable. There would be a very
high risk of failure, even with very good intelligence on the location
of the hostages and other operational detail. (TS)
A number of punitive options have been examined in more detail.
An attack on the refinery at Abadan would potentially destroy a large
proportion of domestic fuel stocks and reduce refinery capacity for
kerosene, heating oil and gasoline by more than half. There are three
specific targets: the power plant, the refinery and the catalytic converter.
The power plant could be repaired relatively quickly, although it would
be very disruptive. The refinery would take about six months to replace,
and the catalytic converter would take several years. The operation
could be conducted by carrier-based aircraft from the Midway (4–5 days
away), a Seal team to be put ashore (could be organized in 2–3 days),
or by an AC–130 gunship (3–4 days lead time). On balance, Defense
and JCS favor the gunship since it is extremely accurate, very effective,
and involves no likely problem of extracting personnel. Air defenses
in the area are extremely light. The AC–130 could make an attack
from Diego Garcia with refueling. Use of Diego Garcia would require
coordination with the British. Defense will examine further the possibil-
ity of such an attack without coordination with any other nation. (TS)
Three Iranian harbors could be mined to close off 65 percent of
Iran’s imports without affecting the oil export facilities. The most appro-
priate [1 line not declassified]. (TS)
An attack on the F–14s could not expect to get more than about
half the Iranian inventory. Defense believes it would be an error to
strike at the Iranian military, since they may be helpful later. Also, a
disruptive attack on the military might tempt the Soviets to move in.
9 The November 8 briefing memorandum from Katz to Vance outlined that the
United States could prohibit imports of oil, implement an export embargo of food and
spare parts, freeze the estimated $1.4 billion of Iranian Central Bank funds on deposit
with the New York Federal Reserve, suspend the FMS pipeline, and impose financial
and trade transactions. All of these economic sanctions would require a Presidential
determination. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 97, Meetings File, 11/8/79: SCC re Iran) In a subsequent November 8 memorandum
to Vance, Katz changed his assessment of Iranian assets in U.S. and foreign branches of
U.S. banks from $1.4 billion to $6 billion, and noted an estimated $3.5 billion in U.S.
claims on Iran. (Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, S/S–I, Lot
85D382, Section III.E., Misc Assessment of Strength & Durability of Shah’s Regime)
