International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
549
More important than any of these will be how we prosecute the
fight on inflation, which is treated under (4) below. (U)
3. North-South. You said in the campaign that you would restore
morality to US foreign policy. This means different things to different
people. To me, it means helping the one billion people in the world
who live in desperate poverty. (U)
Most of these people are not in the middle-income developing
countries; these countries, moreover, do not need concessional aid.
What they need is a good MTN agreement, and strong multilateral fi-
nancial institutions from which they can borrow on hard terms. We
have moved actively to achieve both. This Administration’s lead in
creating the new IMF facility and our progress in making up our World
Bank arrearages is in refreshing contrast to past US neglect of these two
institutions. The case for thus helping middle-income countries is clear
in terms of US self interest: They are increasingly important economic
partners. (U)
The case for helping poor developed countries rests on a longer
term consideration, our interest in meeting global problems, and on
moral grounds: When Bob Lipshutz swore in members of the Hunger
Commission,7 he referred to a quotation from Matthew; when I had
looked it up, it seemed to me the best justification of aid to poor coun-
tries that I had read: “In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.” We’re not ashamed to
take moral considerations into account in our private lives; there’s no
reason we shouldn’t do so as a nation, as well. (U)
Your Administration has significantly increased foreign aid. The
biggest increase has been in multilateral aid; this makes sense because
one US dollar here mobilizes three dollars from other donors. You have
also improved the quality of aid by directing concessional develop-
ment loans and PL 480 more clearly to the needs of poor people in poor
countries—leaving hard loans to meet the needs of middle-income
countries and SSA to meet political needs. This maximizes the amount
of concessional aid available for the poor. (U)
We have moved toward the developing countries’ views about the
Common Fund, although it’s not yet clear whether this will result in
agreement. (U)
North-South oratorical tensions persist, and this will continue for
some time. But US substantive policies toward LDC’s have improved
and this should be reflected in these countries’ attitudes, as well as
prospects. (U)
7 See footnote 6, Document 171. Robert Lipshutz was Counsel to the President from
January 1977 until October 1979.
