Chile  297
that I convey his assurance of sympathetic support for President 
Eisenhower in the difficult situation which he confronted at the Paris 
meetings.
The President went on to say that while the world situation was 
grave and the attitude of Khrushchev at Paris a cause for concern, he 
personally was not surprised, as Khrushchev’s attitude was just such as 
might be expected from one of his background, which Alessandri com-
pared to the background and attitude of many members of the local 
opposition to his government here in Chile, with the common traits 
of irresponsibility and demagoguery. He emphasized the increasing 
danger of Communism in Latin America and said that no doubt the 
Communists would exploit the current increase of world tensions to 
serve their own ends here and in this continent.
Using these objectives and tactics of the opposition as a transition 
from world affairs to his own problems in Chile, the President men-
tioned the current situation relating to the wage and salary readjust-
ment and his determination to explain it in the bluntest terms to the 
Congress in the course of his address this week. He blamed these dif-
ficulties primarily on petty political maneuvering within and among 
the various political parties, pointing out that with the congressional 
elections coming early next year many, if not all of the parties, were 
focusing their attention more on those elections than on the needs and 
welfare of the country. [text not declassified] He said that his failure to 
present to the Congress an administration-­sponsored project for wage 
readjustment during the early months of the year was due entirely to 
the fact that at no time had he been able to get sufficiently clear assur-
ance of support from the Radicals to provide such a project with a rea-
sonable guarantee of congressional approval. He said further that in 
recent weeks the attitude of the Radical Party had further deteriorated. 
Its official leadership continued to recognize the basic validity of the 
government’s position and to be in general accord with its stability pro-
gram. Due to the approach of congressional elections, the leadership 
was under more and more pressure from elements within its own party 
and less willing or able to offer the administration the support which 
it requires.
I remarked that I supposed that the Radicals, along with other 
parties, would have their own proposals relating to wage readjust-
ments to introduce into the next Congress, after the 21st; the President 
replied, of course, there would be many, but stated with great vehe-
mence that as long as he had the support of one-­third of the mem-
bership of either Chamber he would veto and continue to veto any 
wage proposal that would endanger the government’s stabilization 
program.
