XXVII Summary of Print Volume III Following is a summary of the contents of print volume III, National Security Policy; Arms Control and Disarmament. Parenthetical citations are to numbered documents in the text. Volume III, published in 1996, is available from the U.S. Government Printing Office. National Security Policy A major focus of the first part of the compilation on national secu­ rity policy is the Eisenhower administration’s response to the Gaither Panel, which in November 1957 had submitted its report, “Deterrence and Survival in the Nuclear Age.” (See Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume XIX.) The main thrust of the report was that during the next 2–3 years the U.S. strategic position relative to the Soviet Union would be at its strongest, but that within 12–20 years both the United States and the Soviet Union would be capable of annihilating one another and that the very real dangers of miscalculation that would then exist in estimat­ ing whether or not an attack was occurring required urgent study. (1) In response to the report, the National Security Council (NSC) in early 1958 held lengthy discussions on the nation’s strategic offensive and defensive weapons systems. One result was President ­Eisenhower’s directive that the Defense Department should report back on the fea­ sibility and desirability of supplemental “active” military measures to reduce the vulnerability of the Strategic Air Command (SAC) to a hypothetical Soviet surprise bomber attack. (2) In response to the Gaither Panel’s concerns about the status of the nation’s active defenses, the Eisenhower administration held several meetings on various aspects of the problem. One was devoted to SAC alert forces. Discussions about procedures involving the deployment of these forces under emergency conditions, initially called “Fail Safe” and renamed “Positive Control,” centered on the readiness and rapid launching of SAC planes as well as procedures to recall them before attack if the alarm proved to be false. Eisenhower seemed to be gener­ ally satisfied with the SAC’s preparedness and emergency safeguards. (9, 16, 25) A related question was the military’s coordinated targeting strat­ egy in the event of nuclear war. In August 1959 the President approved the use of an “optimum mix” of military and urban-­industrial targets, which in the event of general war was to include all vital strategic elements of the enemy’s known nuclear offensive capability and to achieve a 75 percent assurance of delivering one weapon at each target.
