with modern practices. Moreover, in devising a common schedule
of tariff by readjustment of the numerous complicated and
conflicting interests of the powers, the plan would encounter
serious obstacles, perhaps impossible of being overcome within the
time that is at the disposal of this conference. On the contrary,
under the first plan, the steps to be taken would be definitely
decided upon at this conference. At the same time, it would give
each interested Power ample time, during the preparatory period,
for arriving at a separate agreement with the Chinese Government
on the subject of special tariff, while China, upon the abolition of
likin and the removal of other obstructions to trade, will be able to
enforce a national customs tariff law with the full accord of the
Powers. It is by far the simpler and more practicable means [to] set
China on the direct road to tariff autonomy.’
Mr. Strawn, in [behalf] of the American delegation, expressed willingness to
go beyond the Washington treaty, and to accord to China relief, but wished to
be fully advised as to the plans for the abolition of likin which must be
accomplished coincidently with the institution of tariff [autonomy].
Mr. Kauffmann, Danish delegate, who spoke after Mr. Strawn, made a
statement virtually to the same effect.
The Belgian delegate accepted in principle the proposal to accord China tariff
autonomy enforcement, suggesting that a transitory period should precede
it[s] going into force and expressing the hope that this period be as short as
possible.
The French delegate [said] that he was prepared to consider it [in] the most
friendly and generous spirit and to submit to his Government any reasonable
proposals which might be put forward by the Chinese to meet their
aspirations in regard to the customs tariff.
Mr. Oudendijk stated that the right of tariff autonomy [is] an inherent
sovereign right and that the Netherlands Government would do its best to
arrive at a satisfactory settlement of the question.
The Italian [delegate] said that the proposals would be examined in the
friendliest spirit and that the complete abolition of likin must precede full
tariff autonomy.
The Portuguese delegate said that he expected that the proposals issued at the
conference will lead; to complete tariff autonomy.
