640 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I advisers will naturally want to avoid foreign policy actions which would be unpopular with segments of the electorate. In addition, with the long stream of primaries, we can expect even ephemeral issues to be stridently debated in public. We may be able to overcome the foregoing constraints in specific instances, but they will provide the overall context. In that context, the following are ten points for emphasis in the last 18 months. 1. Latin America. An unusual opening for progress in Latin American relations is provided by the Panama Canal Treaties, our role in the removal of Somoza,2 and our human rights policy. Systematic attention by you and others on the 7th Floor to Latin America can pay big dividends, and can be done without cutting across the constraints outlined above. (a) Andean Countries. The opening is especially important with respect to the Andean countries. Their democratic leanings make us natural allies on many problems. We should consult more with them, learn from them, and seek to make common cause with them in approaching the hemisphere’s problems. (b) Brazil. The new Figueredo regime affords an opportunity to put our relations on a sound and friendly footing.3 We started off on the wrong foot with Brazil but they have recently shown signs that they are ready for a closer relationship. We should begin to consult with them not primarily on bilateral matters, but on regional and global issues, treating them as the equals that they may some day be. Sometime during this period, I would like to consider making a trip to Brazil, which, if it went well, might be seen in contrast to the trip I made at the very beginning of the Administration, carrying the rather heavy nonproliferation message.4 (c) Mexico. We have had a roller-coaster relationship with Mexico, with more downs than ups. The US-Mexican Coordinator gives us a mechanism to try to smooth out the relationship.5 It is however a rather awkward mechanism which will work only if it has support at the highest levels. You have devoted considerable time to Mexican relations, but some of that investment was lost when Roel was replaced.6 2 In July, the State Department demanded that Somoza, who had fled to Miami from Nicaragua after his resignation, persuade the acting Nicaraguan President to step down or Somoza could not stay in the United States. Somoza left Miami, eventually taking refuge in Paraguay. (Wayne King, “Somoza Is Planning A Foreign Trip Soon From Exile in Miami,” The New York Times, July 20, 1979, p. A–4) 3 Figueredo succeeded Geisel as President of Brazil in March 1979. 4 In early March 1977, Christopher participated in high-level talks with Brazilian officials regarding nuclear energy issues. The talks concluded after 1 day. (Bruce Handler, “Nuclear Talks in Brazil End Abruptly,” The Washington Post, March 3, 1977, pp. A–1, A–16) 5 See footnote 26, Document 123. 6 On May 16, Lopez-Portillo replaced Foreign Secretary Santiago Roel Garcia with Jorge Castaneda. Lopez-Portillo also replaced the Secretary of the Interior and Secretary of Budget and Planning. (Alan Riding, “President of Mexico Shuffles His Cabinet On Eve of Castro Visit,” The New York Times, May 17, 1979, p. A–13)
