462 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 335. Letter 23 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 23 Washington, November 2, 1955 Dear Alex: This will be a short note, mainly to submit a few factual items. Indian Ambassador Mehta saw Mr. Robertson on October 27 to dis­ cuss certain phases of the Indian Embassy’s function under the Agreed Announcement. A memorandum of the conversation is enclosed. The Indians are inclined to bring up various hair-­splitting points although fundamentally they are obviously satisfied that all Chinese in this country are free to return to the Mainland if they wish to do so. Mehta seemed worried by what he termed evidence of fear on the part of several Chinese who have made preliminary inquiries, mostly by tele­ phone, of the Indian Embassy here and the Indian Consulate General in New York. He seems to think they fear a certain intimidation of some sort, as if they think they will be penalized in some way if their interest to return to the Mainland should be known. He wants us to find some means of giving reassurance to Chinese who may be deterred by vague fears from contacting the Indian Embassy. We pointed out to Mehta that there is no possible reason for any Chinese fearing any action by the U.S. Government if he should express a wish to return to the Mainland. We do not know of any further action which we could take to make their complete freedom to depart more explicit. Mehta also brought up the question of Chinese who are dual nationals. He wanted to know if Chinese with a valid claim to both American and Chinese citizenship are covered. He also inquired about native American wives and minor children of Chinese who wished to return and take their families with them. These questions seemed to be largely hypothetical at this stage. Hubert Graves on yesterday brought in O’Neill’s message of Octo­ ber 31 reporting the receipt of a letter from Downey. We see no reason why O’Neill should not play this straight and seek to interview Downey immediately. We are informing the British Embassy to this effect today. We are also replying to numbered paragraph 3 of O’Neill’s comments on the release of Mills and Proulx, which we received from the British Embassy on October 28. (We sent you this document as an enclosure to my last letter.) Our reply will recommend that O’Neill proceed to dispatch immediately an identical letter to each prisoner. This letter will reiterate the terms of the Agreed Announcement, and confirm the readiness of the British Embassy in Peking to contact the addressee. We 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­Informal.
