Options Identified
229
2. Two days ago the Soviets advised us in an oral note that they
had made a démarche to the Iranians urging the release of the hostages
and expressed the hope that the US would continue to act with restraint
in this matter.3 [portion marking not declassified]
3. Secretary Vance said that the US appreciated the cooperation of
the Soviet Union in some matters pertaining to Iran and took note of
the Soviet démarche to Iran several days ago. But the Secretary went
on to say that the Soviets were now undercutting this kind of useful
behavior with the Petrov article.4 [portion marking not declassified]
4. Dobrynin replied that he had not seen the article but from what
he had been told it probably reflected anxiety in Moscow about reports
of American preparations to take other measures. He said that military
action by the US would create a situation in which the question would
be raised about possible Soviet involvement. The Soviet side would
want very much for that question not even to be raised. [portion marking
not declassified]
5. Secretary Vance said that the President would exhaust all diplo-
matic means to resolve the issue, but that if any harm were done to
the hostages that would create an intolerable situation. Dobrynin said
that he understood that harm to the hostages would represent a kind
of threshold for us (Although Vance was not unconditional or explicit
on this point, it would not be unreasonable for the Soviets to infer
from what he said that if the hostages were not harmed, the US would
not resort to military force—ALH). [portion marking not declassified]
6. Dobrynin asked Vance if the US agreed that Khomeini may be
looking for a face saving way out. Vance said that if that were the case,
we had indicated that we would be prepared to work out something
with the Iranian authorities (The context in which Dobrynin asked this
question did not seem to suggest that the Soviets had their own source
of information on Khomeini’s desires for a face-saving solution, but
seemed rather to suggest a speculative line of inquiry intended to
probe US willingness to compromise rather than employ force—ALH).
[portion marking not declassified]
7. SALT—Dobrynin said that Vasev had reported to Moscow that
the Administration would not push for SALT ratification. Vance said
he was conveying to Dobrynin a decision by the President that the
Administration would indeed push for SALT ratification and would
3 See footnote 2, Document 83.
4 In the reply to the Soviet message, the United States included a formal complaint
about the article. The U.S. message was transmitted in telegram 315754 to Moscow,
December 8. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 30, Iran 12/5/79–12/9/79) It is printed in Foreign Relations, vol. VI, Soviet
Union, Document 237.
