848  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
198.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Continuity of Government/C3I
The SCC met on June 12 to review the proposals for a new approach 
to continuity of government and survival of the National Command 
Authority (see Summary of Conclusions at Tab B). All agencies fully 
support the recommendations. I have prepared a Presidential Directive 
which is drawn almost entirely from key language in the recommen-
dations made to the SCC (Tab A).2 It spells out national objectives and 
specific agency responsibilities under the supervision of a White House 
Steering Group. (C)
This is the culmination of a long effort to improve our continuity 
of government program and at the same time to remove vulnerabilities 
to the National Command Authority for control of the military forces. 
President Kennedy received a report in 1962 pointing out the system’s 
inadequacies but did nothing to improve it. President Nixon received a 
review, NSSM–58, in 1970 with the same message but failed to act.3 The 
proposed Presidential Directive, mandating a new concept for surviv-
ability and a program office to build and test it, is a step of enormous 
strategic importance and of historical significance. (C)
An ad hoc group in the Executive Office of the President (NSC, 
OMB, Hugh Carter, and the Military Office) has carried this project 
through after the Federal Preparedness Agency and the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency (FEMA) each failed to deliver. Defense, 
State, and the DCI have also been brought together to add the weight 
that FEMA cannot bring alone to this effort. Because of his strong inter-
est and support, you may want to mention this to Hugh. He has helped 
my staff keep the momentum, and he will be important in the follow-­on 
work of the White House Steering Group. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 23, PD/
NSC–58 [2]. Confidential. Sent for action. At the top of the memorandum Carter wrote: 
“Zbig. J.”
2 The draft PD was not found attached. The signed version of PD–58 is printed as 
Document 201.
3 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIV, National Security Policy, 1969–1972, 
Document 144.
