September 18–December 16, 1978 431 127. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, November 9, 1978 SUBJECT Middle East Strategy The Issue As discussed in our meeting2 Wednesday, we need to decide whether and, if so, how we relate our policies and actions in the Egypt- Israel negotiations and in U.S.-Israeli bilateral relations so as to improve chances of getting serious negotiations started on the West Bank/Gaza promptly. In the current negotiations an impasse may be shaping up, with Sadat having sent his negotiators back with instructions to insist on more explicit and far-reaching assurances from Israel concerning the West Bank and Gaza. In the light of this we need to decide: —whether we should press Sadat and Begin to conclude the treaty as soon as possible, and to that end ask Sadat to drop his insistence on most of the “linkage” points he has now raised, while asking Begin to give a bit more in this respect; or3 —whether we should support Egypt in attempting to achieve more of the “linkage” Sadat wants, recognizing that if this succeeded it could assist our own objective of getting West Bank/Gaza negotiations off to a good start, but also that it could delay conclusion of the peace treaty. —We also need to decide how we manage our response to Israel’s request for additional economic assistance so as to achieve our objectives. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 71, Brzezinski, Chron: 11/1–10/78. Secret. At the top of the document, Carter wrote: “Cy. J.” The memorandum was found attached to a November 10 covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance indicating that Vance’s memorandum was being returned to him with Carter’s annotations. 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Vance, Mondale, Atherton, and Brzezinski in the Oval Office from 10:30 a.m. to 11:10 a.m., November 8. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. 3 In the left-hand margin next to this point, Carter wrote: “hold to present language.”
