893.00/6507: Telegram
[Document 632]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, August 14, 1925—4 p.m.
[Received August 14—2:40 p.m.]
329. 1. The consul general at Canton, believing that an attack on the French and British
Concessions at Shameen by the Canton military forces is possible, asks whether it
would be advisable for the United States naval forces to unite with the French and
British forces in the defense of the island if so requested by the authorities of either
Government, or whether it would be preferable to limit their activities to aid in
removing noncombatants from danger zone and to safeguarding the property and the
lives of Americans.
2. While I do not believe in the likelihood of an attack of this sort, it seems to me that it
is none the less so obviously possible that the duty lies upon us of deciding beforehand
and authoritatively on the policy to be followed in such an event, in order that the
consul general and the senior naval officer of the American cruiser should not have to
make a decision without warning and in grave danger of extensive loss of life and of
property, on their own responsibility. This sort of a decision as to the policy to be
pursued seems the more advisable at present because of the large number of other
places in all parts of China where a situation of like nature might well occur at any
moment as a consequence of local unrest.
 
3. A distinction should be noted between the situation under consideration and that at
Shanghai where we take part in and share the responsibility for the administration and
protection of the foreign International Settlement. Insofar, however, as concerns
Shameen the French and British authorities have insisted on their own sole
responsibility.
4. It seems evident that our participation should not be warranted merely for the
protection of a French or a British concession. If we could in fact isolate this question
from other considerations, no doubt it might be possible that it would be preferable for
us to avoid involving ourselves in any sort of dispute to support anything like a
territorial claim for any other nation.
