adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission on January 27, 1926,
which reads as follows:
‘ARTICLE FIVE
Scope of the phrase “Government, official or civil employee in
the political, judicial or fiscal service” of Chile or Peru.
(A)The several registration and election boards will treat the
following government officials or civil employees as falling
within the scope of the phrase quoted at the beginning of the
present article, to wit:
1. The Presidents, Vice Presidents, Ministers, cabinet officers and
other executive officials of the two republics. 2. The Chilean
intendent [e]s. 3. The Chilean Governors. 4. The Chilean
subdelegates. 5. The Peruvian prefects and subprefects. 6. The
maritime governors. 7. The captains of ports. 8. District
inspectors. 9. The judges and the members of all courts. 10. The
fiscals. 11. Recording officers charged with the keeping of court
records and registers of all kinds; of the public record of births,
baptisms, deaths, marriages, incorporations, partnerships and
other like statistics and facts; and of records relating to the title to,
and liens on real estate. 12. Notaries public. 13. Public
prosecutors and lawyers whose public duty it is to prosecute or
defend civil or criminal actions in the courts or to give legal
advice; and persons serving permanently or for fixed periods of
time as receivers or trustees of estates or interests in litigation and
under the control or supervision of the courts; excluding,
however, lawyers who are voluntarily retained in each cause and
who serve private interests for compensation paid by the latter.
14. Officials and employees of the customs, the internal revenue
and the tax collecting services. 15. Officials and employees of the
treasury and of the financial departments of the two governments.
16. Officials and employees of the quarantine, the hygiene, and
the public health services. 17. Civilian (or other) officials or
employees who, as a regular duty or employment act, as surgeons,
physicians or dentists to the army and the navy and the military
