1124
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
key Arabs lest the negative post Camp David reaction be repeated. Oil
prices and our security framework in Southwest Asia are at stake.
—Fahd has already sent such a message to the President.6
—As early as last August when the Palestinian rights resolution
was in the Security Council, intelligence reports indicated that Arafat
recognized that the U.S. might well not be able to make serious moves
until early 1981.
—Sadat, in presenting May 25 as a “deadline” and in wanting ex-
changes with us on strategy toward the autonomy talks, might well be
on the verge of proposing some such strategy.
—If we are to move in this direction, we would want to talk along
these lines with King Hussein when he comes in the second half of
April
4. Throughout this period we will probably see continuing Israeli
moves to expand their settlements in the West Bank. This possibility high-
lights the need to consider further how we might take a stand for re-
straint of some kind on new settlements. The ideal way to achieve this
would be a sensible resolution of the land issue in the autonomy nego-
tiations. But if these negotiations were to be suspended, there would be
at least an argument for either positioning the talks so they will break
down over the settlements issue or, as one means to that end, seeking a
well-defined moratorium on specified actions during the period when
the negotiations are suspended. The Israelis would not agree, but the
issue would be clearly put.
The Decisions We Face
1. The basic decision that needs to be made is whether to press for
an autonomy agreement this year.
—One possible strategy is to press the autonomy talks as far as
they can go with the intent to bring substantive issues to a head when-
ever they are ready. This might require our putting forward our own
draft agreement at some point in some form, knowing this would pro-
duce another serious crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations. This would also re-
6 Brzezinski sent the Saudi aide me´moire containing the oral message from Fahd to
Carter under a March 3 covering memorandum. The message conveyed Fahd’s deep con-
cern that “with the end of May and the possible collapse of autonomy talks, the environ-
ment will be created for serious regional developments. In particular, the mood of any
new Arab summit is likely to be immensely more difficult than the last two. The eco-
nomic rationale for significantly lowering oil production is already being pressed with
great vigour and persuasiveness. HRH’s lack of visible political ‘support’ by Washington
on the Arab-Israeli issue compounds his constraints in these areas as well as in others re-
lated to cooperation in the face of Soviet encroachment.” Brzezinski reported the oral
comments accompanying the message “indicate that the Saudis are fearful that they will
no longer be able to support us,” to which Carter wrote: “a) That will be a decision for
HRH to make b) We are doing the best we can. J.” (Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Country File, Box 68, Saudi Arabia: 3/80)
