98  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
(2) The design of various prototype shelters, the development of 
shelter programs, and development and laboratory testing of structures, 
facilities, equipment and materials not requiring nuclear field tests.
----- $1.0 Million
(3) Studies dealing with psychological, emotional, educational and 
morale problems and determinations of tolerance limits under emer­
gency conditions; medical, food, and water requirements in shelter 
habitation; and sanitary controls to permit tolerable occupation.
----- $1.5 Millions
(4) Development of architectural designs and specifications for 
new types of multiple-­use shelters which will be attractive as well as 
practical. The Committee believes that attention should be given to the 
use of grants to schools of architecture and engineering which would 
stimulate curriculum development, training of new students, and new 
concepts of shelter design.
----- $2.0 Millions
* * * * * * * * * * * * * *
While the above program will be of highest importance in improv­
ing our capabilities to develop a comprehensive shelter system, there 
are serious unsolved problems relating to effects of nuclear attack on 
humans, including the immediate and long-­range effects of radiation, 
and to the development of measures to provide protection against or 
mitigate those effects. The Committee feels that a special assessment 
is required to determine whether present research efforts in this field 
by the several agencies of Government are reasonably adequate or 
whether further coordination or acceleration is indicated. It is therefore 
recommended that a suitable group be designated to evaluate the pres­
ent efforts and to report on their adequacy, including recommendations 
for improvement of the total national effort, if such is warranted.
b. Prototypes
$Millions
$55.4 (3 year program)
This program combines (1) engineering development of multi­
ple use shelter types, (2) exercise of Federal leadership and (3) public 
education. Each prototype will be one-­of-­a-­kind, multiple-­use where 
possible. Experience will be gained not only in design and construc­
tion, but in administration. Prototype structures will be erected on 
Government-­owned land where necessary and desirable. Costs are 
based on estimated cost of the shelter features only, except in the case of 
garages and new school prototypes, where the entire cost of the struc­
ture is included. The Federal Government will recover as much of the 
beneficial-­use value of underground garages as possible.
