382 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX afat with Saudi Arabia’s and the Crown Prince’s personal deep trust in President Carter and his administration. “I will tell him,” said Fahd, “that we did not rush to applaud or support Sadat’s Jerusalem visit or the Camp David agreements. But after careful study of the latter we’ve come to the conclusion that supporting Sadat’s and Carter’s efforts would produce such worthwhile results as no other Arab, or group of Arabs, could begin to bring about.” At this point Fahd, almost plaintively, urged me to reassure Saunders of his best wishes and appreciation. “I hope,” said the Crown Prince, “that what I’ve managed to do, and will continue to do, will make up for the stiff encounter last time with you and Saunders!” Fahd then discussed the situation in South Yemen (PDRY). He related that the PDRY President was constantly sending him messages seeking to patch up their relationship. He said he did not trust PDRY, but wanted at least to keep the lines of communication open and to continue to coordinate with the USG and the YAR. He then concluded with an emotional appeal to President Carter. “Please tell the President,” he said, “that Saudi Arabia is the real, true friend of the U.S. We have always been your friend, even in the days of Nasser. It was then that the voice of Saudi Arabia, and Saudi Arabia alone was raised in defense of the U.S. in the Arab world.” “I hope we have shown you in times passed as well as now how deep and meaningful that friendship is. It is not only a recognition of our mutual self-interest but also the mutual admiration and respect which has developed between our people as well as the leaders over the years. It has now reached its brightest point under the magnificent leadership of President Carter.” “I now ask you to plead with him for the sake of both our countries and our people to stop the Soviets from their expansion here. Draw the line and don’t let them go any further.” The Crown Prince said with obvious emphasis “Please tell the President that in us he has the most constant friend in the region. In me he has a person who is proud of this friendship. We therefore urge him not to lose sight of this friendship but, instead, to examine it and see whether or not it deserves America’s concern for our safety and security and her consequent determination to strengthen Saudi Arabia. Thus we can be more readily and adequately cooperative in driving away the Communist dangers encircling your interests and ours: so obvious even by only looking at your very clear maps!” concluded Crown Prince Fahd. “I will certainly give that message to the President,” I replied, “and while I cannot speak officially on this specific point for my government, I feel that your support of the Camp David accords will be of major assistance to our government in the formulation and implementation of the kind of Mideast policy which would meet with your satisfaction. If
