893.51/4628
[Document 532]
The Secretary of State to the American Group
WASHINGTON, June 26, 1924.
SIRS: I have received the letter of June 12, 1924, with which you enclosed a
copy of a memorandum prepared by Mr. S. F. Mayers, of the British Group
in Peking, in association with Mr. W. S. Nathan, Chairman of the British
and Chinese Corporation, Ltd., containing certain proposals in modification
of the Consortium Agreement of October 15, 1920; also a copy of a letter
dated May 23, 1924, relating to these proposals from Sir Charles Addis to
Mr. C. F. Whigham.
In view of the fact that the existing Consortium Agreement will expire in
October, 1925, the question has arisen of the advisability of continuing that
Agreement and of the possible necessity of making arrangements in the
near future to that end. I approve of the continued application to the field of
Chinese finance of the principles which that Agreement embodies, namely,
that loans made to China should be based upon sound investments, and that
this result should be assured by a mutual undertaking among the principal
national financial groups to abstain from reckless competition. While it is
no doubt true that the results of the past few years have been purely
negative, and that it is of course impossible to appraise the value of such
results, I nevertheless venture the opinion that, but for the existence of the
Consortium during this period, the financial situation of the Chinese
Government would present an even more difficult problem than it now
does. I therefore see no occasion for dissatisfaction with the policy which
has been followed, and I should welcome the making of arrangements to
continue that policy substantially unmodified.
With regard to the proposals contained in the memorandum prepared by Mr.
Mayers and Mr. Nathan, I am frankly disposed to concur in the criticism
made by Mr. Anderson in his telegram to Mr. Lamont of June 14 (a copy of
which was enclosed with Mr. Simpson’s letterito Mr. MacMurray of June
