236 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 66. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, June 23, 1958 OTHERS PRESENT General Twining General Goodpaster General Twining reported that General Cutler is recalling copies of instructions regarding the Net Evaluation Sub-Committee’s next effort in order to edit one provision. A small follow-­up study will be made after the main project, and an oral report will be given to the President on that phase. General Twining said that Secretary McElroy has read in full Admiral Burke’s testimony on defense reorganization. His general feel­ ing is that Admiral Burke had done well in his testimony, but did not go “down the line” as some of the others had. General Pate goes up to testify this week, and there is more concern regarding his appearance. General Twining next mentioned a direct leak to Hanson Baldwin of some of the proceedings in a very private meeting Mr. McElroy had held with the Chiefs and Secretaries last week, with no one else present. This matter is being pursued. Next General Twining reported that the President’s talk at Quantico had a very fine effect on the participants—­it gave them a shot in the arm in stirring up interest in the meeting, and what the President had to say, as well as his personal vigor and force in saying it, had a profound impact on the participants. The JCS are starting work tomorrow on the budget guidelines for fiscal year 1960. General Twining has told the Chiefs that if they do not turn in a satisfactory job on the guidelines, the Secretary will make the determination himself. The President referred briefly to additions that the Congress is proposing in the FY–59 budget. He said that the talk that having one more division in reserve in the United States makes a great differ­ ence in our small war capability is meaningless to him. Also, he said we are apparently planning to “kill every Russian three times” in the development of our forces for massive retaliatory attack; because the Polaris looks like a promising weapon, to be fired from under water, we are hurrying into construction of nine submarines, without appar­ ent study of the capability as a whole. Finally, he said that statements 1 Source: Defense reorganization, FY 1959 Defense budget. Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
