January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1165 tinians are very pragmatic. It is in their self-interest to cooperate in gaining a better life. Therefore, they need something attractive that we can defend. This is our best argument. Lots of Europeans have been in contact with the Palestinians. With Begin’s intransigence, these factors lead to a negative attitude of wait and see. The President said that there is another aspect which might prevail, though he hopes not. This is that the Israelis, with the support and cooperation of Egypt and the U.S., might believe they can stay where they are, and blame the entire failure of Camp David on the failure of the Palestinians to take part. We need to do two things: to move forward with Israel, and to get points more clearly defined. Second, we should do all that is possible—with President Sadat’s, Sol’s, and his influence, and to try to get Jordan—at least—and some Palestinians in the talks. Is this hopeless? We should pursue it more. And we should get a clearer picture of what is acceptable to the Palestinians. This is not a final solution, but they should join the discussions. This would put Israel on the defensive. Everyone is concerned—Israel, Jews everywhere, the United States—that Western Europe is severing itself from Israel. This is a major concern to Israeli leaders, except for Begin. If it were obvious that Jordan and the Palestinians and the U.S. and Egypt were all trying to work out an agreement on Palestinian aspirations, and gaining them a voice in their future, this would be very helpful. He thinks we have to go forward. Would President Sadat designate someone to work on the draft? President Sadat named Minister Butros Ghali and Mr. el-Baz. The President asked whether they had agreed on a communique. Secretary Vance said yes, but it had been referred for Israeli agreement. The Israelis had not yet responded. We had gone this morning to ask if it is all right to put it out. The President said that if the Israelis don’t agree, then delete the reference to the continuing negotiations. He asked if they would be meeting with the press when they left.18 Mr. Hunter said yes. The President asked whether the communique could be released later.19 Minister Butros Ghali agreed. 18 The text of the remarks made by Carter and Sadat to the press on the South Grounds of the White House beginning at 11:45 a.m., April 9, is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 622–623. 19 The communique´ of the talks, released by the White House on April 9, is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, pp. 623–624.
