3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
838
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
3. At the outset of my meeting with Gromyko at 4:45 this afternoon
(June 12), I mentioned briefly my meetings in Washington last week
with the President, the Secretary, and members of the Senate and
House committees, then stated that the Secretary had asked me to de-
liver a letter, which was the result of very careful deliberations in
Washington. Gromyko first asked his interpreter to read a translation
of the letter into Russian, then went over the English text very carefully
himself.
4. In the initial translation, the Soviet interpreter, in the second sen-
tence of the second paragraph (“accordingly, with the prompt with-
drawal of all Soviet forces . . .”) rendered the word “with” as “after”
(posle). My political counselor, who was present as notetaker, inter-
rupted to suggest that “after” was not an accurate translation and after
some discussion with the interpreter and USA Director Komplektov it
was agreed that “pri” might be a better Russian translation.
5. Gromyko stated that he would like to say the following in re-
sponse to the Secretary’s letter; the position of the USSR was set forth
very clearly and precisely in Vienna during my meeting with the Secre-
tary. I will repeat briefly the essence of that position; the Soviet Union
will be prepared to withdraw its military contingent from the territory
of Afghanistan, as it has stated many times, after—and I emphasize the
word after—the aggression and armed intrusion into Afghanistan from
the territory of Pakistan and, naturally, from Iran also, to the extent that
it is taking place from Iran, is terminated. If that termination is guaran-
teed, [omission is in the original] contingent will be withdrawn. Until
that has been done, there can be no discussion of the withdrawal of the
Soviet contingent.
6. Gromyko continued that the Soviets resolutely reject any state-
ments that the Soviet Union is interfering in the internal affairs of Af-
ghanistan, any allegation that the introduction of the Soviet military
contingent is a form of interference in Afghanistan’s internal affairs, or
any allegation that it is as if the Soviet forces created the current leader-
ship or current regime of the Afghanistan Government. “We intro-
duced our contingent in order to assist Afghanistan at repelling aggres-
sion, in order to liquidate interference in the most flagrant form—
armed interference in the affairs of Afghanistan. It is not our action
which constitutes interference; rather our military contingent is the
means of eliminating that interference, of repelling aggression.” It is in
this way that the situation must be viewed if one wishes to view it
objectively.
7. Gromyko continued by stating that one can hear from the Amer-
ican side statements to the effect that the Afghan leadership or regime
must be acceptable to other states, especially to neighboring states such
as Pakistan. Since when, he asked, do other states have the right to
