154 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III package before the end of the year.2 I would appreciate it if you could do me the personal favor of explaining the results of my meeting in Brussels to Prime Minister Fukuda, Foreign Minister Ichiro Hatayama and Finance Minister Hideo Bo. 2. On July 11, I met with EC Commission President Roy Jenkins, and Vice President Haferkamp, and Commissioners Gundelach, and Davignon to discuss how we could best implement the Summit commitment to achieve substantial progress in the multilateral trade negotiations in 1977. As you know, both President Carter and Prime Minister Fukuda were quite firm on this goal. 3. I found President Jenkins and his colleagues extremely positive and pragmatic, and very eager to infuse the multilateral trade negotiations with a sense of purpose and urgency. They recognize that an ambitious effort is needed if current protectionist pressures in Europe, the U.S. and elsewhere are to be overcome. Roy Jenkins and his colleagues assured me that they would assume personal responsibility for achieving agreement on the main elements of a substantial MTN package before the end of the year. 4. We also agreed that achievement of our goal would require a set of interim steps, and that we needed to set dates for each of these interim tasks. We agreed to seek the agreement of other MTN participants to a plan along the following lines, though we delayed announcement of the details until the Commission has had a chance to consult all the member states. A. Agreement during July on procedures for handling negotiations of agricultural issues and non-tariff issues not covered by multilateral codes or agreements. B. Agreement by October 1 on a tariff plan, including a tariff formula, language covering the treatment of agricultural tariffs, and procedures for negotiating tariff concessions with developing countries, and developed countries not applying the formula. C. By November 1 all countries would table requests for agricultural commitments and for commitments on non-tariff measures not covered by multilateral codes or agreements. D. Agreement by December 15 on draft texts for all multilateral codes and agreements to be included in an MTN package. E. By January 15, all countries would table offers in all areas of the negotiations. 2 Memoranda of conversation of Strauss’ July 11 meetings with EC officials in Brussels are in the National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Subject Files, 1977–1979, Box 3, European Community 1977.
