1979 745 assumptions about the others’ responsibilities and capabilities. As a result evacuees would not have received adequate care nor would they have been screened by customs or immigration officials. —In May, you directed a comprehensive review of mobilization planning. An interagency group under the National Security Council was formed. This group has representatives from seventeen Federal Departments and Agencies. The efforts of the interagency group are beginning to pay off in the identification and resolution of mobilization jurisdictional issues. This group will develop mobilization planning guidance for all agencies and the means for periodic assessment of capabilities. In addition, the formation of the Federal Emergency Management Agency in mid-1979 has already had a positive effect on mobilization planning and coordination at the interagency level. —Resources —We also learned that our operation plans need to be adjusted to take into account current resource limitations. For example, our plans were developed on the basis that we would have ample stocks of ammunition and equipment in Europe and that trained manpower would be available to fill all units to wartime strength and replace casualties. Moreover, as NIFTY NUGGET unfolded, the demand for transport aircraft in the several theaters far exceeded those available. Some of these resource limitations will be cured in the next several years, but operation plans should be based on current resource levels and changed when resource levels are improved. —We have already informed our Unified Commanders that fewer cargo aircraft are likely to be available. We are developing revised guidance for military operations planning that would specify resource limitations for major contingencies. NIFTY NUGGET heightened concerns about critical resource shortfalls. These deficiencies come to my attention and yours during our annual program and budget reviews. During the NIFTY NUGGET exercise these same shortfalls were portrayed for our senior military and civilian Defense officials for the first time in a simulated crisis. Because our Five Year Defense Program is designed to provide the means to respond to a crisis not unlike that simulated in NIFTY NUG- GET, the exercise has strengthened our desire to achieve the improvements contained in that five year program. In sum, readiness and mobilization are separate but complementary elements of military preparedness. We are taking actions necessary to maintain the readiness levels of our active forces, to improve readiness in our reserve forces, and to continue improving and testing our mobilization plans and procedures. Harold Brown
