Paraguay 1021 with the IADB’s subsequent operations in Paraguay, to include feeder roads off the Brazil hold and other developments aiding the exploitation of the newly-­opened fertile area of eastern Paraguay. 4. Special emphasis of the ICA should be on increasing production in the fields of stockraising and agriculture, with education and health being given second and third priorities respectively. (The Ambassador noted that in the field of education he favors more scholarships for Paraguayans to study in the U. S. and financial assistance for the construction of some normal schools in the interior of the country. He also noted that he favors the proposed ICA aid to a new public health center in Asunción but not at the expense of the more important priority of increased agricultural and pastoral production.) 5. If an expanded economic aid program becomes a reality in Paraguay, [illegible in the original] activities should be closely coordinated with the aim of making an appropriate impact on the population. The Ambassador said that in his talks with officials of the IADB he had found great sympathy for the current economic plight of Paraguay. He noted that Mr. Roger Williams, loan officer for the region, is planning a trip to Asunción about mid-November and that the Paraguayan Ambassador in Washington is returning home for consultations about the same time. He was hopeful that these consultations will result in some definite priorities and planning for Paraguay. The Ambassador said it is his impression that IADB officials are thinking of assistance to Paraguay during the first year of operations to the extent of some $5 million—with perhaps about $1 million for the National Development Institute and rest of the remainder for the hydroelectric project. It might also be necessary for the Bank to expend something on feasibility studios. [text not declassified] The Ambassador notes that save for the continuity of regular ICA technical assistance and a small food distribution program under Title III of P.L.-480 the U.S. has not given new help to Paraguay over the past twelve months. Meanwhile, most serious deterioration of the economy had occurred. He said he felt that the time is long over due for getting U.S.-Paraguayan relationships out of the doldrums. The Ambassador reiterated that he feels very strongly we ought to proceed without delay to assist the GOP with the two banks, the hydroelectric project, further road construction and with other credits as may seem appropriate to increase national production and exports. He concluded by saying that he wished to receive guidance from the Department before returning to his post since he did not wish to be placed in the position of having definite recommendations by the Embassy along the above lines repeated in Washington on grounds of the dictorship issue.
