Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Because the interplay between domestic and diplomatic goals is so clear and because it suggests at least as many opportunities as problems, I conclude with a suggestion. You might wish to allot at least one Cabinet session each quarter to an assessment and projection of where our diplomatic and domestic goals interact and how we can best minimize the damage from frictions and capitalize on the connection. Peter Tarnoff Editorial Note On June 29, 1977, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance addressed a meeting of the Asia Society in New York. Founded by John D. Rockefeller III during the 1950s, the Asia Society helped to improve American understanding of Asian cultures. Vance begin his remarks, entitled “America’s Role in Consolidating a Peaceful Balance and Promoting Economic Growth in Asia,” by noting that American prospects for “sustaining and developing relationships” with East Asian nations were more promising than at any time since World War II. The Carter administration sought to capitalize upon positive developments in U.S.-Asian relationships, while preventing negative trends that might upset the “presently favorable regional environment.” U.S. interests in Asia, he asserted, “are enduring, and they are substantial.” He continued: “I hope to leave you with these understandings: “—First, the United States is and will remain an Asian and Pacific power. “—Second, the United States will continue its key role in contributing to peace and stability in Asia and the Pacific. “—Third, the United States seeks normal and friendly relations with the countries in the area on the basis of reciprocity and mutual respect. “—Fourth, the United States will pursue mutual expansion of trade and investment across the Pacific, recognizing the growing interdependence of the economies of the United States and the region. “—Fifth, we will use our influence to improve the human conditions of the peoples of Asia. “In all of this, there can be no doubt of the enduring vitality of our country’s relationships with the peoples of Asia and the Pacific.
