August 8–September 17, 1978
183
effort to be cooperative and to ease the resolution of the problem. It also
did so to accommodate the United States. Israeli withdrawal will en-
able the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-determination.
The Egyptians find basic defects in the way this problem is presented in
the American paper. The interim arrangement envisaged in our paper
carries with it the seeds of perpetuation. It can become a permanent ar-
rangement. There is no clearcut Israeli commitment to withdraw or
how to do so. Israel is also given a prominent role in deciding the final
outcome. Granted, the American paper calls for the abolition of mili-
tary government, but Israel remains a major participant in running the
area. All authority is derived from Israel. This, el-Baz contended, ne-
gates the concept of abolishing the Israeli military government. Egypt
and Jordan, he noted, can play a role to provide additional needed se-
curity in the West Bank/Gaza.
The Secretary said that it is not correct that the American proposal
envisages the interim regime will become a permanent one. We have
spoken of an interim settlement and the participation of the inhabitants
in the determination of their own future. He drew attention to page 7,
para 2 in support of this view. The people elect the self-governing au-
thority. That authority derives its competence from Egypt, Israel and
Jordan, at such time as the latter joins. We sought to place authority in
the hands of the people through an election process. Egypt, Jordan and
Israel should have a role so that they can in a practical way set up the
authority.
Abdul Rauf el-Reedy contended that this simply creates confusion.
It can be used by the Israelis to claim that Israel is a partner in the in-
terim period. This prejudices the basic principle that authority should
derive from the people. The Secretary noted that the Egyptians believe
this and so do we, but the Israelis do not. Our belief is that the Amer-
ican formulation is a practical way to handle the problem. Nabil el-
Araby stated that as long as there is a provision that Israel is one of the
parties from whom authority is derived, Israel will claim a favored po-
sition. On page 8 of the American draft, Israeli residual rights are cited.
The Egyptians’ study of those rights suggest that the self-governing au-
thority will be limited to maintaining internal security. Others will
handle the territorial aspects.
The Secretary asked if it might be better to delete the sentence
about the source of the authority for the self-governing group. The
Egyptians readily agreed that this should be done. The Secretary said
we will consider this.
El-Baz noted that if this concept is deleted, page 9 of the American
proposal still gives the Israelis an important voice in determining the
future of the West Bank/Gaza. This should be handled through self-
determination of the Palestinian people. The Egyptians know the
