614
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
9. North/South Economic Issues
U.S. Objectives: To assure President Ceausescu that the U.S. wel-
comes a continuation of a positive North/South dialogue and to urge
a constructive Romanian role.
Ceausescu’s Objectives: To convince the U.S. of the need for estab-
lishment of the New International Economic Order espoused by the
“Group of 77”; to persuade the U.S. to be more forthcoming on the
G–77’s proposals which they believe would promote the development
of the LDC’s like Romania; and to convince us that Romania is playing
a moderating role in the G–77.
Essential Factors: Romania is the only Soviet Bloc country that is a
member of the G–77.14 By strengthening Romania’s ties to the develop-
ing countries through active participation in the Group of 77, Ceausescu
has sought to limit his country’s dependence on the Soviet Union and
CEMA, and to balance its relationship with the West. Romania was
an early proponent of the New International Economic Order. It has
supported G–77 demands that the developed countries—East and
West—make concessions to the developing countries. Romania, how-
ever, has not played a leadership role in the G–77 generally or in
meetings on specific issues.
Points to be Made:
—Assure Ceausescu that the U.S. continues to be willing to discuss
any issue of the N/S dialogue so long as negotiations on specific issues
are confined to specialized forums relatively free of political debate.
—The U.S. looks forward to the ECE regional meeting of the UN
Conference on Science and Technology for development in Bucharest
this June and the World Conference on this subject in Vienna in 1979.
We hope, however, that they will not result in the creation of new
international bodies but will utilize existing UN institutions for any
proposed program of action.
—Express U.S. views on the appropriate role of the UN General
Assembly’s “Overview Committee.”
—(If raised by Ceausescu.) Explain the U.S. position on resumption
of negotiations on a Common Fund.
10. UN Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD)
U.S. Objectives: To assure Romania that we regard the UN role in
disarmament as important, and to note our belief that SSOD objectives
should be reached by consensus agreement.
14 Brzezinski underlined “only Soviet bloc country” and “the G–77” in this
paragraph.
