1214 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 4. In implementation of subparagraph 3–­a above, it is considered that advantage should be taken of existing agencies and action chan­ nels. At present, intelligence is furnished to the Watch Committee of the United States Intelligence Board by the Department of State, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Military Services, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Atomic Energy Commission. This intelligence is quickly evaluated by the Watch Committee and its conclusions immediately given to the United States Intelligence Board which, in turn, through the Director of Central Intelligence, advises the National Security Council. The personnel and functions of these agencies (Watch Committee, United States Intelligence Board and National Security Council) are so inter-­related and organized as to provide for the most expeditious handling of and making recom­ mendations to the President on matters concerning information on the imminence of attack. It may be noted that the Watch Committee is composed of representatives from all agencies dealing with the eval­ uation of intelligence, with their superiors constituting the United States Intelligence Board, whose superiors in turn are either mem­ bers of or attend the meetings of the National Security Council. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who normally attends these meetings, ensures that the U.S. Representative to the Standing Group is kept informed. It is therefore considered that in order to provide both political and military consideration, the President, on the advice of the National Security Council, should authorize the transmittal of warning of attack messages to the Standing Group and Major Commands of NATO. It is further considered that, in view of the communications channels available to them, the Joint Chiefs of Staff should be the U.S. agency to transmit warning of attack messages. In case actual hostilities have commenced, or the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider hostilities too imminent that time is of vital importance, the Joint Chiefs of Staff should be authorized to transmit to NATO such warning of attack messages simultaneously with transmission to the President, the members of the National Security Council and the Director of Central Intelligence. 5. It is considered that, in cases of extreme urgency, when the element of time is vital (reference subparagraph 3–­b above), informa­ tion available to the United States of the imminence or actual com­ mencement of hostilities will reach the Standing Group and the Major Commands of NATO through already established intelligence proce­ dures and channels which are internationally identifiable.
