490
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
movements in the exchange market had overshot and that the current
equilibrium rate is about 200–210 yen to the dollar.
Nishiyama indicated that the GOJ “was screaming at us” and
“begging us” to do something to reduce the speculation in the ex-
change markets”.4 He made no specific request, but in response to my
question indicated it should be “something like you did for the
Germans”.5 There need be no public announcement of such U.S. steps;
the agreement could be a tacit one with periodic (e.g., semi-annual) re-
view. Nishiyama stressed the political distinction which is felt in Japan
concerning the differences between the U.S. policies toward the two
countries on this issue, but in response to my further question indicated
that they also believed that the U.S.-German agreement had stabilized
the DM market.
In return for USG help on this issue, Nishiyama said that Japan
would offer the following:
—A commitment to sell dollars to keep the yen from weakening
beyond 205:1.
—A reduction in the prime interest rate to 2 or 2½ percent, from
the present level of 3%.
—A supplementary budget in September of 4 trillion yen (about
$20 billion) instead of the 2½–3 trillion yen now under active
consideration.
—Periodic, perhaps monthly, review of developments to see if the
agreed targets were being achieved.
Nishiyama indicated that these measures would be aimed at as-
suring Japanese growth of 7% in JFY 78, compared with the current out-
look of 5½ percent, and a rate of 7½ percent in JFY 79. He strongly im-
plied that the lower supplementary budget now under consideration
might well fail to achieve the 7 percent target for JFY 78.
In response to my question, Nishiyama foresaw a Japanese current
account surplus of $16 billion in JFY 78 dropping to $6 billion in JFY 79
if growth were to reach 7% in JFY 78 and 7½% in JFY 79.
I indicated that these current account numbers were still very high,
and wondered whether anything could be done about them in the short
4 Japanese concerns about dollar depreciation were reinforced the following week.
In telegram 14808 from Tokyo, August 17, Mansfield reported on an August 16 discus-
sion of economics with Fukuda, who “closed meeting by asking me to report the concern
which he had expressed over the dollar’s decline and I of course said that I would do so. I
have no doubt that his concern is real and that he feels strongly on this matter.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780335–1005)
5 In telegram 13938 from Tokyo, August 2, the Embassy noted a statement ap-
pearing in that day’s Nihon Keizai, a Japanese business newspaper, “that the FRB has
never even once activated the swap with Japan, while it has done so in the cases of Ger-
many and Switzerland.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780315–1244)
