272  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
other countries of South America, mentioning especially his desire 
as Chairman of the Sub-­committee on Latin America of the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee to learn for himself of the situation and 
problems in the area. The President expressed his pleasure at having 
Senator Morse in Chile and at having the opportunity to talk with him. 
Senator Morse then said that he came primarily to observe and to study, 
that party politics did not enter into the consideration of policy by the 
Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate, and that he and the rest of 
his Committee hoped to develop information for an objective appraisal 
of conditions in Latin America. The President replied that he was glad 
that the Senator had come to observe but was sure that he did not need 
to study as he knew how much attention he had already given to Latin 
America. Senator Morse than said he wished to congratulate President 
Alessandri on the views expressed in his recent interview for the New 
York Times on the subject of the burden of armaments.
President Alessandri thanked the Senator and then went on at 
some length to reiterate his views with relation to this whole question 
of armaments. To a considerable degree the President repeated what he 
had said in the press interview but spelled out certain points in more 
detail. He said that Chile, by restraining its military expenditures and 
attempting to devote its resources to economic development, was, 
he felt, following a sound course and setting a good example in the 
hemisphere, but that unfortunately with certain of the neighboring 
countries purchasing arms over and beyond those provided under the 
MAP program, Chile was finding herself in a very difficult situation 
internationally. He continued that it did not seem fair that a country 
which attempted to follow a sound policy should thus, in effect, be 
penalized for such policy. The President suggested that new thought 
should be given to the MAP program as a whole as it referred to Latin 
America, to consider whether the same treatment should be given to 
countries which tied in their own defense expenditures with the MAP 
program as to those which made additional and often unnecessary 
purchases outside of the program. Similarly he felt that the lending 
agencies, both international and U.S., such as the IBRD, the IMF and 
the Eximbank, should take into account the nations’ military poli-
cies as well as their economic and fiscal management. He mentioned 
the demands made by these agencies for sound fiscal management, 
which he recognized as necessary, but then said that the same nations 
which directly or indirectly provided the foreign credits through 
the international or national lending agencies appeared to permit or 
even encourage receiving nations to undertake military expenditures 
which in reality could have just as unfavorable effects on both fiscal 
policy and economic development as unsound financial policies. The 
President said he hoped very much that Senator Morse, both directly
