Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 511 106. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 28, 1978 SUBJECT NSC Weekly Report #83 (U) 1. Opinion One of the major concerns of the other leaders present at Guadeloupe will be to obtain from you a sense of your strategic direction.2 In part, this is due to some anxiety that this Administration does not have any overall scheme, and that the United States is no longer prepared to use its power to protect its interests or to impose its will on the flow of history. (S) It is, therefore, quite critical that you use the meeting in order to share with your colleagues your thinking, especially on the level of high strategy, in addition to much more specific discussion of such issues as SALT, China, the Middle East, Iran, Africa, etc. (S) I believe that as we enter 1979, you, quite literally, have a historic chance to start shaping a new global system, with the United States as its predominant coordinator if no longer the paramount power. The fulfillment of that opportunity depends critically on how you play the China/Soviet Union issues, and also on how you respond to the deteriorating situation along the Indian Ocean. (S) The key issue is how you perceive and handle the U.S.-Soviet relationship, and how you fit your handling of that relationship into your wider strategy. There are different views of handling U.S.-Soviet relations, and important consequences flow from these differences. Your policy, as it has evolved through your speeches and actions, is quite distinctive and—I believe—historically more relevant. It is not: (S) 1. Confrontation, or renewed Cold War (e.g., Reagan): A bitter, hostile, head-on confrontation advocated almost as an end in itself. The key weakness of this approach is that the United States would eventually find itself alone in taking on the Russians, for this is too simplistic an image for the increasingly complex world. (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 6–12/78. Secret; Nodis. The President initialed the top right-hand corner of the memorandum. 2 Reference is to the January 4–9, 1979, summit meeting in Guadeloupe, which the President, Callaghan, Giscard d’Estaing, and Schmidt were scheduled to attend. Documentation on the Guadeloupe summit is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
