International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 633 exempt steel altogether from the MTN. In addition, the quotas on specialty steel originally imposed in 1976 will run for another eight months. 3) January 1979: The textile white paper announced that bilateral agreements reached under the MFA will be tightened to eliminate surges, and that future textile trade will be more closely monitored. The cost estimates in the attachment are based on existing quota and tariff restrictions, assuming estimated price differentials of 27% in textiles and 36% in apparel. If monitoring results in further restrictions, costs will of course increase. 4) ASP: On rubber footwear, we converted American Selling Price to AVE levels of protection, but offered no cuts in the resulting tariffs (which run as high as 48%). In chemicals, we excepted a number of basic chemical products from tariff cuts in order to satisfy industry fears of potential import competition. 5) Agriculture: No across-the-board tariff formula was applied. Liberalization was applied only on items specifically requested, and paid for, by our trading partners. 6) Meat: Indications are that Congress will defeat the Administration’s efforts to raise our minimum annual beef import quota from 1.2 billion pounds to 1.3 billion. As a result, beef imports probably will vary from about 5.6% to about 11% of total U.S. consumption over the next ten years. *7) Sugar quotas: A bill pending in the House would raise the U.S. sugar support price from 15 cents to 15.8 cents per pound. Conventional wisdom has it that every 1 cent increase results in an additional $500 million cost to consumers. The Administration is supporting the growers because Senator Church is holding ISA ratification hostage, but consumer groups are resisting. 8) Wine Gallon: The 15-day deferral of tax payments by the domestic industry will result in lost revenue to the Treasury, but probably not in a cost to consumers. 9) Tariff Exceptions: Textiles, leather goods, consumer electronics, and other sectors benefitted from numerous tariff exceptions which will result in higher prices to consumers, though these are not now quantifiable. *10) Escape Clause cases: Recent 201 actions3 on nuts, bolts and screws, CB radios, high-carbon ferrochrome, etc. received additional impetus from the need to head off pressures on the MTN agreements. 11) Extended Tariff Authority: Political pressure to exclude entire industries by name (textiles, steel mill products, chemicals, footwear) 3 Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974 deals with escape clause actions.
