Afghanistan 311 Government generally extends recognition and issues a diplomatic note with the appropriate language. As I mentioned in a cable sent two days ago,3 on the eve of the “Babrak Soviet coup,” we here had doubts regarding the Amin regime’s effective control over the countryside, and particularly its legitimacy in the light of its action of permitting Soviet troops to enter the country, presumably to keep itself in power. After viewing the USSR’s deplorable action of yesterday, [we] harbor even greater doubts about the new regime’s legitimacy. Moreover, it is by no means clear that the Babrak/Soviet hold on power is firm anywhere beyond Kabul. 5. Finally, as regards the new regime’s attitude towards the U.S., we have only skimpy information so far. Babrak’s initial speech contained the accusation that the “traitor” Amin was an agent of the CIA and of “fascist American imperialism.” Not surprisingly, Babrak threw the usual bouquets at the Soviet Union and other Socialist countries. Babrak also requested further “economic and military” assistance from the USSR. Based on my assessment that there really is little to choose substantively between the Khalqis and their Parchamist successors, I have no reason to believe at this point that the new regime will be any more kindly disposed to U.S. interests and programs than its predecessor. 6. On balance, therefore, I come down on the side of breaking or suspending diplomatic relations with Afghanistan. I think that we may have more to lose in U.S. prestige globally and internally too, were we to maintain a Mission here than withdrawing it. I favor however no hasty action on our part, and would counsel discreet prior consultation with our NATO allies. My surmise is that this regime will not be looking for “recognition” from anybody, as it will probably allege that what has happened merely represents an internal tiff within the party in power and in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. 7. By septel, I have recommend a temporary modest phasedown of Amcit personnel.4 Were we to decide to suspend or break relations, I must ask that this decision be closely held, and be implemented without fanfare, until almost all personnel and our personal effects are gone. None of us here relishes the prospect of losing our effects as a result of an angry reaction by a fickle, hostile government. Amstutz 3 Not found. 4 In telegram 8653 from Kabul, December 28, Amstutz recommended the temporary closure of USAID and USICA offices at the Embassy. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800001–0186)
