Human Rights 359 Administration’s policies; others doubtless are bandwagon-hopping. But they all contribute to a growing international lobby which combines its influence with our own. Most important, this increased international focus already has led to human rights improvements in several countries. Significant numbers of political prisoners have been released, in Iran, Poland, Morocco, Bangladesh, Pakistan, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Togo, Nepal, the CAE, Guinea and Indonesia. Iran and Thailand are opening trials of political prisoners for the first time. Emigration from the Soviet Union, some East European states, and Syria, has become a little easier. In some of these countries there also has been back-sliding; moreover, we often question whether an improvement is more than cosmetic. Nonetheless, the overall balance is decidedly positive. No authoritarian regime has fundamentally altered its political system, nor are the hard-core dictatorships likely to take action which they would perceive (in some cases rightly) as political suicide. But some political systems are becoming somewhat freer.14 The opposition in Brazil is increasingly active. El Salvador and Nicaragua have lifted states of seige. Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador have announced intentions to hold elections in 1978. The most notable advances in political freedom—in India, Portugal and Spain—were independent of our human rights advocacy; but democratic forces in all three seem to be taking heart from our new focus. In sum, a trend seems to have begun which could gather momentum and which already is improving the plight of individuals—including those under some still-authoritarian regimes. And since individuals are what the human rights policy is primarily about, even the scattered and partial successes registered to date are important. Moreover, even marginal reductions in repression offer more latitude to dissidents, which in turn contributes to an internal dynamic that may produce further change. It is neither possible nor very useful to specify the precise weight of our influence in these developments. The important thing is that we are contributing to an international consciousness-raising and a climate conducive to human rights improvements. Are We Jeopardizing Human Rights Anywhere? Maybe, at least in the near-term. Worry about the “destabilizing” effect of international attention to human rights may lead some authoritarian regimes to tighten domestic screws. This may already have happened in the Soviet Union and South Africa, where the governments 14 An unknown hand placed a check mark in the margin to the right of the paragraph next to this sentence.
