Human Rights
359
Administration’s policies; others doubtless are bandwagon-hopping.
But they all contribute to a growing international lobby which com-
bines its influence with our own.
Most important, this increased international focus already has led
to human rights improvements in several countries. Significant
numbers of political prisoners have been released, in Iran, Poland, Mo-
rocco, Bangladesh, Pakistan, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Togo,
Nepal, the CAE, Guinea and Indonesia. Iran and Thailand are opening
trials of political prisoners for the first time. Emigration from the Soviet
Union, some East European states, and Syria, has become a little easier.
In some of these countries there also has been back-sliding; moreover,
we often question whether an improvement is more than cosmetic.
Nonetheless, the overall balance is decidedly positive.
No authoritarian regime has fundamentally altered its political
system, nor are the hard-core dictatorships likely to take action which
they would perceive (in some cases rightly) as political suicide. But
some political systems are becoming somewhat freer.14 The opposition
in Brazil is increasingly active. El Salvador and Nicaragua have lifted
states of seige. Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador have announced intentions
to hold elections in 1978. The most notable advances in political
freedom—in India, Portugal and Spain—were independent of our
human rights advocacy; but democratic forces in all three seem to be
taking heart from our new focus.
In sum, a trend seems to have begun which could gather mo-
mentum and which already is improving the plight of individuals—in-
cluding those under some still-authoritarian regimes. And since indi-
viduals are what the human rights policy is primarily about, even the
scattered and partial successes registered to date are important. More-
over, even marginal reductions in repression offer more latitude to dis-
sidents, which in turn contributes to an internal dynamic that may pro-
duce further change.
It is neither possible nor very useful to specify the precise weight
of our influence in these developments. The important thing is that we
are contributing to an international consciousness-raising and a climate
conducive to human rights improvements.
Are We Jeopardizing Human Rights Anywhere?
Maybe, at least in the near-term. Worry about the “destabilizing”
effect of international attention to human rights may lead some author-
itarian regimes to tighten domestic screws. This may already have hap-
pened in the Soviet Union and South Africa, where the governments
14 An unknown hand placed a check mark in the margin to the right of the para-
graph next to this sentence.
