1106  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
accomplishments. She mailed us typed excerpts but apparently left out 
important parts, possibly because she is embarrassed at the evidence 
that he has broken to some extent under ­Communist pressure. We are 
trying to get a complete copy of the letter. We will let you have what is 
available in any event.
8. We still have no reply from the Indian Embassy to our appeal 
for a reconsideration. The Indian Embassy gave us the amazing infor­
mation the other day that we would probably get the reply from the 
Chinese Communists at Geneva before the Indian Embassy here had 
anything. That does not sound encouraging, but we are allowing a few 
more days before we make plans to proceed independently with the 
prisoner interviews. From this Indian reply you should probably expect 
a new attack by Wang at the next meeting on our prisoner initiative.
9. The British are about to jump entirely off the reservation on trade 
controls. They are exporting 151 “land rovers” (jeeps) to Communist 
China in defiance of the multilateral control and consultation procedure. 
We fear they will follow up with a number of tractors. Other countries 
of course will feel that they are no longer inhibited. The whole system is 
in jeopardy and we still have no firm position here on how we will deal 
with the crisis. The Communist Chinese are probably aware of the trend 
and it may make Wang less insistent on the trade issue at Geneva.
10. We have heard from FE/P that the NBC wants to have a filmed 
TV interview with you on the first anniversary of the beginning of the 
talks August 1. We have heard nothing from you on this and it may 
be a garbled report. In any event we have told FE/P that we think an 
interview along the anticipated lines would be a mistake and should 
be discouraged. We do not want to play up your success in keeping the 
talks going at this time. Judge Phleger in particular feels it would be a 
serious mistake.
11. SCA feels that it would be a good idea for Ambassador Lodge 
to make a speech on the question of the 450 servicemen. The State 
­Department is coming in for a lot of unwarranted criticism from many 
Americans who are writing in. A speech might help to clear the atmo­
sphere and FE is not opposed, assuming of course the content is right.
Regards and good wishes,
Sincerely,
Walter P. McConaughy
Enclosures:
1. Translation of circular letter to Chinese Students dated May 29, 
1956.
2. Copy of Tabulation of Information on Americans in Prison in 
Communist China
