Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
675
US has 42 defense treaties, we concluded that we had no choice but at
least to mention these special treaty obligations specifically once.
The addition to paragraph 2 c. was in our submission to you, and I
think it is consistent with what you favor. If it is not we will take it out.
The proposed alternative language for paragraph 5 is designed to
be more consistent with existing laws.
Since this issue is likely to be discussed at least in your bilateral
with Giscard, we suggest that you take a copy of this memorandum
with you and that its final issuance be delayed until your return.3
Attachment
Annotated Presidential Directive4
Washington, undated
ANNOTATED PD5
After reviewing results of the Policy Review Committee meeting
held on April 12, 1977, to discuss US conventional arms transfer policy,
I have concluded that we must restrain the transfer of conventional
arms by recognizing that arms transfers are an exceptional foreign
policy implement, to be used only in instances where it can be clearly
demonstrated that the transfers contribute to our national security
interests.
In establishing this policy of restraint, the United States will con-
tinue to utilize arms transfers to promote our security and the security
of our allies and close friends.
Recognizing that unilateral restraint can have only limited effec-
tiveness without multilateral cooperation, the United States will con-
tinue its efforts to urge other suppliers to join us in pursuing policies of
restraint. In addition, we believe that regional agreements among pur-
chasers of arms can contribute significantly to curbing the proliferation
of conventional weaponry, and we will assist in whatever way possible
in the conclusion of such agreements.
The United States will give continued emphasis to formulating
and conducting our security assistance programs in a manner which
3 Underneath this sentence, Carter wrote “Let’s do so. J” and drew an arrow to the
word “until.”
4 Secret; Sensitive. All brackets are in the original.
5 Suggested new language is underlined. Existing language to be removed is brack-
eted. [Footnote is in the original.]
