Afghanistan 207 SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS [Omitted here is material unrelated to Afghanistan.]2 The proposals on Afghanistan were discussed in detail.3 CIA representatives pointed out that they followed naturally on the actions that had already been undertaken as a result of the Presidential Finding of 3 July 1979.4 The State Department representative suggested that all further actions supporting the Afghan rebels be deferred until spring so that we could see how the insurgency fared through the winter months, but all other members of the committee felt the need to act now was urgent. The Chairman stressed the political importance of demonstrating to Saudi Arabian leaders that we were serious in opposing Soviet inroads in Afghanistan and the likelihood that a substantial commitment of assistance on our part would result in increased Saudi willingness to provide support. CIA representatives pointed out that delays of various kinds were bound to occur even under the best of circumstances but that decisions made now greatly improved the possibility that some of our aid could reach rebel forces in time to help them through the strains of the winter. (S) The committee concluded by endorsing unanimously a proposal for [amount not declassified] of additional aid for Afghan rebels, to be provided primarily through Pakistan and Saudi Arabia in the form of cash, communications equipment, non-military supplies and procurement advice. No more than [amount not declassified] of this sum will be for communications equipment. An amendment to the Presidential Finding of 3 July 1979 will be prepared. The Chairman directed CIA to undertake at an early date a briefing of senior Saudi leaders (specifically Prince Sultan and Prince Fahd) on Afghanistan and our decisions on aid for the insurgents. (S) [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] 2 For discussion of El Salvador, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XV, Central America, Document 396. Regarding the discussion of Jamaica, see Foreign Relations, 1977– 1980, vol. XXIII, Mexico, Cuba, and the Caribbean, Document 199. 3 The detailed proposals were attached at Tabs E, F, and G to Brzezinski’s memorandum to Carter (see footnote 1, above). They are printed below. 4 See footnote 5, Document 53.
