670 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 4. I assume planning for the ministerial is well along by now. It would be difficult at this stage to predict which issues will be settled at the ministerial and which at the Summit. However, if we are to make a credible claim that we have resolved all “major” START issues by the end of the Summit, I believe we need to focus on the following: — ALCM range — Sublimits on ICBM and SLBM warheads — Sublimits on mobile ICBM warheads — Schedule of reductions (if not resolved in Geneva) — Heavy ICBMs — SLCMs — PPCM installations — Non-­circumvention (see below) — Whether there will be a requirement to eliminate missiles — Follow-­on negotiations. 5. Naturally, the details of some of these issues (e.g., telemetry, PPCM) can be dealt with after the Summit in Geneva. My point is that definite progress is needed in all these areas if we plan to announce that all major issues have been resolved. I believe this can be achieved, though not without some pain on both sides. 6. Since we are coming to the end of our tether on the 32 issues, we have identified a list of about 20 additional less important treaty text issues which we may start on with the Soviets while the ambassadors are away. Below are some scattered points which you may not have picked up in recent reporting cables (in some cases because they were not there). Non-Circumvention 7. As predicted in the last O–I, the AD Ref deal on non-­circumvention has started to come unraveled. The Soviets have proposed changing “existing patterns of cooperation” to “obligations of cooperation existing at the time of treaty signature.” This would narrow the concept to those agreements that exist in writing, e.g., the Polaris sales agreement, and may not be consistent with our broader pledge to maintain the UK nuclear deterrent as contained in our talking points last December. This subject will definitely come up at the ministerial and I believe our side should be prepared to deal with the following questions: — What exactly are the existing patterns of cooperation between the U.S. and the UK? — What U.S.–UK cooperation beyond the trident program is to be allowed? — Does the U.S. have existing patterns of cooperation with any countries other than the UK? — Does the USSR have any existing patterns of cooperation with other countries?
