Arms Control and Disarmament 1249 We discussed my suggestion that the President, in connection with the opening of the present series of nuclear tests, might state that follow­ ing this the United States did not intend to have further tests for a period of two years or substantially the duration of his Administration. I pointed out in this connection the estimate of the Intelligence community that Khrushchev might announce a voluntary suspension of testing within the next two or three days and that this would put us in an awkward position vis-­à-­vis world opinion. I pointed out that good world opinion was vital to our cause in the long run and over the broad aspects of the problem which involved more than winning a military war. I expounded the matter along the lines of the annexed draft, although I did not give the President a copy of this. Copies had, however, been given to Messrs. Strauss and Quarles. The proposal was strongly opposed by Strauss, Quarles and Twining and to some extent by McElroy. The President raised the question as to whether the matter might be handled in a less formal way, indicating a more or less routine admin­ istrative announcement. However, there appeared to be difficulties also in that way, and in the end we let the proposal drop. I was impressed particularly by a suggestion made by General Twining that our allies might feel that we have become frightened. I also felt that without adequate preparation Macmillan and Adenauer might perhaps be embarrassed and feel that we had played into the hands of their political enemies. Admiral Strauss presented an alternative proposal in the form annexed. I expressed the opinion that this would not have much of a public relations aspect because it seemed to be a repetition of our whole “cut-­off” theme. Also whereas it was within our own administrative dis­ cretion not to have another series of tests for two years or whatever time we determine we could not alter our agreed disarmament proposals as this would involve action without negotiation with our allies which would make it impossible for us to anticipate the possible Soviet action. JFD Attachment Draft Presidential Statement After reviewing and confirming plans for nuclear testing in the Pacific this summer, President Eisenhower announced today that he did not intend (for 2 years thereafter) to authorize any additional test­ ing of nuclear weapons. The President believes that this policy is con­ sistent with the security interests of the United States. The President said that the Free World could take sober satisfaction in the contributions which the next test series will make to the defense
