216
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
a. The recent mutiny of at least elements of an Afghan army division
near Kabul. Based on reports of the duration and scale of the measures
to suppress it, this latest mutiny appears to be the most serious break
yet in the cohesiveness of the Afghan army. Whether and where another
uprising might take place must concern the Soviets. The worst case
they probably envisage is a defection (as opposed to a mutiny) of one
or two whole divisions to the Muslim insurgency. A military coup
could be accommodated by the Soviets, but a major defection could
cause the entire situation to become unravelled, making the Soviet
options even more unpleasant than they are at present. [classification
marking not declassified]
b. Information that on 17 October, shortly after the mutiny, a meet-
ing of the highest [less than 1 line not declassified] was held to discuss
Afghanistan. [classification marking and codeword not declassified]
c. Information that Pavlovskiy was still in Afghanistan on 19 Octo-
ber apparently awaiting some decision or orders. [classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified]
Activity at Kushka and Termez
9. Beginning in [less than 1 line not declassified] imagery of the Kushka
ground force installation began to show substantial amounts of ground
force equipment in the nearby rail transshipment area. Initially, it was
difficult to ascertain whether equipment was coming in or going out.
By early September, however, it appeared that the entire garrison had
been vacated. While a full interpretation must await a detailed imagery
analysis, the types and amounts of equipment suggest that at a mini-
mum a motorized rifle regiment, an artillery unit, an anti-aircraft unit,
and some combat support units had moved out. The destination was
unknown at the time, but later evidence indicated that a major field
training exercise was underway. About [less than 1 line not declassified]
later, the same types of units appeared to have begun returning to the
garrison. By [less than 1 line not declassified] all units apparently were
back. [classification marking and codeword not declassified]
10. [1 line not declassified] SWS cannot make any firm judgements
as to what transpired. While the activity appears to be only exercise-
related, we also believe the evidence suggests the forces at Kushka
may have been augmented. [classification marking and codeword not
declassified]
11. In any event, the units at Kushka were believed to be in a
Category III (or Cadre) manning status prior to the recent activity. To
undergo a field training exercise of the scale and duration of what
appears to have taken place in the last month would have required
the call-up of a substantial number of reservists. In a sense, the units
were in a “mobilized” status at least for the past month. We believe a
