334
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—2. The parties agree to the stationing of United Nations per-
sonnel in areas described in Annex I. The parties agree not to request
withdrawal of the United Nations personnel and that these personnel
will not be removed unless such removal is approved by the Security
Council of the United Nations, with the affirmative vote of the five per-
manent members, unless the parties otherwise agree.
—3. A joint commission will be established to facilitate the imple-
mentation of the treaty, as provided for in Annex I.
Article V
Freedom of Navigation
—1. Ships of Israel, and cargoes destined for or coming from Israel,
shall enjoy the right of free passage through the Suez Canal and its ap-
proaches through the Gulf of Suez and the Mediterranean Sea on the
basis of the Constantinople Convention of 1888, applying to all nations.
Israeli nationals, vessels and cargoes, as well as persons, vessels and
cargoes destined for or coming from Israel, shall be accorded non-
discriminatory treatment in all matters connected with usage of the
canal.
—2. The parties consider the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba
to be international waterways open to all nations for unimpeded and
non-suspendable freedom of navigation and overflight and undertake
to respect each other’s right to such navigation and overflight.
Article VI
Priority of Obligations
—1. Each party ensures to and agrees with the other, in recognition
of the parties’ commitments to each other in this treaty, that there will
be no conflict between its obligations under this treaty and any of its
other obligations, including those under any other international agree-
ment, whenever made. Each party also assures the other that it will re-
spect its obligations under the United Nations Charter in its dealings
with all states.
—2. The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under the present treaty.
—3. They further undertake to take all the necessary measures for
the application in their relations of the provisions of the multilateral
conventions to which they are parties, including the submission of ap-
propriate notification to the Secretary General of the United Nations
and other depositories of such conventions.
—4. This treaty does not affect and shall not be interpreted as af-
fecting in any way the rights and obligations of the parties under the
Charter of the United Nations.
