August 8–September 17, 1978
159
(g) Applying the principle of free passage to transit through the
Straits of Tiran.
(h) The establishment of relations of peace and good-neighborly
cooperation among the Parties.
11. In all of the negotiations described above, they will explore
possibilities for regional economic development in the context of both
transitional arrangements and final peace treaties, with the objective of
contributing to the atmosphere of peace, cooperation and friendship
which is their common goal.
12. A Claims Commission will be established to adjudicate claims
made by either side against the other.
13. The United States shall be invited to participate in the talks on
matters related to the modalities of the implementation of the agree-
ments and working out the time-table for the carrying out of the obliga-
tions of the Parties.
14. The Security Council shall be requested to endorse the Peace
Treaties and ensure that their provisions shall not be violated.
15. The Permanent members of the Security Council shall be re-
quested to underwrite the Peace Treaties and ensure respect for their
provisions. They shall also be requested to conform their policies and
actions with the undertakings contained in this Framework.
41.
Memorandum for the Record1
Camp David, September 9, 1978
At his request, Weizman saw Sadat this morning.2 He asked the
following questions:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 8, Camp David [Summary]: 9/6–9/78. Secret. Carter wrote that Begin had
asked him at the end of their meeting on September 8 (see footnote 21, Document 28), “if
it was possible for Weizman to meet with Sadat regarding the four items concerning the
Sinai. I told him that all five items, including the settlements, should be discussed between
them, that I was on my way to Sadat’s cabin and would arrange for the meeting he had
suggested.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 367) Quoting from his personal notes made at the
time of the summit, Brzezinski wrote of the meeting in his memoirs: “In the meantime
just had word that Weizman went to see Sadat to discuss the outstanding issues between
the Egyptians and Israelis and also he proposed to them that they cut a deal leaving us
out of it. Apparently, Sadat refused all of these requests.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle,
p. 259)
2 For Weizman’s account of this meeting, see Weizman, Battle for Peace, pp. 359–362.
