before authorizing participation in another joint action in protection of the
Canton customs.
3. Jenkins’ recent reports would indicate that the Sun government is
completely under domination of Soviet agents. If this is so an initial success
at Canton in defying the treaty powers’ contention regarding the customs
would dangerously assist Soviet agents in their endeavor to incite Chinese
to repudiation of all treaties. I assume that seizure of customs at Canton
would leave Chang Tsolin to seize Majichurian customs which he has
already threatened (see my telegram 375, October 2, 4 p.m.33 ) Incidentally
Manchuria also has become important sphere of Soviet activity. From this
standpoint additional weight seems given to the Department’s views
respecting insuring of Maritime Customs as essential to whole system of
treaty rights (see Department’s telegram 243 December 5, 192334 ).
4. There is reason to fear that the apparent efforts of the Soviet Government
to achieve the disintegration of China as a national entity are regarded with
favor by the Japanese Government at least as concerns Manchuria. I
therefore apprehend Japanese reluctance to cooperate again in protection of
the Canton customs lest precedent be set requiring Japanese participation
later in international support of the Central Government against Chang Tso-
lin. Japanese cooperation at Canton therefore seems essential.
5. Although total American portion 1900 indemnity has now been remitted I
assume the American Government still asserts former interest in the
integrity of the customs based not only on general grounds but also on
actual claim to revenues as secondary security for unpaid obligations owed
to American citizens.
6. In view of these various considerations and in spite of Jenkins’ report of
imminent action by Sun I have telegraphed him and the commander in chief
of the Asiatic Fleet as follows:
“October 20, 5 p.m. Your telegram October 19, 1 p.m. American
vessels should not take forcible measures to prevent seizure
customs until further instructed and unless British, French and
