772 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX President Sadat said he had received a message from Begin.7 He would show it to him. Dr. Brzezinski said it was psychologically important not to exclude Begin from visiting Cairo, or you from visiting Jerusalem. President Sadat said we will be good neighbors, and we have no objection if he comes here. However, the whole show is Carter and for that reason he had suggested signing all three of them in Washington. He then read the message from Prime Minister Begin which indicated that the Washington signing was acceptable, with two additional signings in Cairo and Jerusalem, with the order to be determined later. President Sadat then read his proposed answer which was that “All that President Carter told you, as you mentioned in your message is correct and I 8 everywhere. My statement about signing three copies in Washington was motivated only by the fact that it was entirely a Carter show. Until we meet in Washington, please accept my warmest wishes and congratulations.” Dr. Brzezinski said it was especially President Sadat and Carter, since you started the process by your trip to Jerusalem.9 Mr. Christopher said I am very reassured. I am sure the President will be also. I assume the modalities will be agreed upon in Washington. President Sadat said yes. He said you have seen my people. Dr. Brzezinski said they are your great strength. Mr. Christopher said the treaty is also extremely popular in the United States. President Sadat said yes and the whole world, except among the Arabs. Referring to the Mubarak visit to Saudi Arabia10 he said that he 7 The message, sent by Begin to Sadat through Lewis on March 16, conveyed the substance of an exchange between Begin and Carter on the sequence of the signing ceremonies for the Arabic, English, and Hebrew versions of the peace treaty. Begin agreed with Carter’s suggestion that Washington should serve as the first signing location for the peace treaty and also stated his willingness to go to Cairo to sign the Arabic version before Sadat came to Jerusalem to sign the Hebrew version. (Telegram 5309 from Tel Aviv, March 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–2640) 8 Text missing in the original document. The final version of Sadat’s message, conveyed to Begin through Eilts and Lewis on March 18, reads: “All that President Carter told you, as you mentioned in your message, is correct and I will honor every word of it. My statement in saying that the three copies should be signed in Washington was motivated solely by the fact that it should be President Carter’s show. Until we meet in Washington, please accept my warmest wishes and congratulations.” (Telegram 5486 from Cairo, March 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790126–0268) 9 See footnote 3, Document 4. 10 On instructions from Sadat, Mubarak visited Jidda and Riyadh on March 15, following meetings with Numeiri in Sudan, in order to discuss the peace treaty with Saudi officials. The same day, Sadat briefed Eilts on the talks, described by the Egyptian President as “more than good.” Sadat reported that Fahd proposed to Mubarak a “joint plan”
