1068  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
34. I said Wang’s statement morning well as previous statements 
made clear he apparently did not consider his Dec 1 applied dispute 
Taiwan area. This one of very ambiguities that draft I attempted clear up 
in my April 19. If there agreement with me on unambiguous unquali­
fied untime-­limited declaration on renunciation force including Taiwan 
area well as elsewhere, would be no grounds for rejecting my April 19. I 
regretted he not yet willing accept this simple straightforward proposal 
so we could resume progress talks.
35. Wang said on his part already made large progress. Progress 
will depend on attitude US Government towards this entire problem. 
Wang hoped at next meeting I would be able make remarks furthering 
progress.
36. I replied I had nothing more morning. Wang suggested we 
meet Thursday 28. I agreed.
Gowen
Note: Mr. Waddell’s office(FE) notified 6/22/56 12:20PM. EMB (CWO)
662.	 Letter 38 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 38
Geneva, June 20, 1956
Dear Walter:
First, Ekvall has not heard anything concerning extension of his 
orders and his time is up on June 30. It is putting him in a difficult posi­
tion with regard to extending the lease on his house, etc.
Next, I received the guidance for tomorrow’s meeting this morn­
ing and appreciate it very much. I plan to open with implementation, 
attacking his position at the last meeting but in a fairly low key and see 
where it leads. Incidentally, with respect to renunciation I find that the 
correspondents here really do not understand what the fuss is all about. 
The American correspondents accept what we say on faith but really do 
not understand it and the foreign correspondents are more skeptical. 
One of the difficulties I find is that by emphasizing the “slightness” of 
our April 19 changes to their December 1 draft the question is raised 
as to why then their December 1 draft, if not ideal, is nevertheless not 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­Informal. 
Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The two postscripts are handwritten.
