1218
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Make the North-South dialogue on disarmament more construc-
tive, winning greater Third World support and understanding for our
goals—particularly in the areas of conventional arms transfer restraints
and non-proliferation, endeavoring, in turn, to be responsive to Third
World concerns about self-restraint by the nuclear powers and access to
peaceful nuclear technology;
—Preserve the integrity of existing multilateral negotiating forums
such as the CCD while maintaining flexibility with regard to proposals
for procedural changes which may be proposed to meet Non-Aligned
desires for a more substantive role;
—Establish, through the program of action to be adopted by the
SSOD, a positive but realistic arms control and disarmament agenda
for the next few years;
—Maintain a common position to the extent possible with our
allies on arms control matters and if the opportunity arises, encourage a
more forthcoming French and Chinese attitude to arms control initia-
tives of particular importance to US;
—To the extent possible, utilize the SSOD to give new impetus to
arms control negotiations;
—Gain greater public support—in the US and abroad—for arms
control and disarmament and better explain our various efforts and re-
late them to one another.
—To resist the initiatives of others that might be inimical to basic
US security interests or to effective, practical, and verifiable arms con-
trol agreements.
—Counter Soviet efforts to use SSOD as a propaganda vehicle.
—Discourage and when necessary oppose impractical or mis-
guided arms control initiatives which would not be in the interest of the
United States, our allies or the international community.
3. General Guidance.
The US Del should promote the objectives set forth in para. 2 above
seeking appropriate opportunities to do so in major policy statements,
in negotiations on SSOD final document, and in informal meetings
among Delegations. Del should continue to consult closely with the key
players, and in particular with our allies. While the principal allied con-
sultative mechanism will continue to be the Barton Group,2 the
Western Group of CCD members (US, UK, FRG, Italy, Netherlands,
Canada, Japan) will meet as required but has agreed to limit its agenda
to machinery issues related to the CCD. The US should not object to
discussing other issues in the Western Group if there is agreement to do
so. In addition, Del should maintain close bilateral contact with UK,
FRG and French. Consultations with the Soviets will also be important,
particularly with respect to nuclear issues and other issues currently
under negotiation bilaterally. While we should stay in close touch with
the Soviets on issues related to CCD organization in general and the
2 The Barton Group was a group of Western nations who met to consider arms con-
trol and disarmament policy in anticipation of the SSOD.
