German Democratic Republic —Prosecutions and investigations against leading dissidents such as Havemann and Heym based on currency charges stemming from their publication of writings in the FRG. —Expulsion of Heym and eight other writers from the Writers’ Union. —Most recently, on June 28, adoption of a series of laws apparently aimed at further isolating Western journalists and providing the state with new legal weapons to use against East Germans who maintain contact with the Western media or with other institutions in the FRG; these laws include an addition to the criminal code on “treasonable provision of news” (Landesverraeterische Nachrichtenuebermittlung) that subjects to imprisonment for two to twelve years whomever “passes, gathers on their behalf or makes available” to a “foreign power, a foreign power’s institutions or representative, or to a foreign organization as well as to the helpers of a foreign organization” material described as “news that is not subject to being kept secret” but that is subjectively determined to be not in the interests of the GDR. Whoever “takes up contact with or offers himself to work with these organizations or persons or in other fashion supports these organizations or persons” may be imprisoned for one to ten years. Another law appears directed at the sending of manuscripts or recordings to the West. Human Rights Dialogue with the GDR Our efforts to establish a solid basis for ongoing discussion of human rights with the GDR have been hampered, as with so many other issues, by the newness and low level of relations. I attempted to explain the humanitarian basis of our concern and our non-ideological approach during my visit to East Berlin in October, 1978.3 I dealt more specifically with several issues, including family reunification, pressure on dissidents such as Havemann and Heym, and anti-Western propaganda in the schools when I had a second meeting with Deputy Foreign Minister Nier in Washington in May.4 Jim Goodby also laid the basis for detailed discussion of certain Helsinki Final Act issues including family reunification and the restrictions on journalists when he conducted CSCE consultations in November, 1978 and during Dr. Nier’s May visit.5 I have discussed with Ambassador Bolen and given considerable thought to the best means to build on these initial efforts and accustom the GDR over time to dealing with us on human rights-related issues. 3 See Document 123. 4 See Document 127. 5 See Document 129.
