Eastern Europe Region 17 monitoring group in the USSR has also praised the efforts of the East European dissidents.4 The impact of such statements is to buttress the concept of a common cause among the dissidents and to encourage them to believe that they are not alone in their efforts. Such expressions of mutual support may also persuade the Soviets, who are not known for their objectivity on such matters, that a “plot,” involving a network of dissidents of several countries and possibly with outside support, is in existence. The Question of Popular Support It seems safe to assume that there is a reservoir of popular sympathy, if not support, for the dissidents. After all, they stand in opposition to the regimes, and we have reason to believe that the people of Eastern Europe, in varying degrees, are disenchanted with both those who rule them and the system in which they live. We know that the dissidents, most of whom are members of the intelligentsia, have tried to reach out to the wider community. In Poland, the Workers Defense League was so named precisely for this reason. In Czechoslovakia, the Chartists have been trying to speak to the interests of the working class; a letter released in late March talked about the trouble that Czech workers had in making a living and other working class themes. (Ironically, at the same time the Czechoslovaks were deemphasizing human rights in favor of more prosaic concerns, the Poles were headed in the opposite direction. In late March, another organization—“Movement for the Defense of Human and Civil Rights”—was created in Poland. Was this an admission that the direct overtures to Polish workers by the League was a failure? Or perhaps too dangerous?) Whatever our presumptions about the likelihood of shared attitudes between the dissidents and the people, the fact is that there is little evidence that the people have either tangibly supported the dissidents or are prepared to do so. The dissidents themselves make no great claims of having the allegiance, loyalty, or support of the worker or other groups. There has been no significant student agitation, one key barometer of unrest. The dissidents have not, for the most part, attempted to establish direct personal contacts with various segments of the population by such means as speeches in factories and the dissemination of circulars. Such actions, of course, would be considered incitement and thus subject to punishment. Many East Europeans, recalling the events in Hungary in 1956 and in Czechoslovakia in 1968, would doubtless believe it futile to show support for the dissidents, even assuming that an issue would come 4 This paragraph concluded the pages forwarded by Brzezinski with his June 16 memorandum to Carter. See footnote 2 above.
