Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 No other part of our nation has done more than the Western States to assist those already here. Despite the growing dimensions of the problem, I hope that the spirit of American compassion will not allow us to turn our backs on those still in desperate need of help. The Indochina refugee dilemma is the most visible aspect of our human rights efforts. But the drama and urgency of that situation should not obscure the fundamental actions of the United States in promoting the dignity and rights of people in all nations. We will continue to speak out in appropriate fashion when we feel that human dignity is being diminished or those rights abridged, and we believe that real progress has been made in some countries with which we have long had, and intend to maintain, very close ties of friendship. The other humanitarian concern I would like to mention—one long predating the refugee problem—is the state of agriculture, which remains the weakest link in the Asian development scene. Surveys by the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank indicate that improvements in rural living standards in much of non-Communist Asia lag further behind the modernized industrial sector. There are also serious food shortages and nutritional deficiencies in some areas. For example, one-third of last year’s entire world trade in rice—well over 2 million tons—went to Indonesia. This is a genuine cause for concern. In the short term, the United States and other donors can do much to alleviate the food shortages and malnutrition plaguing some Asian countries. In the long run, the answer lies in the development and modernization in the rural economies of Asia. The United States can make a large contribution to this process with carefully directed development programs supported by PL–48010 and assistance by the Agency for International Development, support for agricultural development projects sponsored by international lending institutions, and the transfer of appropriate technology and capital to the rural sector. We are working closely with the ASEAN countries to achieve just this sort of development. Japan is also aiding in this effort. In sum, Asia today presents both challenges and opportunities for Americans. We are an integral part of the process of change in the region because of our history, our geography, and because of shared values and interests. We will always be a power in the region, but we realize that power must be newly defined and redefined as circumstances evolve. In Asia and the Pacific, it now largely means cooperation not only with old friends but, if they wish, with old adversaries. Our interest and involvement in the region will remain, but the shape and size of that involvement will continue to adapt.
