976 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement locally available will be limited, in light of the difficulties encountered in many underdeveloped nations in developing major military forces, and particularly in becoming proficient with advanced military equip­ ment. Another and more important factor is the growing use and flex­ ibility of UN and other international machinery. The UN seems likely to be increasingly effective in calming situations and facilitating settle­ ments. Moreover, world opinion as experienced in the UN will have to be taken more and more into account by major powers considering intervention in local conflicts. 71. Any spread of nuclear weapons to the underdeveloped areas could, of course, have incalculable consequences for the likelihood and scope of local conflicts. However, we do not believe any of the under­ developed countries could or would produce its own weapons, even on an initial basis, if for no other reason than expense and prevail­ ing world opposition to nuclear testing. Nor do we believe Western Europe would be a source; the sole possible exception, France sup­ plying Israel, would involve the risk of triggering Soviet nuclear sup­ port to the Arab States. Except possibly in such a case, we believe that the Soviets for a variety of reasons would not make nuclear weapons available to underdeveloped countries. B. Prospects for Particular Areas 72. From these general points, we turn to an appraisal of the pros­ pects for particular areas, taking into account local stages of develop­ ment and other factors that could operate to affect stability and the chances of Communist success. As noted in Section III, the Far East and Southeast Asia present special cases because of the Chinese Communist threat. 73. Middle East. For the short-­run, the outlook for Western influ­ ence in the Arab World has improved, in large part because Nasser and other Arab nationalist leaders are becoming increasingly aware of the Communist threat.10 Basic Western interests—access to oil and the maintenance of reasonably stable non-­Communist governments—are not incompatible with those of the Arab States themselves. Yet the Arab nations will almost certainly continue to seek economic aid from both sides, and there will remain the possibility of chaotic developments in any one country (Iraq at present) or of conflict between countries. Such developments or a resurgence of the deeply rooted Arab-­Israeli conflict would present serious dangers of further Communist inroads. Beyond the Arab World, the situation in Iran is precarious and could turn chaotic. Moreover, continued political instability coupled with Soviet 10 For a more complete discussion, see the recent NIE 30–59, “MAIN CURRENTS IN THE ARAB WORLD,” dated 25 August 1959. [Footnote is in the original.]
