September 18–December 16, 1978 261 6. I responded that I had been pondering the problem and I wanted to describe to him the situation as I saw it. The public in both our countries had been promised the text of a letter on a settlements freeze which would be made public. It was obviously important that the Prime Minister’s complete recollection of that evening’s meeting be brought to the attention of the President. However, I had serious doubts whether the letter he had read to me should be made public. If it were, the press in both countries would dissect every word of the message and our differences would become more and not less serious. Further, if Begin sent the President such a letter, and it were made public, the President would surely be compelled to state publicly in a letter to the Prime Minister his conviction that Begin had agreed to the U.S. language. He would doubtless also restate the U.S. position on the settlements freeze, perhaps with much more specificity. 7. I continued that the President’s notes, which the Prime Minister had seen, made no rpt no mention of Begin’s desire to think the matter over until the next morning. The President did not recall that Begin had spoken those words. 8. Moreover, and on the basis of the President’s conviction that the Prime Minister had committed himself to the U.S. formulation, Sadat has signed the Camp David Agreements. Thus, the President’s own credibility with Sadat was at stake. 9. Begin then said that it was not necessary to publish the lengthy letter he had read to me earlier, although he stressed it was important that the President be personally aware of the way he remembered the September 16 conversation and of the “minutes” of the conversation kept by Barak. Instead, a shorter message to the President could be sent and published which simply stated the Israeli position on the settlements freeze. Pulling another piece of paper from a stack in front of him he read me the following draft language: Begin text Dear Mr. President I have the honor to inform you that during the agreed period of negotiations (three months) for the conclusion of the peace treaty no new settlements will be established in the area by the Government of Israel. Sincerely yours, Menachem Begin End text. 10. I told Begin that language got nowhere near solving our mutual problem. Something had to be said about the period after the three month freeze. I told Begin I had written out some language in the car on the way up to Jerusalem which I wanted to try out on him although it had no status whatever in Washington. Could he agree to the following two sentences being added to the one sentence he had just read me. Begin text: It is my hope and expectation that, during this same period
