August 8–September 17, 1978 67 9. Connected to the settlements issue is the potentially explosive question of land ownership. Under Ottoman law, which was unchanged by the Jordanians, all land not built upon or cultivated is considered to be public land. Perhaps a formula could be found whereby Israelis would have the right to acquire land in the West Bank and Gaza, subject to agreement by the interim administration. 10. Presentation is all important. Any interim administration to have any hope of success must not appear to be warmed-over Begin plan2 but a transition to a “better day.” Similarly, Hussein and supporters on the West Bank should be seen to enter the negotiating process reluctantly in order to safeguard Arab interests and not primarily on behalf of the Hashemite regime. PLO reaction would obviously be important here. If Israel is willing to make concessions outlined in para 7, PLO opposition in our judgment would not be decisive concerning moderate West Banker participation. Newlin 2 See footnote 2, Document 5. 23. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated OPTIMAL OUTCOME FOR CAMP DAVID Overall Far-reaching understandings on the following five elements of a peace settlement: (1) arrangements for a transitional West Bank/Gaza 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 13, Middle East—Negotiations: (7/29/78–9/6/78). Secret; Nodis. The paper was found attached to an undated covering memorandum from Vance to Carter stating that this was a “refined version” of the paper “that we discussed at lunch today.” (Ibid.) Reference is presumably to Carter’s September 1 luncheon meeting with Mondale, Vance, Brown, Jordan, Brzezinski, Eilts, and Lewis to discuss the Camp David talks. The luncheon took place from noon to 1:11 p.m. in the Roosevelt Room at the White House. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No other record of this meeting has been found. Carter noted in his personal diary on August 31: “All the briefing books from the State Department, NSC, and CIA had set our expectations too low. I want to insist to the Middle East leaders that we resolve as many problems as possible at Camp David, not just come out with a declaration of principles leading to further negotiations.” (White House Diary, p. 215)
