100
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
The British Government has also informed the United States that it
does not contemplate the use of force in Iran, without prior consulta-
tion with the United States, except in the event that it becomes abso-
lutely necessary in order to protect the lives of British subjects.
B—Action Taken by the United States
1. The British Government has now come to the conclusion that the
Iranian desire for nationalization of its oil resources cannot successfully
be denied, and is willing to negotiate. It therefore appears to be in the
national interest of the United States to support the British by all appro-
priate means. It has accordingly:
a. Urged repeatedly on the Iranian Government both in Tehran
and through its diplomatic representatives in Washington the need for
negotiation and has pointed out the great difficulties Iran would face in
trying to operate the oil fields and refinery if the British company were
removed. It has also stressed its strong opposition to the unilateral can-
cellation of valid contracts and attempts by the Iranian Government to
settle a serious international controversy unilaterally. The Iranian Gov-
ernment has been told that this position does not mean that the United
States opposes Iran’s desire for control of its own resources.
b. Made its position in this matter public through a release to the
press on May 18.3
c. Stressed to the British Government the need for proceeding with
caution and moderation.
2. With respect to the general situation in Iran, the United States
has:
a. Instructed the American Ambassador in Iran to make clear to the
Shah American support for him. This support will be demonstrated by
concrete assistance in the form of continued economic, military and
technical aid, and the Ambassador was authorized to inform the Shah
3 In a statement released to the press on May 18, the U.S. Government commented
on the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute. “The United States wants an amicable settlement to this
dispute, which is serious not only to the parties directly concerned but also to the whole
free world,” the U.S. emphasized its neutral, though engaged position. To that end, the
U.S. advised the British to recognize “Iran’s expressed desire for greater control over and
benefits from the development of its petroleum resources.” To the Iranian Government
the U.S. “pointed out the serious effects of any unilateral cancellation of clear contractual
relationships which the United States strongly opposes.” The statement also underscored
that the United States had attempted to impress upon the Iranian Government the tech-
nical aspects of the oil situation. “In this connection, we have raised the question of
whether or not the elimination of the established British oil company from Iran would in
fact secure for Iran the greatest possible benefits. We have pointed out that the efficient
production and refining of Iranian oil requires not only technical knowledge and capital
but transport and marketing facilities such as those provided by the company.” For the
complete text of this statement, see Department of State Bulletin, May 28, 1951, p. 851. See
also Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954, pp. 56–57 (Document 23).
