648
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
soon as key appointments have been made, a task force should be
formed to develop such an integrated strategy under a tight time
schedule—two to three months. This should be done in coordination
with key members of the Congress.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to food policy.]
208.
Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter intended to pursue both bilateral and mul-
tilateral approaches to solving the problem of world hunger, as he out-
lined in a January 20, 1977, videotaped address to the world commu-
nity. Broadcast to 26 nations by the United States Information Agency
on Inauguration Day, the message stressed Carter’s “desire to shape a
world order that is more responsive to human aspirations.” “The
United States alone,” he asserted, “cannot guarantee the basic right of
every human being to be free of poverty and hunger and disease and
political repression. We can and will cooperate with others in combat-
ing these enemies of mankind.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Docu-
ments, January 24, 1977, pages 89–90) For additional information, see
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance outlined the Carter administra-
tion’s foreign assistance program, including the use of food aid, in testi-
mony to the Subcommittee on Foreign Operations of the Senate Com-
mittee on Appropriations on February 24, 1977. Vance explained that
the administration’s foreign assistance programs “are diverse in sub-
stance, serve a variety of objectives, and are aimed at a wide range of
targets.” Underscoring the interdependent world of the late 1970s and
its burgeoning global concerns, Vance then commented: “We cannot ef-
fectively promote multilateral diplomacy, control the proliferation of
nuclear arms, defuse international terrorism, reduce the buildup of
conventional weapons, or protect our security interests in the oceans or
space in a hungry, angry, and bitter world. We can achieve cooperation
on these security issues only if we are doing our fair and reasonable
share in the process of international development cooperation—only if
we are seen as encouraging, not frustrating, the development aspira-
tions of others.” The Secretary subsequently indicated that the adminis-
tration planned to budget $1.4 billion for Public Law 480 commodities
for fiscal year 1978. (Department of State Bulletin, March 14, 1977, pages
236–241) For additional information, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
