International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1001 bureaucratic limitations dictate that we keep our expectations realistic. We will work closely with HEW, AID, and others to improve coordination, and we will urge those agencies to upgrade their international offices. Health initiatives as a primary element of foreign policy (pages 1 and 2). A better statement of what can realistically be expected, given all the political, military, economic, and other issues that have to be attended to, is that the United States should seek to give greater emphasis to international health issues and to better integrate health considerations with those of development assistance, cooperative research and the like. To overstate will serve no purpose. Global Health Cadres (page 5). Although there doesn’t seem to be much initial enthusiasm for this proposal in State, AID, or HEW, the decision memo might call for consideration of the idea by these departments. The State Department is currently engaged in a review of the technical attache´s’ program (science counselors, and energy, minerals, fisheries, and other attache´s) and the question of how adequate the technical representation in our embassies is. We will certainly examine the desirability of health attache´s as well. Interagency committees (implementation Task Force, page 5; Interagency Strategic Coordinating Committee, page 6; and Executive Policy Group, page 6). It is just too early to consider establishment of all these committees until our objectives become clear. Whatever group turns out to be necessary should probably be set up either within the NSC Domestic Council or other well-established structures. Major conclusions (page 3). These are poorly worded. For instance, the first “conclusion” is of little guidance as it stands: “A new ethic is required—one of global collaboration among all nations based on humanitarian not ideological themes, asking what we can do together not how much we can or ought to do for another.” The second “conclusion” is also diffuse, and it says that “[The President’s] basic human rights policy is an ideal framework for global health collaboration”; this should be clarified either to discuss the human rights approach to health issues (which the Report did not address very fully) or the basic human needs strategy. The third “conclusion”—that “the full U.S. scientific and technical potential is not directed to help meet basic human needs worldwide. Significant changes are required to do so”—deserves amplification. Specifically what changes are needed? Again, perhaps the memo could elicit directions to HEW, OSTP, NSF, and others to review the longterm health-related R&D agenda. Priorities. The Report neither lays down priorities nor sets forth criteria to be used in generating priorities. If in the revision process these could be accomplished, considerable guidance to the U.S. government
