March–August 1953
545
d. The Shah is inclined to postpone a change of government until
such time as Mossadeq’s popularity will have further ebbed. The Shah
feels that there is a strong undercurrent sapping away Mossadeq’s
power and that this should be allowed to take its course.
2. As of 11 April:
a. the Shah would definitely not fight against the Mossadeq Gov-
ernment to protect his prerogatives but would continue his completely
passive position and let events take their course;
b. the political opposition to Mossadeq had dropped, at least tem-
porarily, all plans to overthrow the Prime Minister. However, the op-
position was still working secretly to stir up public opinion against the
recommendations contained in the report of the “Majlis Committee of
Eight.” The opposition asked its friends and supporters not to attempt
or encourage street demonstrations against Mossadeq or in favor of the
Shah. Furthermore, the opposition urged Zahedi not to run the risk at
this time of further compromising his political future by attempting a
test of strength with Mossadeq. The opposition decided to conserve its
assets by making a strategic withdrawal;
c. Mossadeq was beginning to doubt his ability to command a
Majlis majority in support of the report of the “Committee of Eight” or
even for a vote of confidence. Mossadeq, therefore, was reluctant to
force a decision on the report in the Majlis although he was still hopeful
that he could persuade the Shah to endorse the “report” without Majlis
action. The Prime Minister was, in fact, making conciliatory gestures
toward the opposition, and, in particular, toward the Shah.
3. On 11 April, Mullah Borujerdi, Kashani, and Behbehani, leading
clerical figures from the spiritual and/or political point of view, were
reaching mutual understanding on the need to bolster the Shah in his
resistance to Mossadeq.
4. On 12 April:
a. Majlis opposition leader Seyyed Abul Haerizadeh indicated to
Zahedi and other colleagues in the group opposing Mossadeq that this
was not the time to attempt to force Mossadeq’s resignation;
c. Moscow’s recent overtures of conciliation toward the West also
were having their effect on the opposition by lessening the fear of the
Tudeh Party.
