Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
159
In accordance with human rights provisions of legislation gov-
erning our security assistance programs, we recently announced cuts in
military aid to several countries.8
Outside the government, there is much that can be done. We wel-
come the efforts of individual American citizens and private organiza-
tions—such as religious, humanitarian, and professional groups—to
work for human rights with commitments of time, money, and
compassion.
All these initiatives to further human rights abroad would have a
hollow ring if we were not prepared to improve our own performance
at home. So we have removed all restrictions on our citizens’ travel
abroad and are proceeding with plans to liberalize our visa policies.
We support legislation and administrative action to expand our
refugee and asylum policies and to permit more victims of repressive
regimes to enter the United States. During this last year, the United
States spent some $475 million on assistance to refugees around the
world, and we accepted 31,000 refugees for permanent resettlement in
this country.
What results can we expect from all these efforts?
We may justifiably seek a rapid end to such gross violations as
those cited in our law: “torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
ment or punishment, (or) prolonged detention without charges. . . .”
Just last week our Ambassador at the United Nations, Andrew Young,
suggested a series of new ways to confront the practice of torture
around the world.9
The promotion of other human rights is a broader challenge. The
results may be slower in coming but are no less worth pursuing. And
we intend to let other countries know where we stand.
We recognize that many nations of the world are organized on au-
thoritarian rather than democratic principles—some large and pow-
erful, others struggling to raise the lives of their people above bare sub-
sistence levels. We can nourish no illusions that a call to the banner of
8 Presumable reference to the reduction of aid to Argentina, Ethiopia, and Uruguay;
see footnote 6, Document 27.
9 Young presented a statement before the UN Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC) on April 19, in which he spoke to three basic fears: “the fear of hunger, the fear
of torture, and the fear of racism,” adding that the three “are basic problems that we
could attack with near-unanimity and high expectations of significant success if we
agreed to focus on them as priorities.” Young suggested that with regard to torture, the
United Nations might consider establishing a group—under UN mandate—with the in-
tent of investigating torture “on a worldwide basis” and staff a panel of “distinguished
nonpartisan experts” who could carry out the mandate. For the text of Young’s state-
ment, see Department of State Bulletin, May 16, 1977, pp. 494–502. See also Kathleen
Teltsch, “Young Says Criticism Will Not Deter Him,” The New York Times, April 20, 1977,
p. 3.
