United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  101
Dillon thought we might try to get an ICA increment of $50 million 
during August for Latin America and outlined a strategy for obtaining 
it at the last moment without going to Passman. No definite decision 
was made.
He was fuzzy on whether to ask that the DLF appropriation be 
increased from $550 to $700.
I concluded that he did not believe we could or should request any 
appropriation during August, though he blew hot and cold on the sub-
ject. I believe he is thinking along these lines: Use the contingency fund 
to the extent possible during the next six months and, possibly, ask at 
the last moment for an ICA increment of $50 million.
Forward Approach
Dillon asked Mann to put this new plan down on paper. Since 
the President was visiting Denver after his Chicago appearance,8 
we should plan to approach the President early next week (week of 
August 1). He said the President would probably “not be firm one 
way or the other”, would probably say he was all for the plan if 
Congress had no objection.
Hence it would be necessary to discuss the plan with the 
Presidential candidates9 and Congressional leaders. It was agreed that 
the plan should be put forward as a non-­partisan program. Dillon 
seemed to feel that Treasury and Budget could be approached after the 
plan had been outlined to the President.
Dillon laughingly observed that there should be no difficulty in 
obtaining the Vice President’s concurrence, since “he and Nelson are 
now for a confederation in the hemisphere and this is certainly a little 
less than that” (a reference to the Nixon-Rockefeller platform talks of 
last Friday evening).10
8 President Eisenhower was in Chicago on July 26 and 27 to address the Republican 
National Convention and to attend the Republican National Committee Breakfast, 
respectively; on July 28 he visited Denver.
9 The respective candidates of the Republican and Democratic Parties were Richard 
M. Nixon and John F. Kennedy.
10 Another memorandum of this meeting, without drafting information, listing the 
conclusions reached by the participants is in ARA Files, Lot 63 D 210, “Latin American 
Social Economic Development Program July–Sept 1960.”
