Human Rights 487 1. USUN agrees with reftel A that a strategy session sometime this summer with at least the presence of Young, Wells, Maynes, Dalley, Vanden Heuvel and Mezvinsky would be helpful. Obviously, the presence of Hewitt, Tyson, Matteson and the human rights officer from US Mission Geneva and perhaps someone from US UNESCO office would be helpful, also. (Ambassador Young is now tentatively scheduled to be in Geneva July 3 to July 12.) This message is an attempt to place such a strategy meeting in the context of 1) a proposed general strategy, 2) a series of initiatives in which the US could participate and 3) preparatory meetings and consultations both before and after the session in Geneva. 2. As a general US human rights strategy in UN forums, USUN suggests that given the overall desire of the US to continue to build deeper and broader contacts with key non-aligned nations in both the political and human rights fields, the US should focus on initiatives which can be promoted with non-aligned as well as Western support. It appears to us that the major tasks at this time are: A) the building of a human rights alliance with key non-aligned nations (especially India and Nigeria) and supporting their human rights initiatives. B) Consolidating the recent increased interest in human rights and the recent advances under 1503 in the Human Rights Commission (HRC) by strengthening, upgrading and expanding the Human Rights Division (HRD) staff (see reftel B), and developing plans for an improved UN human rights organization and program to be presented to the next session of the HRC, which will probably be devoted largely to the overall analysis; and C) developing some positive US responses to the non-aligned aspirations expressed in 32/1304 for a greater concern with economic, social and cultural rights without sacrificing commitment to civil and political rights. 3. Perhaps the major task of the next few months is the development of a USG model of an ideal human rights program and organization to be the basis for our proposals and responses at the meeting on the “over-all analysis” of the HRC next February–March. It is here that the proposals for a High Commissioner, Regional Commission and Commissioners, Coordinator of Human Rights Programs and Activities with the rank of Under Secretary General, an enlarged commission, two sub-commissions, an International Court for Human Rights, etc., must be evaluated, integrated, and put into a package. 4 Reference is to A/RES/32/130, “Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms,” adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 16, 1977. See Document 94.
