Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II C. The item dealing with the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the status of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination5—the United States is not a party to this Convention and is therefore ineligible to participate in the work of the Committee. D. The status of the Convention on the Crime of Apartheid6—the United States is not a party to this Convention and was one of the two governments to vote against it. E. The item on self-determination—resolutions under this item regularly endorse the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and condemn the policies of NATO members, thus assuring a U.S. negative vote. F. The item relating to the report of the Human Rights Committee under the international covenants on human rights—the United States is not a party to these covenants and is therefore precluded from participating in the work of the Human Rights Committee. G. The item on alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights will focus upon a progress report from the Human Rights Commission—since the substance of this item, including the High Commissioner for Human Rights proposal, is still being studied by the HRC, no useful initiative by the United States with respect to any specific related proposals is likely to be possible. H. The item on the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance—the drafting of a declaration is still proceeding at a snail’s pace in the Human Rights Commission; no realistic alternative drafting body is available. I. The item on freedom of information—an impasse in the drafting of either a declaration or a convention was reached many years ago, with majority sentiment clearly in favor of letting this matter continue to lie undisturbed. J. The item relating to Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the population of the Occupied Territories (to be considered in the Special Political Committee)—the United States rejects a priori the findings of human rights violations made repeatedly by the UNGA and the Human Rights Commission because of the unacceptable nature of the fact-finding mechanism. U.S. Goals This year’s UNGA agenda of human rights items offers less scope certainly than that of the last session for U.S. initiatives and positive
