Eastern Europe Region 141 40. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 PA M80–10385C Washington, September 5, 1980 LIKELY CONSEQUENCES IN EASTERN EUROPE OF THE POLISH EVENTS SUMMARY Over the short to medium term (several months to a year) the Polish regime’s granting of political concessions to striking workers will have a greater effect on the regimes than on the populaces elsewhere in Eastern Europe. The regimes will seek to head off any developments similar to those that took place in Poland by using persuasion, assuagement, and—if necessary— intimidation. If Moscow does not force wholesale retraction of the concessions the regime in Warsaw has granted, workers elsewhere in Eastern Europe eventually might raise demands similar to those the Poles have. If the Soviets intervene to prevent the implementation of the concessions, other East Europeans are unlikely to take the risk of emulating the Polish workers. (C) Impact on the Regimes [1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified] Over the short term, the regimes probably will be prepared to make limited concessions—such as increasing the availability of consumer goods, offering limited wage increases to certain workers, and perhaps delaying price increases. At the same time they will increase the workload of party cadre who monitor and seek to direct public opinions and will tighten security. They may also revamp the party-controlled trade unions in an effort to head off criticisms and demands for change. Nervous leaders, however, might over-react to any signs that people are even considering imitating the Polish workers. Harsh political measures or the use of force could precipitate the very thing they wish to avoid—labor unrest and other forms of popular demonstrations. (C) East European leaders would become even more concerned if the Polish regime proves unwilling or unable within the next several months to retract some of its concessions. Internally the regimes would most likely continue and intensify their efforts to persuade, assuage, and intimidate. The economic costs of assuaging the populace might, however, soon present a burden that the five countries would be unable 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job 85T00287R, Production Case Files, Box 1, Folder 198, Likely Consequences in Eastern Europe of the Polish Events. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]. Prepared in the Office of Political Analysis and Office of Economic Research and coordinated with the National Intelligence Officer for the USSR/Eastern Europe.
