Strawn suggested that the matter lie dormant until an agreement could be reached. Mr. Oudendijk, in an effort to have the committee arrive at a definite conclusion said that he thought the question should be further discussed with a view to overcoming the difficulties. He thought that a mere postponement would be of no use and he urged the subcommittee to accept the Japanese proposal as it stood. He could not see that it involved any danger to the Chinese Government, and as he had previously said, would expedite the work of the Conference. He strongly urged the Chinese Delegation to reconsider its position and to come to an agreement which he thought was also the position of the other five members of the subcommittee. Mr. Hioki said that the only alternative which the Japanese Delegation would accept was that the levying of the surtaxes should be allowed to begin only when the conditions and purposes should have been agreed upon. The chairman said that it seemed useless to discuss the matter further and that Mr. Strawn’s suggestion to defer action would be followed. After considerable further debate it seemed reasonably certain that the Chinese would yield no ground with reference to the Japanese proviso and with reference to the ninety days’ notice. Count de Martel, at this point, reminded the Chinese Delegation that with reference to the landing they had won on principle and the chairman replied that China had won on principle so often that he hesitated to win much more on it. The reading of the resolution, so far as it had been agreed upon, then took place (see pages 14 and 16 of Minutes of March 18, 1926). With certain corrections noted it appeared that the resolution had the unanimous approval of the Delegations composing the sub-committee, with the exception of the Chinese Delegation who had made three reservations, one with respect to the 90 million dollar clause; another with respect to the three months’ notice and a third with respect to the Japanese proviso. Adjournment was taken with the understanding that the chairman would consider the question whether the sub-committee would make a majority and a minority report, or whether they would allow the matter to stand in statu quo holding another meeting with a view to arriving at a definite understanding. Technical Committee to Draw up a List of Luxuries for the Levying of the Washington Surtaxes, Third Meeting, April 9, 1926.
