September 18–December 16, 1978 527 Ambassador Eilts has reported from Cairo3 that Sadat did not accept our suggested variation of the proposal for delaying the interim withdrawal so that it could coincide with the establishment of the selfgoverning authority in the West Bank and Gaza. Instead, Sadat still insists on carrying out the interim withdrawal within nine months, and simultaneously establishing a Palestinian self-government at least in Gaza. (S) Prime Minister Khalil suggested that Secretary Vance or you should meet directly with President Sadat before formally answering his letter. He clearly feels that he has done as much as he can to persuade Sadat to change his views and wants to leave the remaining task to us. (S) With reference to Articles IV and VI of the treaty, the Prime Minister expressed his view that Sadat might eventually accept the idea of leaving the text of these Articles intact, while accommodating Egyptian concerns in interpretive notes. Nonetheless, the Egyptian proposal now contains language concerning the need for amendments in both of those Articles. The Egyptians also have left out of their proposal the idea of not holding the Israelis responsible if elections cannot be held because of Jordanian or Palestinian obstruction. Khalil maintains that this has already been conveyed to the Israelis in Sadat’s letter4 and they do not want to include it in any of the documents related to the peace negotiations. (S) In brief, the Egyptians have come back to the idea of a target date for elections which coincides with the interim withdrawal. Compared to their earlier position, however, they are most insistent that the interim withdrawal and the establishment of a self-governing authority must occur simultaneously, unless otherwise agreed by both parties. As you know, this will be extremely difficult for the Israelis to accept. (S) In a meeting this afternoon with Secretary Vance,5 Khalil strongly urged the Secretary to come to Cairo to see Sadat as early as this coming Sunday.6 He also informed the Secretary that he will be meeting, at Weizman’s suggestion, both Weizman and Dayan somewhere in Europe later this week. 3 Telegram 26225 from Cairo, December 4. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850067–1725) 4 See Document 146. 5 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. 6 December 10. The Department reported to Khalil, who was traveling in Belgrade, the decision to send Vance to Cairo on December 10. (Telegram 306812 to Belgrade, December 5; Carter Library; National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State Department Out, Box 114, 12/1–14/78)
