International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1155 3. Intensify Family Planning/Contraceptive Research There is a need for increased funding for biomedical research; one weak link in the chain is the acceptability of contraceptive methods in different cultural and economic settings. We propose the establishment/upgrading of research centers in the developing countries. Their focus would be operational research into usage of differing methods. A model for this type of operation is CGIAR.5 The centers would work in cooperation with established operations by other international organizations (such as WHO) where possible, and be specifically linked to research efforts in the Summit countries. Because the United States is the only Summit country with a significant bilateral population program, the US would take the lead. These centers would be located in countries which already have an interest in family planning assistance from the United States, such as Kenya, Egypt, Nigeria, Indonesia, India, Philippines, Thailand, Bangladesh, Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico. (Three such AID-funded health-oriented efforts already exist.) We would suggest that as all Summit countries have population and biomedical research programs, they should consider either joining the US in this effort, or establishing similar centers. In order to upgrade and expand international efforts in biomedical research, a mechanism, perhaps under the guidance of the population coordinators (or IDCA, the DAC, UNFPA, or the World Bank) would be established. This coordination would encompass these research centers. 5 Denton sent Owen a memorandum on September 22, informing him that she had undertaken additional work on contraceptive research. In regard to the recommendation proposing research centers in developing nations, Denton noted: “Future investigation suggests that there may be sufficient centers already in operation. What is lacking is research funds. What may be lacking is international cooperation and coordination of results.” She then recommended that the population coordinators of the Summit countries “investigate what their countries’ actual and planned expenditures are, stressing the need for increased funds.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects—Hazel Denton, Box 63, Population: 8/80)
