984  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Obukhov: Well, the only issue there is that of the Midgetman and 
the Shevardnadze letter mentioned that specific point.
Burt: The Soviets say the downloading issue was agreed to at 
Houston.
Bartholomew: On downloading, we introduced a new element that 
we thought would make it simpler.
Obukhov: We offered some reassurances on the question of down-
loading which were embodied in the Shevardnadze letter of December 
30th4 and January 12th.
Bartholomew: We hadn’t agreed to anything in Houston. We cer-
tainly didn’t agree to anything formally. We raised the question of 
being willing to look at certain assurances and we received some of the 
assurances in the letter, but this was never resolved formally.
Baker: When we were in Houston, we wrote out the deal that 
Obukhov had outlined to us and that was confirmed in the letter.
Bartholomew: Mr. Secretary, you said that going to 73 on the SS-N-
18 would be a problem for us and you asked what assurances would 
they provide to deal with our concerns.
Obukhov: But the answer was laied out very thoroughly in the 
December 30th letter.
Burt: But as I said at the time I didn’t know and wasn’t certain that 
letter would in fact be sufficient to meet our concerns.
Obukhov: But now the US position is really a new position. And 
we’re getting a new position on new types and also a new position on 
downloading.
Bessmertnykh: What worries us is that a clarification is now explod-
ing into a major technical problem.
Obukhov: I tried to understand what was behind the US position on 
throwaways and Brooks then made a presentation to us on that.
Baker: Let me ask this. Can we start with Houston, the record of 
Houston and the letter after it and take each of these issues one by one 
and see if we can get back to what we each thought was the basis of the 
agreement.
Bartholomew: Well, for the past five days we’ve tried to do this.
Bessmertnykh: I think we might make it easier for them if we can 
identify the unsolved areas—I think there are three or four areas—­how 
would you summarize them.
Bartholomew: Well, they are bombers, PPC, downloading and new 
types.
4 See Document 183.
