230
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
2) (a) What is present economic and financial situation?
(b) Does Mosadeq or any Iranian Govt have courage or ability to
make full use of country’s resources?
(c) Is financial and economic collapse inevitable and if so is it
matter of weeks or longer period?
(a) This has already been dealt with in latest reports prepared by
Economic/Commercial Counselor in consultation with US/Brit Emb.3
(b) It not believed Mosadeq or any Iranian Govt, short of dictator-
ship, cld obtain reduction of Govt expenditures or increase of tax rev-
enue to extent sufficient to make substantial contribution toward bal-
ancing budget. However, it not unlikely Govt cld obtain Majlis [text
missing] on for limited use of remaining gold reserve behind currency
and for expansion of currency required for financing Govt deficit.
Thus, while in our opinion Govt cld not make full use of all country’s
resources, it cld obtain sufficient funds to meet its needs for consider-
able time.
(c) Ultimate financial and economic collapse is believed to be inevi-
table in absence restoration oil income. Such collapse might be matter
of months unless Majlis authorization obtained for use currency gold
reserve and/or currency expansion to support Bank Melli loan to Govt.
With such authorization Govt might carry on thru Iranian year 1331
(until Mar 1953).
3) In event of collapse of central Govt, what is most likely political
development?
We do not believe that collapse of central Govt imminent despite
slow drift toward anarchy. Nevertheless, unity of Natl Front under
strain and it showing certain indecision. Iran’s problems in varied
fields becoming so serious that Mosadeq Govt or its possible successors
probably will be obliged to think in terms of authoritarian govt. This
govt may be a) present Govt or revised Natl Front regime, b) one de-
rived from non-communist opposition groups, c) one frankly con-
trolled by communists or military junta.
(a) We do not believe that oil problem can be solved so long as Mo-
sadeq remains Primin. In absence solution and Western financial aid he
3 An apparent reference to two surveys of Iran’s economic and financial condition
at the close of the Iranian year 1330, prepared individually by the American and British
Embassies in Tehran, under the direction of U.S. Counselor for Economic Affairs Robert
Carr, and attached to despatch 1187 from Tehran, May 7. Both estimates, especially the
American one, described the Iranian economy as healthy and resilient, primarily because
of a healthy agricultural sector, positive trade balances owing to the Korean war induced
economic boom, and the accumulated level of imported stocks. Nevertheless, the gov-
ernment’s financial position was nearing exhaustion and, without the reinstatement of
considerable oil revenue, would provide the source for economic deterioration in the
coming months. These two surveys are ibid., 888.10/5–752.
