Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 783 a. Maintenance of military deterrence. b. Containment of Soviet expansion where deterrence fails. c. Offers of politically conditioned economic benefits. d. Reduction of Soviet influence over client states, bloc states, and minority nationalities in the USSR. A number of things have been accomplished over the past three years to provide the programs and policies for “competitive engagement” over the next four years. When they are specifically related to the four elements of the policy, a clear view of how to proceed in East-West relations begins to emerge. That follows for each element. a. Maintenance of military deterrence through military pre-eminence. The doctrinal changes marked by the “strategic” PD–41, 50, 53, 57, 58, and 59 provide the direction our military programs must take to maintain deterrence in the 1980s.4 The gap between our political objectives and our military capabilities must be reduced. This can be accomplished through simultaneous improvements in our force posture and meaningful arms control agreements. —Force Improvements. We must address our military deficiencies in a three-pronged attack which includes: —The Budget. Not only must the budget be increased, but Defense, FEMA, and the DCI must let the strategic PDs guide their program choices. To date, they have yielded little to the new doctrine. —Organization. All three agencies must be reorganized to improve “factor productivity,” with particular emphasis on the Pentagon. The President tried to reorganize DoD once, but the effort failed. He succeeded with FEMA. He must succeed in the next term with DoD. —Manpower. We must also solve the military manpower problem. That probably means a return to the military draft. The objective of these measures may not be “military superiority” but it should be “military pre-eminence” for the US and its allies, in terms of both nuclear and conventional forces. —Arms Control. Arms control, too, plays a part in the military balance. Arms control, however, is headed for indefinite dormancy in the 1980s unless it is tied symbiotically to our defense policy. PD–50 prescribed the process that can achieve that symbiosis. ACDA, State, and even ISA at Defense have failed to see this merit in the directive. Yet it is precisely arms control that is at risk without the PD–50 approach. 4 Copies of PD/NSC–41, “U.S. Civil Defense Policy,” September 29, 1978; PD/ NSC–50, “Arms Control Decision Process,” August 14, 1979; PD/NSC–53, “National Security Telecommunications Policy,” November 15, 1979; and PD/NSC–57, “Mobilization Planning,” March 3, 1980, can be found at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library website. Documentation on PD/NSC–59 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IV, National Security Policy.
