711.3512Anti-War/16: Telegram [Document 187] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) WASHINGTON, October 25, 1928—3 p.m. 46. I received your despatch of September 10th enclosing a copy of a speech of Senator Molinari. The speech is a very able and interesting one. I think the Senator has some misapprehensions about the negotiations and effect of the Treaty. I fully appreciate what he says about the pacific intentions of Argentina. I know, of course, that the Government and the people of Argentina are devoted to the principle of world peace and that it is not necessary for Argentina to sign a treaty not to go to war in order that its influence may be cast on the side of peace and justice. No country has gone further to demonstrate this than has Argentina in her past history. She has gone further than most countries in making arbitration treaties which are intended to settle difficulties between nations without resort to war. Argentina can undoubtedly add great weight to the Multilateral Treaty by signing it. She is one of the great nations of the Western Hemisphere and influential in world affairs. There are some suggestions in his speech which I think I can demonstrate spring from a want of knowledge of our local conditions. The Treaty was not proposed or signed with any idea of affecting our local political conditions or the elections of 1928. M. Briand proposed a bilateral treaty in exactly this same language in 1927 and the negotiations have been going on ever since until shortly before the signing. I am sending you some copies of the pamphlet which contain all the negotiations between the countries on the subject of this Treaty. There were no secret papers or conversations. Everything was made public as we proceeded. The principles of the Anti- War Treaty were endorsed both by the Democratic and by the Republican National Conventions and it is not an issue in this campaign nor has it been mentioned by either party as it is generally understood to meet the approval
