Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II volved, its wages, training policy, etc.4 It also means applying the amendment to the group of 40–50 “grey area” countries which have serious human rights problems. (This is the group which has been considered by the Committee at one time or another—it substitutes for a hit list of “gross and consistent” violators.) In sum, it means implementing the amendment very much as we do the similar Congressional language limiting assistance in the IFIs. 2. Implement the law narrowly—perhaps not as Congress intended—but in the light of our own view of the wisdom of the amendment. This would mean that except in very rare instances the needy people exemption would be considered inapplicable, and the Committee would therefore not request supportive background detail from OPIC on company behavior, wages structures, etc. It would also mean limiting application of the amendment to those projects where the government of the recipient country is involved in the project. This would immediately rule out about 80% of all OPIC programs. Unfortunately, determination of government involvement is not a yes-or-no question. After consulting with OPIC, I would suggest that the primary criterion for determining involvement be that the government be either an equity holder in the project, or that it have provided a significant portion of the financing for it. At a decidedly secondary level, a government might be considered to be involved in a project: (1) when it was to be a major beneficiary either from tax revenues or production sharing; or, (2) where the project was of extreme size or political significance for the country involved. Finally, this approach could mean limiting application of the amendment to a smaller group (say 10–15) of the most egregious human rights violators. While this limitation would be consistent with the overall approach, it would entail major problems in agreeing on which countries are the worst offenders (after eliminating Uganda, Cambodia, Chile, etc., with which OPIC does no business). If such a group was agreed on there would always be the danger of leaks—even if nothing were put on paper. The Decision Christopher has very nearly settled on a final decision for Option 1, while I believe we should follow Option 2. The NSC staff also strongly favors Option 2, as does OPIC itself. You should note however that Option 2 might not be very popular on the Hill. If we were to follow this approach we should brief key members, being quite straightforward in 4 Bartholomew underlined the phrase “social behavior of the company involved,” drew a horizontal line next to this portion of the paragraph, and wrote “absurd” in the left-hand margin.
