Chapter 4, February–April 1990  483
Shevardnadze commented that we were establishing ceilings for 
other types of missiles and placing specific figures; therefore he won-
dered why we could not do the same for SLCMs.
The Secretary explained that the question we were debating was 
whether we should try to handle SLCMs in the START Treaty. The U.S. 
had said no, they should be limited outside the treaty. We would not 
agree to limit SLCMs for 15 years, but we would be prepared to under-
take an obligation to update our declaration each year for the duration 
of the treaty to set forth our SLCM plans for the coming three years. Our 
position had always been that SLCMs should not be included in the 
treaty. Under the Soviet approach the U.S. could put an outrageously 
high figure and not reach it. Another obvious problem was that the 
Soviets wanted to get into verification, whereas we did not think this 
was feasible. It was simply impossible to verify SLCMs.
Shevardnadze said he believed there was a fundamental difference 
between the sides and perhaps we should not pursue this further, but 
rather focus on other issues such as ALCMs. We could put SLCMs off 
until the next ministerial. It seemed that the problems were basic and 
we would not reach an understanding no matter how long we dis-
cussed it.
Nazarkin said he wanted to add one point. In the Washington sum-
mit joint statement of 1987 there was an obligation to establish a ceiling 
on SLCMs. The Soviet draft was based on this understanding, whereas 
the U.S. draft ignored the Washington understanding and provided for 
the possibility of changing the limits in the future. Such an approach 
did not allow for the possibility for reaching an agreement.
Burt said the Washington summit agreement also spoke of verifi-
cation measures. As we had made clear, there were fundamental prob-
lems in this regard. Frankly, if the U.S. agreed to limit these missiles 
within the treaty or in a legally binding agreement outside the treaty, 
there would be severe problems in getting such a deal ratified because 
of the verification problems. This was why we had proposed a different 
approach.
Under the U.S. concept, Burt continued, both sides would declare 
their plans for SLCM production. In our political system, this would 
have a binding impact. This was the only way to proceed given the 
verification problems. While we could not agree to the Soviet state-
ment, it did contain some interesting elements. For example, it spoke of 
enhancing confidence. This, Burt thought was a better way to proceed. 
We should think of our declarations as confidence-­building measures 
rather than as legally binding, verifiable limits.
Shevardnadze said he did not think we would work this out. Talking 
of different categories—­confidence-­building measures and limits on 
the number and qualitative characteristics of armaments—­was a very
