Comprehensive Test Ban
607
The UK, however, may see in the offer of a prototype NSS unit an
opportunity to defer changing its NSS position, since by accepting the
prototype and thus signalling the possibility of a future change of posi-
tion, they could hope to ease the pressures somewhat.
246.
Editorial Note
The issues of funding of National Seismic Stations (NSS) for the
United Kingdom and the potential transfer of NSS equipment to the
USSR continued during the spring of 1980. The Special Coordination
Committee (SCC) scheduled a meeting for March 12, 1980, to discuss
these issues.
Regarding the funding issue, an agenda for the SCC meeting pre-
pared by the National Security Council (NSC) identified three options:
The United States could (1) “inform the UK that we are willing to make
a commitment to seek appropriate funding from Congress if they are
willing to locate three NSS in their dependent territories in the
Southern Hemisphere;” (2) “Defer decision and inform UK that this
possibility remains under serious review;” (3) “Inform UK that we have
decided not to fund NSS equipment for UK stations.” Secretary of State
Cyrus Vance endorsed Option 1. No record of Vance’s recommenda-
tion has been found.
As for the technology transfer, an ad hoc group of the NSS SCC
Working Group had begun to review “prototype equipment in order to
identify elements of that equipment that could raise technology
transfer questions. The group will then assess options for replacing
those elements with others involving less advanced technology, taking
into account any degradation of NSS performance, delays in the NSS
program schedule, and implications for the CTB negotiating process.”
Once this assessment had been completed, the SCC would decide
“whether we should reconsider our willingness to transfer US NSS
technology to the Soviet Union to gain information for CTB moni-
toring, and in particular, whether we should withdraw our offer to loan
them an NSS prototype for joint testing and operation.” (Agenda: SCC
Meeting on BW and CTB, March 12; Carter Library, National Security
Council, Institutional Files, Box 11, SCC 297, CTB, 4/3/80)
On March 13, NSC staff members John Marcum, Ben Huberman,
and Jasper Welch informed the President’s Assistant for National Secu-
rity Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, that “we think funding of the UK
equipment would be an acceptable outcome once we are prepared to
