274 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI acceptance of the structure of limits and sublimits that have already been agreed: L600 strategic offensive delivery systems; 6000 accountable warheads; 4900 warheads on ICBMs and SLBMs; L540 warheads on L54 heavy ballistic missiles; and a reduction of approximately 50 percent in Soviet ballistic missile throw-­weight. The U.S. side will be prepared to address all issues on which agreement has not been reached as the negotiations proceed. While we reaffirm our support of the basic agreed numerical limits in the JDT, we reserve the right to suggest new ideas and other changes that we believe would contribute to force survivability and stability. Furthermore, the United States believes that some of these measures could usefully be discussed with the objective of reaching agreements independent of the basic START treaty. Implementation of these measures would be useful in their own right, but also would contribute to our overall confidence that the ultimate START treaty will fulfill the principles that I have outlined. Critical to determining whether START enhances our security and strategic stability is the issue of verification. As part of our overall negotiating effort, the United States will propose that the sides make a special effort to agree on, and to begin implementing as soon as possible, certain verification and stability measures that we believe will enhance verification of a START treaty and contribute to strategic stability. We propose to work out measures now to establish perimeter/portal monitoring of certain ICBM production facilities; to conduct, on a reciprocal basis a prompt exchange of data for the agreed categories of the MOU; to halt ballistic missile telemetry encryption and data denial; to demonstrate, on a reciprocal basis, procedures for ballistic missile RV inspection; to conduct a joint experiment to demonstrate the U.S. concept of unique identifiers for ballistic missiles and the Soviet concept for registration; to address the problem of short time of flight SLBMs; and to notify the other side of strategic exercises. We will provide additional detail on these measures at future meetings. Early agreement and implementation of these measures will give both sides early practical experience in verification, which will speed resolution of outstanding issues, and give added momentum to the efforts of our two countries to conclude a START treaty. These measures do not represent a comprehensive verification regime, nor do we intend that they detract from the START negotiations or suggest preconditions for resolution of START issues. On the contrary, we believe that implementation of these measures would facilitate early agreement on START. IV In a moment, I will ask Ambassador Cooper to make some comments on defense and space issues. As in START, the fundamental U.S.
