274  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
acceptance of the structure of limits and sublimits that have already 
been agreed: L600 strategic offensive delivery systems; 6000 account-
able warheads; 4900 warheads on ICBMs and SLBMs; L540 warheads 
on L54 heavy ballistic missiles; and a reduction of approximately 50 
percent in Soviet ballistic missile throw-­weight. The U.S. side will be 
prepared to address all issues on which agreement has not been reached 
as the negotiations proceed.
While we reaffirm our support of the basic agreed numerical limits 
in the JDT, we reserve the right to suggest new ideas and other changes 
that we believe would contribute to force survivability and stability. 
Furthermore, the United States believes that some of these measures 
could usefully be discussed with the objective of reaching agreements 
independent of the basic START treaty. Implementation of these mea-
sures would be useful in their own right, but also would contribute to 
our overall confidence that the ultimate START treaty will fulfill the 
principles that I have outlined.
Critical to determining whether START enhances our security and 
strategic stability is the issue of verification. As part of our overall nego-
tiating effort, the United States will propose that the sides make a spe-
cial effort to agree on, and to begin implementing as soon as possible, 
certain verification and stability measures that we believe will enhance 
verification of a START treaty and contribute to strategic stability. We 
propose to work out measures now to establish perimeter/portal mon-
itoring of certain ICBM production facilities; to conduct, on a reciprocal 
basis a prompt exchange of data for the agreed categories of the MOU; 
to halt ballistic missile telemetry encryption and data denial; to demon-
strate, on a reciprocal basis, procedures for ballistic missile RV inspec-
tion; to conduct a joint experiment to demonstrate the U.S. concept of 
unique identifiers for ballistic missiles and the Soviet concept for reg-
istration; to address the problem of short time of flight SLBMs; and to 
notify the other side of strategic exercises. We will provide additional 
detail on these measures at future meetings.
Early agreement and implementation of these measures will give 
both sides early practical experience in verification, which will speed res-
olution of outstanding issues, and give added momentum to the efforts 
of our two countries to conclude a START treaty. These measures do not 
represent a comprehensive verification regime, nor do we intend that 
they detract from the START negotiations or suggest preconditions for 
resolution of START issues. On the contrary, we believe that implementa-
tion of these measures would facilitate early agreement on START.
IV
In a moment, I will ask Ambassador Cooper to make some com-
ments on defense and space issues. As in START, the fundamental U.S.
