534
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
term interest is enlargement of human rights, we may be lucky to be
able just to help modify the restrictive tendencies.
Romanian leverage on the United States is so far not great. Romania
has no raw materials or industrial products which are vital to the U.S.
economy. While some Romanian petroleum and petroleum products
are presently being shipped to the New England area, this is a small
fraction of our total imports which could readily be purchased else-
where. The Romanian market for U.S. exports at present is small,
but it could grow appreciably in the next few years. Their greatest
leverage is in their knowledge that we also have an interest in their
independence.
C. Objectives, issues, and courses of action
1. Objectives
We see the following as key U.S. objectives for the next one or two
years:
—An active but candid relationship with the Romanian leadership
based on mutual respect and understanding of each other’s interests.
—Expanded contacts and mutual involvement between individu-
als, institutions, and bureaucracies of both countries in order to widen
and solidify the regime’s stake in successful cooperation with the West.
—Improved Romanian performance on the human rights issues
embodied in Helsinki Basket III and the Jackson/Vanik Amendment.
—Moving economic-commercial relations faster toward the one
billion dollar 1980 goal, especially through increased U.S. penetration
of the Romanian market with our industrial goods.
These objectives are basically similar to those contained in last
year’s policy assessment (76 Bucharest 2230), but, unlike last year, we
do not see them in any particular order of priority since they are closely
interrelated and mutually reinforcing.
2. Issues
“Pecking order”—We believe that it is no longer useful to maintain
a set “pecking order” in our relations with the countries of Eastern
Europe other than in terms of our inherent interests. We should position
ourselves so that if there is an opportunity for moving ahead anywhere
we could do so. This, we realize, will call for more flexibility than we
usually have allowed ourselves. We believe that, because of the U.S.
presence already established in Romania and the extensive though
admittedly often erratic opportunities which that affords, our bilateral
relationship will continue to be one of the most active in Eastern Europe,
with or without a “pecking order.”
Foreign policy independence v. internal liberalization—There
seems to be no set formula in Eastern Europe for prescribing the neces-
sary inter-relationship between these two factors. Thus during Ceauses-
