1212 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement elections now scheduled for November. The chief threat to the accomplishment of its mission is that of a military coup to prevent the return of Acción Democrática to power. (Paras.18, 34–35, 39–41) 4. All political parties in Venezuela are supporting the Junta, opposing military intervention in political affairs, and demanding effective democratic government with full civil rights. Their solidarity and the threat of a new general strike have hitherto deterred any effective coup attempt, although one nearly occurred in July. (Paras. 19, 27, 35) 5. “National unity” will be the watch-­word of the Venezuelan political parties as long as there remains any real or supposed threat of a military coup. The major parties regard the possible restoration of military dictatorship as a more serious danger than that of Communist penetration and are unwilling to forego the contribution which the Communists can make to a united civilian resistance. In these circumstances, the Communists are ensured the opportunity to function freely as a legitimate party and are shielded from political attack. (Paras. 27, 40, 47) 6. The Communists probably represent no more than five percent of the Venezuelan electorate. They exert a disproportionate influence through their infiltration of key positions in organized labor, the press, the teaching profession, and student organizations. They have also achieved some success in their efforts to infiltrate the government and the major leftist parties. In national politics, however, their influence is not comparable to that of the major leftist, but non-communist, parties—Acción Democrática, COPEI, and URD—­which together represent about 90 percent of the electorate. (Paras. 20–25, 30, 43) 7. Since the July crisis, the likelihood of a concerted effort on the part of the military to seize power appears to have receded, although there was an uncoordinated and abortive coup attempt on 7 September and the situation between military and civilian elements is now tense. The military are still apprehensive regarding the political trend, but are manifestly reluctant to take on a united and determined civilian resistance. On their part, the Junta and the parties fear a coup and will probably take care not to provoke one, although they will also continue their efforts to improve their position vis-­a-­vis the military. (Paras. 36–41) 8. The maintenance of “national unity” is precarious. It will require the nomination of a single presidential candidate agreed upon by the three major parties and also acceptable to the military. The selection of such a candidate will be a very difficult and delicate matter. (Paras. 42–45) 9. Any representative Venezuelan government will conform in general to the nationalistic programs of the three major parties (AD, COPEI, and URD). In particular, such a government will seek a greater share in the profits of the petroleum industry. (Paras. 19–24, 51)
