1212ÔÇâ Foreign Relations, 1958ÔÇô1960, Volume V, Supplement
elections now scheduled for November. The chief threat to the accom-
plishment of its mission is that of a military coup to prevent the return 
of Acci├│n Democr├ítica to power. (Paras.18, 34ÔÇô35, 39ÔÇô41)
4. All political parties in Venezuela are supporting the Junta, oppos-
ing military intervention in political affairs, and demanding effective 
democratic government with full civil rights. Their solidarity and the 
threat of a new general strike have hitherto deterred any effective coup 
attempt, although one nearly occurred in July. (Paras. 19, 27, 35)
5. ÔÇťNational unityÔÇŁ will be the watch-┬şword of the Venezuelan 
political parties as long as there remains any real or supposed threat 
of a military coup. The major parties regard the possible restoration of 
military dictatorship as a more serious danger than that of Communist 
penetration and are unwilling to forego the contribution which the 
Communists can make to a united civilian resistance. In these cir-
cumstances, the Communists are ensured the opportunity to func-
tion freely as a legitimate party and are shielded from political attack. 
(Paras. 27, 40, 47)
6. The Communists probably represent no more than five percent 
of the Venezuelan electorate. They exert a disproportionate influence 
through their infiltration of key positions in organized labor, the press, 
the teaching profession, and student organizations. They have also 
achieved some success in their efforts to infiltrate the government and 
the major leftist parties. In national politics, however, their influence 
is not comparable to that of the major leftist, but non-communist, par-
tiesÔÇöAcci├│n Democr├ítica, COPEI, and URDÔÇö┬şwhich together represent 
about 90 percent of the electorate. (Paras. 20ÔÇô25, 30, 43)
7. Since the July crisis, the likelihood of a concerted effort on the 
part of the military to seize power appears to have receded, although 
there was an uncoordinated and abortive coup attempt on 7 September 
and the situation between military and civilian elements is now tense. 
The military are still apprehensive regarding the political trend, but are 
manifestly reluctant to take on a united and determined civilian resis-
tance. On their part, the Junta and the parties fear a coup and will prob-
ably take care not to provoke one, although they will also continue their 
efforts to improve their position vis-┬şa-┬şvis the military. (Paras. 36ÔÇô41)
8. The maintenance of ÔÇťnational unityÔÇŁ is precarious. It will 
require the nomination of a single presidential candidate agreed upon 
by the three major parties and also acceptable to the military. The 
selection of such a candidate will be a very difficult and delicate mat-
ter. (Paras. 42ÔÇô45)
9. Any representative Venezuelan government will conform in 
general to the nationalistic programs of the three major parties (AD, 
COPEI, and URD). In particular, such a government will seek a greater 
share in the profits of the petroleum industry. (Paras. 19ÔÇô24, 51)
