1957  1403
faced when came here to find a method of peacefully settling our differ­
ences and the difficulty we still face. No amount of words or misrepre­
sentation of the plain words in the proposals we have put forward can 
change this fact.
14. I continued. With regard to the first item of our agenda he 
entirely ignored the genesis and history of our talks on this subject. We 
are not here to put forth propaganda statements for the public which 
obscure the issue, but we are here to discuss on the basis of facts and, 
between the two of us, to settle these issues.
15. I have tried calmly, objectively and frankly to deal with him 
on the questions that we face. A statement such as “since the opening 
of these talks all the Americans who desired to return have done so 
except for a few criminals serving sentences” does not contribute to a 
settlement of this issue. Both of us perfectly well know when we came 
here we were discussing precisely those Americans who were in prison. 
I accepted the proposals and suggestions he made which he said would 
expeditiously resolve the problem. As I have again pointed out this 
morning, rather than resolve, it appears to have worked in the opposite 
direction. Since December 1955 not a single prisoner has been released 
even a day before the completion of his sentence. I again pointed out, 
entirely apart even from the agreed announcement, it is common prac­
tice even under normal procedure for prisoners to be given time off for 
good behavior. However, each of these prisoners has been held right 
up to the last day of his sentence. I asked him this morning how the 
agreed announcement could be said in any way, under the most liberal 
or strained interpretation, be said to have been applied to them. I asked 
him to cite one single measure taken by his authorities with respect to 
the six who still remain in his prisons. I still await his answer.
17. I continued. With regard to the Chinese in the United States his 
vague, unsubstantiated and erroneous charges of obstruction to their 
return does not obscure two basic factors. The first fact is the Chinese 
who desire to do so are steadily and regularly returning to his country. 
To the best of our knowledge not less than 353 have returned since the 
beginning of our talks here. The second fact is that the very agency 
which he suggested for the purpose has not called to our attention a 
single case of any obstruction to departure.
18. I went on to say that such statements as “On the United States’ 
side Chinese still imprisoned remain without any change in their sit­
uation”, as he was well aware, did not correspond to the facts. Every 
Chinese in our prisons who desired to do so has been permitted to go 
home without regard to length of sentence and without regard to his 
eligibility for normal parole and release.
19. I continued. As far as Mr. Tseng is concerned, I pointed out 
that less than a year and a half from his entry into the U.S., that is, in
