had been affected by intimidation, bribery, or fraud to such an extent that
result reached did not represent will of people of Tacna and Arica having
the right to vote; in such event, the Plebiscitary Commission and the
Arbitrator may set election aside and decree new plebiscite within three
months (pp. 46–49 of award). Award contains no provision which looks to
abandonment of the proceedings because in opinion of Plebiscitary
Commission, or of a majority of it, conditions will not permit fair plebiscite,
and will not justify it in holding one. Award looks to holding of a plebiscite
and determination afterwards of question whether proceedings are vitiated
by fraud, intimidation, or bribery to extent that will of people of Tacna and
Arica is defeated.
Only contingency which could justify failure now to hold plebiscite is
encountering of obstacles which would render physically impossible
functioning of the election machinery—should Chilean Government, for
instance, practically exclude activities of Plebiscitary Commission. I give
this as an instance.
I do not think we are justified in abandoning plebiscite on conditions as
now reported in various past investigations. In regard to future, I am clear
that plebiscite should not be abandoned despite adverse circumstances or
any general preliminary opinion at which you may arrive to the effect that
fair plebiscite cannot be held, thus placing you and the Arbitrator in the
position of being obliged to justify an abandonment of the plebiscite on any
disputed issues of fact.
Should the Commissioner either of Chile or Peru be withdrawn by his
respective Government, you have complete authority to appoint another and
to continue with the plebiscite (award, pp. 43, 44). I think that, in spite of
the discouraging conditions, the thing for you to do is to give Chile and
Peru to understand that you are going ahead to hold an election and that if
that election is vitiated by intimidation or fraud or bribery by either party
you will vote to have election set aside, and a new one authorized. It might
happen that the circumstances in which plebiscite was held or frustration of
a proper plebiscite might justify Arbitrator in not ordering a new plebiscite
and in deciding that plebiscite as contemplated by the treaties had been
rendered impossible. If the parties to the plebiscite are given this
