674 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Mr. Perry said that to make $16 million available now to Guatemala would require a cut-­back in loan proposals for other areas. Ambassador McIntosh said such a cut-­back should be made in order to accommodate Latin American needs which he felt had been neglected by the DLF. GT–11. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1 Washington, December 9, 1958. SUBJECT DLF Staff Request for Board Guidance on Loan for Housing in Guatemala. I am informed that the DLF staff has requested by close of business Tuesday, December 9, guidance from the DLF Board as to whether an application from the Government of Guatemala for a loan of $12 million to be used for the purchase of housing mortgages should be placed under DLF review. The application has been summarized in DLF–IC/P– 116 of November 26.2 The necessity for prompt guidance in this matter stems from the circumstance that the DLF Latin American loan officer, Mr. William Ryan, is now in Guatemala City attempting to clarify and assess the intent and significance of four applications submitted by the Government of Guatemala for DLF loans totaling $33.5 million, of which this $12 million housing application is one. The staff paper emphasizes that consideration of this application would represent a departure from previously expressed views of Board members with respect to advisability of using DLF funds to finance housing construction. I am grateful to the DLF staff and to Ambassador McIntosh for the expeditious action which they have taken to facilitate consideration of the Guatemalan loan applications in line with my memorandum to you of November 14.3 Your support of the recommendation contained in that memorandum is greatly appreciated. The political and economic 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 814.02/12–958. Official Use Only. Drafted by Harry Conover, Deputy Director, Office of Inter-American Regional Affairs. 2 A copy of the referenced item, a memorandum to the Board of Directors of the DLF, is attached to a memorandum from William V. Turnage, Deputy Director, Office of International Financial and Development Affairs, to Dillon, December 8, 1958. A notation by Turnage on his covering memorandum indicates that Dillon approved the recommendation “that we would be prepared to consider on their merits modest loans to participate with local capital in sound proposals for establishing savings and loan Institutions coupled with mortgage insurance schemes.” (814.02/12–858). 3 Not found in Department of State files.
