3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
675
Gromyko said there were much more serious matters our two
countries should be dealing with than the scenario or some kind of a
detective story. He said that when he returned to Moscow he would
have to tell the Soviet leadership and Brezhnev personally that some-
thing had occurred that had never been contemplated by the Soviet au-
thorities that the Secretary and the U.S. Administration were laboring
under a delusion and that he had done his best to assure the Secretary
of State that the very thought of harming the security of the United
States could not have occurred to the Soviet leadership. He was certain
that Brezhnev would tell him that he had been right in doing so. If such
a thought had indeed occurred to the Secretary, Gromyko would as-
sure him that it was groundless. It was a strange thing that many more
serious problems related to halting the arms race, questions of the
SALT Treaty—when and if it would enter in force, questions of SALT
III, European matters, NPT, CTB and other most important matters
which should have engaged the efforts of both sides, had been subordi-
nated to a matter which did not exist. All this was very difficult to
understand.
The Secretary said that he wanted to ask Gromyko one or two fur-
ther questions. Was Gromyko saying that this was not a combat unit,
that the Soviet Union did not intend to give this unit combat capabil-
ities by airlift or sealift? Was that what Gromyko had been saying?
In reply to the Secretary’s question, Gromyko said that the Soviets
have only a training center in Cuba and did not intend to change the
conditions under which that center operated. That is what he wanted to
state officially. He could not state the matter any clearer. In fact, he
could state that the Soviet Union will not change those conditions. That
was even stronger than saying that it did not intend to change
conditions.
The Secretary had said that he wanted to be clear. He wished it
were a simple matter, but it was not. Could he (Vance) assume that
what he had said does reflect the Soviet position accurately?
Gromyko repeated that the Soviets had said that they have only a
training center in Cuba, which engaged only in training functions, and
that the Soviet Union will not change that situation. It seemed to him
that he and the Secretary were talking along the same lines. It was true
that he was stating this to the Secretary unilaterally, and that he was
also stating it quite definitely.
The Secretary said that one of the important factors would be the
fact that the unit in question does not have airlift or sealift capabilities
and that the Soviet Union did not intend to change that.
Gromyko said that was correct and that the Soviets will not change
the function of the training center.
