586
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
this regard. His suggestion was that he inform Amini in the utmost
confidence that I had told him about my visit to Karachi and my con-
versation with Mr. Dulles and that I had indicated to him that there
seemed to be little chance in present circumstances of a settlement of
the compensation problem. He would go on to tell Amini that he had
said that, in his opinion, it would be much easier for a settlement of the
oil dispute to be effected with Dr. Mosadeq than with some subsequent
Prime Minister and that he had expressed to me the hope that if it
should prove impossible to achieve an oil settlement, the Government
of the United States would nevertheless give sufficient economic and fi-
nancial assistance to Iran to enable it to pass through its present eco-
nomic crisis.
Loy W. Henderson
213.
Monthly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated.
IRAN
May 1953
A. General Developments
1. May was marked by relatively minor parliamentary skirmishes
between supporters and opponents of Mossadeq. The government’s
base of support in the Majlis is narrowing, but the opposition still lacks
the unity of leadership and design to challenge Mossadeq’s authority
effectively. While the Tudeh’s popular strength remains about the
same, its relative political position has grown relatively stronger as a
result of continuing penetration of government agencies and the dis-
ruptive effects of Mossadeq’s struggle with the opposition.2
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO–IMS Files, Job 81–01061R, Box 1, Folder
5, Monthly Report—May 1953—Country Summaries and Analyses. Top Secret.
2 In commenting on the effectiveness of the CIA’s anti-Tudeh propaganda program,
the May 1953 Monthly Project Status Report on [text not declassified] states that “the
project’s effectiveness can be seen in the growing government interest and Tudeh opposi-
tion to certain items distributed by the [text not declassified] net. The vehement Tudeh pro-
test and subsequent government crackdown is indicative of the effectiveness of the black
attack on Borujerdi. An excellent Psychological Warfare success resulted from the dis-
covery and publication of the unissued and heretofore secret government order ab-
solving Tudehites from complicity in the attempted assassination of the Shah. Finally, in
