First Responses 7 Since the Shah is a given and since Khomeini’s need to hold on to power domestically will outweigh any benefits he might receive from cooperation with us (at least in his own mind), this argues for a shift in our own policies. We have made a conscious effort to develop good relations with the Iranian government as a long-term investment. At least publicly, we can continue with that but we should have no illusions that it will pay off. Otherwise, we should shift the balance of our efforts to building up contacts with the secular leadership and other opponents of Khomeini to place ourselves as well as possible for a successor government and to end Khomeini’s rule as soon as possible. The longer Khomeini remains in power, the worse it will be for us— and for Iran. [1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified] In the meantime, Khomeini will use the hostages for his own political purposes. We must continue our efforts to convince him that this is a losing game by mobilizing all the resources we can. A special emissary still strikes me as a very useful initiative on our part. I suspect (and Bill Miller agrees) that when Khomeini has made his point, he will release the hostages. Unfortunately, our principal channel—Yazdi—is not the most effective way of getting our message through to the Ayatollah, and if we overload that circuit we may merely succeed in getting Yazdi, Bazargan and other possible friendly elements fired. 5. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 5, 1979 SUBJECT Iran You asked how our contingency plans held up when put to the test. Obviously, the answer is: not at all. The extraordinary effort which has been exerted over the past nine months to reinforce the Chancery building proved futile when the mob managed to penetrate the base- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 142, Chron File, Sick 11/1/79–11/15/79. Confidential.
