1142 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II by a variety of non-governmental organizations, ran concurrently with the UN conference. In November 1979, in preparation for the conference, the Department of State established the Office of the U.S. Secretariat for the World Conference of the UN Decade for Women. Headed by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Equal Employment Opportunities and Civil Rights Vivian Lowery Derryck, the Secretariat conducted an expansive national outreach program by partnering with the Departments of Education, Labor, and Health and Human Services; the Environmental Protection Agency; and women’s organizations to coordinate and host meetings throughout the country to discuss conference agenda items and gain insight on problems facing American women. (Department of State Bulletin, April 1980, page 69) The Department also hosted Copenhagen 80: The Washington Conference for Women, June 12–13, featuring addresses by Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Newsom, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Patricia Derian, and Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Richard McCall. Derryck summarized the speeches in a memorandum of conversation transmitted via telegram 169422 to Copenhagen, June 27: “Assistant Secretary Patt Derian keynoted the Conference on a positive note when she commented on the power of public opinion and the strong influence of informed citizens on policy formulation. Assistant Secretary Richard McCall won many new supporters by addressing the group on two separate occasions. Under Secretary Newsom in his address outlined the foreign policy issues facing the US in mid-1980 in a comprehensive factual way that impressed the participants and indicated the seriousness and the respect that he held for the audience. In corridor conversations participants continued to discuss the receptivity and accessibility to high-level Department officials.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800309–1137) According to the final Report of the United States Delegation to the World Conference on the UN Decade for Women: Equality, Development, and Peace, the Secretariat prepared various scope, position, and contingency papers for use by the delegation on such topics as North/South economic issues, job segregation, reproductive health, pay equity, illegal substances, and refugees. It also assisted Department and White House officials in selecting the delegation. U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Donald F. McHenry and Presidential Assistant Sarah Weddington served as the delegation co-chairmen. Representatives included Lowery Derryck, Director of AID’s Women in Development Office Arvonne Fraser, Director of the Department of Labor’s Women’s Bureau Alexis Herman, U.S. Representative to the Commission on the Status of Women of the UN Economic and Social Council Koryne
