1976 3 the U.S. population. Mr. Nitze summarized his key point as follows: the assumptions underlying statements made by the majority of the group were not supportable by the dataÔÇö┬şthat, in fact, the data showed that in the future the Soviet Union would be able to survive a nuclear exchange but that the United States would not; and that, in his view, if such a situation were to develop, it would have a major impact on the two nationsÔÇÖ respective behavior. A discussion ensued among the advisors. Other members of the group, particularly Mr. Vance and Mr. Brown, emphasized that the calculations cited above were dependent upon assumptions such as the effectiveness of Soviet civil defense preparations and U.S. targeting policy, which would be questionable to most observers. In effect, they argued that the calculations presented a ÔÇťworstÔÇŁ case for the U.S. and a ÔÇťbestÔÇŁ case for the U.S.S.R., both of which were unrealistic. They believed that Mr. NitzeÔÇÖs scenario was biased toward the Soviets, and that a more even handed approach would yield different results. Other members of the group questioned the implications of the calculations advanced by Mr. Nitze. There was general agreement that the question was a critical one, and that there should be a thorough study aimed at testing the hypothesis advanced by Mr. Nitze. Senator Mondale asked why the United States, after having built and deployed large missiles early in the 1960s, moved to smaller and more accurate missiles? Mr. Brown responded that the U.S. believed that the diversity and flexibility of its strategic forces was more important than sheer force. It felt that throw-┬şweight could easily be re-┬şbuilt if that appeared to be necessary, but that building a lot of throw-┬şweight into fixed-┬şsite ICBMs did not make sense because of the vulnerability problem. He also stated that mobile land-┬şbased missiles implied high costs and political problems. The discussion continued with Mr. Woolsey, who noted that in discussing these issues it should always be kept in mind that we are not really talking about nuclear war, but about Soviet perceptions of the risks of nuclear war and its likely outcome. He then discussed the ambivalence of weapon systems, and the difficulty of inferring policy from the characteristics of weapons. Governor Carter asked three questions. First, what is the Soviet attitude toward limited nuclear war? Second, what is the U.S. attitude? And third, what U.S. programs exist now to build-┬şup strategic forces and what are the Soviets doing? In response to the first two questions, there was a long discussion the upshot of which was that Soviet attitudes were mixed, that one had to discriminate between tactical nuclear wars and strategic
