1976  3
the U.S. population. Mr. Nitze summarized his key point as follows: 
the assumptions underlying statements made by the majority of the 
group were not supportable by the data—­that, in fact, the data showed 
that in the future the Soviet Union would be able to survive a nuclear 
exchange but that the United States would not; and that, in his view, if 
such a situation were to develop, it would have a major impact on the 
two nations’ respective behavior.
A discussion ensued among the advisors. Other members of the 
group, particularly Mr. Vance and Mr. Brown, emphasized that the 
calculations cited above were dependent upon assumptions such as 
the effectiveness of Soviet civil defense preparations and U.S. target-
ing policy, which would be questionable to most observers. In effect, 
they argued that the calculations presented a “worst” case for the U.S. 
and a “best” case for the U.S.S.R., both of which were unrealistic. They 
believed that Mr. Nitze’s scenario was biased toward the Soviets, and 
that a more even handed approach would yield different results. Other 
members of the group questioned the implications of the calculations 
advanced by Mr. Nitze.
There was general agreement that the question was a critical one, 
and that there should be a thorough study aimed at testing the hypoth-
esis advanced by Mr. Nitze.
Senator Mondale asked why the United States, after having built 
and deployed large missiles early in the 1960s, moved to smaller and 
more accurate missiles? Mr. Brown responded that the U.S. believed 
that the diversity and flexibility of its strategic forces was more import-
ant than sheer force. It felt that throw-­weight could easily be re-­built if 
that appeared to be necessary, but that building a lot of throw-­weight 
into fixed-­site ICBMs did not make sense because of the vulnerability 
problem. He also stated that mobile land-­based missiles implied high 
costs and political problems.
The discussion continued with Mr. Woolsey, who noted that in 
discussing these issues it should always be kept in mind that we are 
not really talking about nuclear war, but about Soviet perceptions of 
the risks of nuclear war and its likely outcome. He then discussed the 
ambivalence of weapon systems, and the difficulty of inferring policy 
from the characteristics of weapons.
Governor Carter asked three questions. First, what is the Soviet 
attitude toward limited nuclear war? Second, what is the U.S. attitude? 
And third, what U.S. programs exist now to build-­up strategic forces 
and what are the Soviets doing?
In response to the first two questions, there was a long discus-
sion the upshot of which was that Soviet attitudes were mixed, that 
one had to discriminate between tactical nuclear wars and strategic
