Arms Control and Disarmament 1345 of testing of nuclear weapons. The President inquired again about the status of the legislation. I explained the question of allowing agreements to be ineffective if within 30 days there was an adverse concurrent res­ olution. The President said that he felt while in general there was a duty to prevent any legislative encroachments, he recognized that this was a legitimate case for an exception and authorized Mr. Herter to inform the Attorney General accordingly. I said that the proposal had been concurred in by Defense and AEC.” D.E. Boster 324. Telegram 1259 From USUN1 New York, May 2, 1958, 5 p.m. 1259. Re US Position on Fallout. Suggest Department give consideration to basic change in US public posture re hazards of fallout. As seen from here US policy of always belittling hazards in public pronouncements has made it pos­ sible for Soviets to cast US as the apologist for fallout, and thereby to turn exclusively against US world’s increasing concern re these haz­ ards. Present situation with Soviets having completed test series and ours just beginning enhances their opportunity promote this devel­ opment, which might lead to serious anti-­American trend world pub­ lic opinion. In ­carbon-­14 they even have propaganda answer to clean bomb. Despite combination factors unfavorable to US in present situa­ tion, and regardless US position on testing itself, however, believe there would be distinct advantages in courageous change to full and frank exposure fallout hazards consistent with UN Radiation Committee report. Our repeated belittling of fallout hazard appears decreasingly effective with public opinion, and losing US respect of informed peo­ ple. Convincing posture of candor this issue will reaffirm that America stands for truth and humane consideration. Moreover, believe we must consider long-­range possibility Sovi­ ets have not really stopped testing and that time may come when we oppose testing and they continue, taking into account probable relative 1 Source: U.S. position on fallout. Confidential. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/5–258.
