958
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
I
Although these countries are more sensitive to the risks of prolifer-
ation than two years ago, they seem more set than we on giving their
own energy needs first priority. They are concerned about spread of re-
processing and enrichment plants and weapons-grade materials. But,
they believe we place too much emphasis on risks of diversion from nu-
clear power programs as compared with dedicated production pro-
grams, and that we are over-emphasizing the risks of plutonium sepa-
ration and use as compared with risks from spread of enrichment
facilities and accumulation of spent fuel.
Our allies are very much concerned about the lack of predictability
of supplier states’ actions, especially the United States, primarily with
respect to approving the reprocessing of spent fuel and use of pluto-
nium. There is still general disapproval of and resentment against the
Nuclear Nonproliferation Act of 1978 because of its requirements on
these points. The prevailing view is that these requirements are more
likely to be a stimulus, than an impediment, to the spread of sensitive
facilities and materials.
II
On breeders, thermal recycle of plutonium and the need for repro-
cessing for waste disposal, there is some convergence of American and
other advanced countries’ views.
All believe it necessary for advanced states to continue R&D on
breeders as a high priority. With fewer energy options, the others feel
this more strongly than we do. But none—not even the French—are
prepared now to make a flat commitment to breeder commercializa-
tion, although they and the Japanese expect to do so within the next
decade.
They all accept that the economic advantage of thermal recycle is
at present marginal, at best, and that decisions about recycle will be
made on other grounds—assurance of supply and the perceived ad-
vantage by some of reprocessing for waste disposal and the need in this
case to burn up the resulting plutonium.
The Germans are committed in principle to reprocessing as a pre-
condition to waste disposal and feel that reopening the question would
jeopardize their already politically fragile nuclear power program.
However, there is increasing acknowledgment that reprocessing is not
required to dispose of waste safely. In fact, in the Free World, except for
France and UK, there is likely to be little commercial reprocessing of
spent fuel for years.
III
With the end of INFCE approaching and the NPT Review Confer-
ence in August 1980, our major problem will be to deal with pressures
