National Security Policy  7
Now look at Nos. 13, 14, and 15, which seek to lessen SAC’s vul­
nerability to a possible late CY 59 ICBM threat. The first of three ICBM 
early warning stations (the Thule arc) will be operational in late CY 
59, and the remaining operational by December 60. Tracking radars 
to identify probable targets will be operational one year after early 
warning radars are operational. Only one-­fifth of SAC will be on a 
15-­minute alert by mid-CY 60 (one-­fourth of SAC by mid-CY 61). SAC 
(which now has 31 bases) will be further dispersed to SAC bases as 
follows: 44 by mid-CY 59; 52 by mid-CY 60; 53 by mid-CY 61. The Air 
Force is studying interim dispersal to non-SAC military bases and to 
civilian airfields.
Now look at Nos. 16, 17, and 18, which seek to increase SAC’s strate­
gic offensive power. We will increase the IRBMs to be produced by early 
CY 60 to 120 (as compared with 240 recommended by the Panel for the 
end of CY 60). We will increase the ICBMs to be produced by the end of 
FY 63 to 130 (as compared with 600 recommended by the Panel). The ini­
tial operational capability of the first 15 U.S. IRBMs and the first 10 U.S. 
ICBMs will equal or better the Panel time phasing; but not (under present 
plan) the operational capability of larger numbers of these missiles.
According to the latest NIE, the earliest date at which the Soviets 
could have a 100 ICBM capability would be mid-1959. At this time the 
U.S. would have operational 10 ICBMs and at most 45 IRBMs. However, 
our early warning ICBM detection system, our 15-­minute SAC alert sta­
tus, and our dispersal of SAC to SAC bases would be deficient as indi­
cated in the short-­page table before you. (Examine table.)
12. As to Group C: ‘‘Panel recommendations which the agency 
assigned primary responsibility for comment would further study 
before deciding to carry out, modify, or reject.
No. 20, which is another measure to lessen SAC’s vulnerability to 
a possible late CY 59 ICBM threat, is under study in Defense, but pre­
liminary findings indicate that, because modification of available anti-­
aircraft missiles would have too limited effectiveness, Defense prefers 
an R & D program for a new anti-­missile system.
As to No. 21, Defense agrees in principle that capabilities for limited 
military operations should be augmented. However, Defense believes that 
consideration of this problem should be deferred, pending completion of 
a national-­level study, a plan for which will be recommended by Defense 
to NSC. I understand this plan will not be ready for some two months.
13. Recommendation No. 26 is the only one in Group D. “Not con­
curred in and not proposed to be carried out.” Defense points out that 
blast shelters would not protect SAC runways or reduce fallout radia­
tion, and believes SAC can be better protected, for the cost involved, by 
alert and dispersal measures.
