480 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV would deemphasize damage limiting and focus targeting on preventing the emergence of marked asymmetries in US and Soviet capabilities that could be exploited by the Soviet Union to coerce us or our allies following a nuclear attack; or which, if perceived as an advantage by the Soviets, could affect crisis bargaining short of nuclear war. This policy would also retain non-SIOP options, but strengthen the procedures to integrate non-SIOP nuclear options with other military and political measures. This policy would involve alteration of current targeting plans and declaratory policy in order to take into account what we know of Soviet views of nuclear strategy, in particular their sensitivities to losing control over their society, and the deterrent effect that we might achieve by planning to attempt to deny the Soviet Union a war winning capability. Some believe such changes to current policy represent the minimum necessary to strengthen deterrence in light of what we know of Soviet objectives and their growing military power. Others believe that changes to current policy are not necessary to strengthen deterrence and would be provocative and costly. b. A further departure from current policy would be to focus both employment and declaratory policy more heavily on denying the Soviets any confidence of achieving a favorable war outcome. A high priority effort would have to be put on developing greater endurance and on improved targeting of [less than 1 line not declassified] New capabilities would be required to support such a targeting policy, particularly more survivable C3I. Countervalue targeting would (as in a.) focus on Soviet [1 line not declassified] However, these attacks would be designed to be withheld for [less than 1 line not declassified] as part of an expanded reserve force concept. Targeting population or targeting industry to impede long-­term recovery would not be a specific SIOP objective, but an assured destruction capability (to be withheld so long as the Soviets spared U.S. cities and industries) should be maintained. Targeting of both Soviet nuclear and conventional forces would be designed principally to assure that they could not expect to achieve a favorable nuclear or military balance following a counterforce exchange. However, damage limiting to the extent feasible would also be retained as an objective of counterforce targeting. Non-SIOP option planning would be improved as in a. above. Declaratory policy would stress that the overall objective of our nuclear policy is to deny to the Soviet Union a favorable outcome from a nuclear war. Some argue that this policy could help to convince the Soviets that the US was seeking serious war-­ winning objectives (as some maintain the Soviets do) and thus, would be a far more effective strategy in extending deterrence and preventing coercion, and that it would give the U.S. more reasonable war objectives if deterrence fails. Others argue that by reducing emphasis on the prospect of massive retaliation and by implying that the U.S. was
