release in the country where he is accredited. They also suggested that the words “collect and” be inserted in line 4 between the words “countrymen” and “receipt”. The Department recognizes that the principal suggestion is not without merit. It can understand that the Austrian Government might consider it to be unnecessary that the agency distributing proceeds of an estate in the United States, and paying a portion thereof to an Austrian consular officer as representative of his non-resident countrymen, should follow funds beyond the hands of the consular officer, on the principle that the matter of the funds reaching the proper distributee is one between such officer and his Government. This Governmen assumes that it would be the official duty of the foreign consular officer to make proper disposition of funds received by him for the purposes mentioned in the Article, and that it would be the function of his Government to see that he performed his duty in this regard. The Department considers that the question of retaining or omitting the proviso is not of great importance. The article with the proviso is identical with Article XXV of the Treaty of the United States with Germany, Article XXI of the Treaty with Hungary, and Article XXIV of the Treaty with Estonia. In order to avoid a departure from these treaties the Department desires that you endeavor to prevail upon the Austrian authorities to accept Article XXI of the American draft without modification. You may inform them that while this Government appreciates their viewpoint with respect to the proviso, it would be glad if Austria would accept the article without change in order that it may be uniform with the corresponding article of the Treaties which are in force between the United States and Germany, Hungary, and Estonia, respectively. You are authorized, however, to consent to the omission of the proviso, if the Austrian authorities attach great importance to their suggestion. This Government does not desire, however, to substitute therefor the provision that a receipt of the consular officer under his official seal and signature shall be accepted as a release. The Department has no objection to the acceptance of the words “collect and” after “countrymen” in the fourth line of the draft. Article XXII. Exemptions from duty of importations of consular supplies and belongings of consuls
