3. I briefly reiterated our position to Tsai that when the
“clarification agreement” had been signed and necessary orders
given as to land and bonds, we would be willing to meet the
Japanese and the Chinese with a view to finding a solution of the
problem along the reasonable lines proposed heretofore, but that,
before we would do anything further, we must be put on this basis
of parity with the Japanese.
4. I could not help being impressed with the apparent sincerity of
the stand the Admiral declared he had taken with the Japanese in
support of the Federal contract, with the logic of his remarks, and,
likewise, with the belief he seemingly had that he could succeed
in achieving the result desired. He stated at the end of our
conversation that he would have a talk with Yoshizawa as soon as
the Minister arrived, and that he would inform me of the result
and then invite Yoshizawa and me, and probably Chang, the
Minister of Communications, to an unofficial dinner at which we
could informally discuss the matter. I shall accept such an
invitation unless instructed to the contrary, provided it appears
advantageous then, and I shall quite frankly tell all that we desire
to solve the problem but state that we are unable to enter any
negotiations for that purpose until and unless our contract is
executed by the signature of the “clarification agreement”, and so
forth.
5. Since, in addition to the conversation I had with Tsai, Saburi
very earnestly spoke to me in the above regard when he returned
recently from a brief visit to Tokyo, I am the more inclined to the
belief that the Japanese are becoming increasingly anxious that
this matter be settled. Saburi emphasized that the only question
pending between his country and the United States was the
wireless question and that our inability to come to a decision on it
was a great pity. From a frank discussion of it with him I gathered
quite conclusively that the Japanese Government now regarded
the question primarily as one involving their national prestige and
therefore that the finding of a solution which would save face for
them was the principal problem.
