Chapter 4, February–April 1990  543
for our May ministerial, we covered START, Germany, Lithuania and 
internal developments in the Soviet Union, Africa, and Afghanistan.
I can’t say that we resolved anything, but the character of our dis-
cussion is another reminder of the changed nature of our relationship. 
Let me briefly run through each topic.
Summit Dates
I gave him our proposed dates—­either June 18–22 or the earlier 
time of June 11–15. I also outlined your preferred scenarios for time 
in Washington and at Kennebunkport. He responded that in principle 
they would accept the scenarios, but they needed to come earlier in 
this month. The June 11–15 dates conflicted with the first ever Congress 
of the Russia Federated Republic’s Communist Party. This was a 
very important political event for Gorbachev and he couldn’t miss it 
or alter the date. Pushing the summit date later would interfere with 
the big Party Congress that was so critical to Gorbachev’s success. He 
said again that it was essential that the summit come before the Party 
Congress—­implying that a successful summit would boost Gorbachev 
going into the Russian and the Union-­wide Party Congress.
Shevardnadze said that he and Gorbachev had gone over dates 
carefully, and the only times that worked were in the first week in June, 
specifically the June 4–8 timeframe. He was afraid no other time would 
work, and hoped we would be understanding given their “complex” 
internal situation and their “upcoming big events.”
I told him those dates coincided with a state visit to Washington of 
the Amir of Bahrain and the spring NAC ministerial. I said I would talk 
it over with you and see what we could arrange to meet their needs.
START
On START, Shevardnadze said he thought we would be able to 
resolve all the major issues by the June summit. He then ran through 
several issues, he would like to settle quickly: ALCMs, SLCMs, the non-­
circumvention clause, and duration of the treaty. Of these, the only one 
where he felt there was a problem was ALCMs, where he said they 
have no fall-­back on the 600 km range.
I told him if that was the case, then our two presidents would have 
to resolve this one because I had no further room to move on range. He 
responded by saying our presidents’ time was too valuable to spend on 
a technical issue like this and we would have to resolve it. We will see if 
or when they move on this; I suspect it may be the last thing agreed to 
because Gorbachev clearly has to overrule Akhromeyev.
I then raised our START proposal, making clear that I was not 
seeking an answer now, why I thought it had merit, and above all else,
