3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 July–December 1979 637 4. Account of meeting is as follows: McHenry: (Introduces the members of the US side, describing Mr. Orville Schell as “a lawyer hired by Mr. Godunov”) We are sorry that this difficult situation has arisen. Our only desire is to ascertain directly from you, in an atmosphere where you are as free as possible from any pressures, whether you wish to remain in the United States or return to the Soviet Union. Vlasova: My only wish is to return to the Soviet Union. McHenry: I understand what you are saying, but I would like to make clear to you the possibilities before you. You are now in the United States under US jurisdiction. Should you choose to remain in this country both your country and mine will honor this decision. (Note: The US interpreter translated the verb “honor” as “uchtet.” At this, Soviet Ambassador Makeyev interjected that a better translation would be the Soviet expression “satisfy your desire.” The US side had no objection to this version.) Should you freely choose to return to the Soviet Union, your government and mine will honor this decision and satisfy this desire also. If you wish to remain in the United States for a period of time, you can also do this. You cannot be forced to leave this country. If you freely choose to stay, you can go from here to another place and reflect further before making any final decision. What do you wish to do? Vlasova: In connection with the situation which took place with Godunov, I expressed my desire to return home on my own. McHenry: What do you mean “the situation which took place with Godunov”? Vlasova: My husband was missing for two days during which time I had no news from him. I knew absolutely nothing about what had happened. He had given no warning to me. That is the “situation” to which I referred. McHenry: I don’t know the background of what occurred. I do know, however, that you are free to do whatever you wish, as was your husband. Vlasova: I agree fully that I am free to express my wishes and am now doing so. McHenry: I could discuss these issues further, but have agreed not to do so. You have expressed your views, but I wanted you to know the full range of options before you. Vlasova: I understand. But again, I am expressing my views. McHenry: I want you to know that you can delay any final decision and that any future decision will also be fully up to you. Vlasova: I don’t know why we are having this conversation. I had already expressed my wishes and made a clear announcement of my intentions.
