for everyone having concern in the foreign and domestic wireless field
including telephony and broadcasting. Seemingly it would be desirable that
an official observer represent the Legation of the nationality of each
participating company.
(4) The submission by the Government of China of a comprehensive
proposal could advantageously initiate the discussion at this conference. The
Chinese Government, I think, would itself be willing to issue to the
companies which are concerned invitations to be represented at the
conference, should the plan for a conference be brought to the Chinese
Government’s attention as a solution of the existing complications between
the nations which are obstructing wireless communications development.
Regarding this consideration, it is my respectful proposal that a suggestion be
made to the Chinese Minister in Washington that if invitations were issued by
the Chinese Government to such a round-table conference, the Department
would give no opposition to American interests participating but, on the other
hand, would have hope of an outcome of success. It is my opinion that
approach by this method is superior to offering such proposals in Peking.
(5) I see the several following advantages in the convoking of such a
conference: When centered on a common object the combined business
acumen of the several representatives should be able to work an adjustment
of their various interests so that that object would be achieved. The American
representatives would, with their present attitude toward the Federal
agreement, be so placed with regard to making concessions as to set a
commendable example. The respective Governments, through their official
observers, would be in a position to make provision that there would be no
violation of international policies such as open door, elimination of spheres
of interest, etc.
(6) It is my belief that there would be embodied in an understanding arrived
at in this way the most satisfactory feature of the proposal made by the
Japanese, that the prestige of each participant would be conserved, the
dignity of China would be enhanced, and that the most for the actual
development of radio would be promised thereby.
SCHURMAN
