374 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 5. Not enough attention has been paid in SALT to the fact that the Soviets can reload and fire from their SS–18, 19, and 17 silos within approximately 24 hours or less. The implications of this need to be examined more fully, especially in view of the lack of a Minuteman silo reload capability. I will have our staff take a look at this. 6. We have very limited warning capability in the event of a Soviet nuclear attack on Europe and/or China. The Europeans and/or ­Chinese have even less. This issue could become a political problem in U.S.-European relations. 7. Our infrared satellite warning system (DSP) has occasional blind spots as well as growing requirements which it cannot meet without added capabilities, especially additional satellites. My staff will be developing the needed review. 8. We need more political input into the development of LNOs. Until now they have been developed purely by the military. I will be taking corrective actions. 9. Dave Jones accompanied me. He is immensely worried about the CTB and says the Chiefs will oppose it. He raised the CTB issue with me several times in the course of the trip. 86. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, September 11, 1978 SUBJECT Weapons Systems, Military Capabilities, and Perceptions You will recall the meeting of the NSC on August 15, on the subject of U.S.-Soviet competition with special reference to the military balance.2 The issue of the relationship of U.S. weapons systems programs to public and governmental perceptions of the U.S.-Soviet balance has been raised at that meeting and since. I have been giving further thought to this matter, and have reached a number of preliminary conclusions. These are listed below and are 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 5, Defense Department: 10/78. Top Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum. 2 See Document 76.
