546
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
maintain the crucial and delicate balance between ourselves, the Soviet
Union and China? And fourth, what can be done to our national secu-
rity process to overcome a deep-seated perception that we are in dis-
array—an image which gravely undermines the very real and substan-
tive successes of this Administration.
Achievements in 1980
Your intense work over the last two years on SALT, the Middle
East and China is bearing fruit. We are about to sign a SALT agreement,
and with effort and firmness we might have a Middle East treaty. The
Deng visit will dramatize a very real diplomatic accomplishment.3
But the question as we approach 1980 is what do we do for an en-
core. The achievement of the SALT summit will evolve into a long, pos-
sibly bitter and potentially inconclusive ratification debate. Legislative
liaison experts now estimate we may not achieve Senate ratification be-
fore Thanksgiving and possibly not before Christmas. While ratifica-
tion itself will be an achievement, it is hard to believe it will provide
much political momentum for the campaign of 1980, especially if the
Soviets in the meantime again do something that generates further
public concerns about their motives and actions.
The problems of the Middle East are likely to drag on in one form
or another. This is addressed in detail below. It is also true that we are
likely to continue to have turmoil in Iran with wider international
repercussions.
We have surveyed the possible achievements which we might seek
that could come to fruition in 1980. Success in Southern Africa, if it is
possible, will not have a great public impact. CTB is likely to produce a
divisive debate in Congress. Conventional Arms Transfer Limitation
will be a positive step but will not command enormous public atten-
tion. The same may be said for an Indian Ocean agreement or the estab-
lishment of some new rules regarding the proliferation of nuclear capa-
bilities as the result of INFCE.4
The only measure apart from those indicated below that might
have a broad impact is the achievement of a first step MBFR agreement
focusing primarily if not exclusively on U.S.-Soviet reductions in Cen-
tral Europe. Such an agreement could well be signed at a Summit of the
more than a dozen nations which participate in MBFR. It could be a sig-
nificant political event, indicative of improving East-West relations. We
could seek to time such an initial agreement for the spring of 1980,
shortly before the Democratic Convention.
3 See footnote 3, Document 104.
4 See footnote 3, Document 56.
