1364 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX does not work, we have a choice between a) Duncan’s options approach, with the 90-day formula being one such option; or b) as Stu said, trying to nail down the 90-day provision. The President said that the overriding objective is that Israel should feel that, if it has a serious supply problem, we will step in. This should not just be loss of supply, but also if the price is exorbitant. We must prevent Israel from self-triggering, however—it would rather rely on the U.S. than on the spot market or on Egypt. We will not let that happen. 20/60 is mandatory to prevent that. The 90-day provision, to be followed by the 20/60 test, is all right. Al Moses said it would help if Modai could get this position today. Ambassador Owen asked how we should conduct the talks with Modai. The President said our negotiators need to be tougher. Secretary Muskie said that there are two ways to go at the 10:30 meeting with Modai—to have the negotiators meet, or to do it at the Cabinet level, then send it to the negotiators, and then back to himself and Duncan if need be. The President said that they should work out the details. The negotiators should tell Muskie and Duncan what not to do when they see Modai, so that he (Modai) can’t slip anything in. This is an old Israeli tactic. If they get something in a side conversation that they like, then it becomes binding—even if it was said by Warren Harding. They say: “Warren said . . .” (laughter) Secretary Muskie said that he will make Modai feel good, and Duncan can be tough (laughter). The President said that he has the responsibility to see that Egypt does not turn off the oil for frivolous reasons. Sadat won’t do it; but a successor might. We need to guarantee Israel’s oil. The position he has outlined is as forthcoming as it can be; we will go no further, even if the Israelis go home. Secretary Cooper raised the phrase “reasons beyond Israel’s control,” even under the automatic provision ((note: in Israel’s meeting the criteria on Egypt and Mexico)). The President said he agreed that one settler wouldn’t be construed as “Israel’s control.” Muskie can explain this to Modai. Les Goldmann said that we want to limit this to oil actions on Israel’s part. The President said yes. We don’t want Sadat to think that Israel has to agree on points in the autonomy talks for it to get oil. He wishes the team good luck; they should call him if need be. He thinks it will be ok. (The meeting ended at 10:00 a.m.).
