850
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
which we regard as too sensitive, and therefore beyond the pale. The
major problem on which agencies now disagree, is whether coproc-
essing should be encouraged, for example at Tokai. NRC feels that co-
processing is no better in the long run than reprocessing, ACDA dis-
agrees. Other agencies are unsure. To a lesser degree, this same
confusion holds for partial coprocessing. This issue is addressed in the
accompanying paper on Tokai. It does not require a Presidential deci-
sion at this time, but any guidance you might care to offer would be
valuable.
COMMENTS:
III. Political Aspects
To be effective, the evaluation program needs to develop and
demonstrate:
1. technical alternatives which will maximize physical barriers to
the direct accessibility of weapons-useable materials, e.g., LWRs with
long-term spent fuel storage instead of reprocessing, or cycles using
fuel “spiked” with highly radioactive material from partial coprocessing.
2. technical/political alternatives which will isolate sensitive tech-
nologies, facilities and materials under effective institutional arrange-
ments, e.g., multinational centers, or supplier monopolies on sensitive
facilities.
3. institutional arrangements by which positive results of the pro-
gram could be implemented as widely as possible.
The success of the evaluation program will depend, in large part,
on a) its acceptability to the other industrialized countries and b) the
degree to which it can be reconciled with existing programs relating to
breeder development and associated reprocessing. In this regard, it
should be noted that the British are in the process of scaling up their
Windscale reprocessing facility, the French have a commercial reproc-
essing plant in operation with specific plans to increase capacity, the
Japanese have built their Tokai pilot reprocessing plant and are ready
to begin testing it, and the FRG has a pilot reprocessing plant in opera-
tion and appears firmly committed to another much larger facility.
Table II lists existing or planned foreign reprocessing facilities. All
of these nations also have avowed interests in proceeding with the
breeder. In some cases, the U.S. does not have substantial leverage over
their activities. Our objective is to try to induce them to actively partici-
pate in the evaluation program and to reorient their current programs.
Given this situation, we could seek the cooperation of France, the
UK, and the FRG through an evaluation framework which would in-
clude optimizing safeguards and related controls that might be applied
