1004 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement of that institution financing such a loan. The Minister indicated that he found Mr. Waugh sympathetic to the idea. Mr. Rubottom said that while he had not yet had an opportunity to study the Paraguayan proposal at length, he had gained the impression that it involved a triangular transaction with Spain which the United States might find it difficult to agree to. The Minister explained that what Paraguay has in mind does not actually have the three-­cornered feature which the United States finds objectionable. The loan would be made directly to Paraguay, which would purchase steel plate and motors from the United States and send the material to Spain. Construction costs would be paid out of a combination of Paraguay’s favorable pesetas balance and P.L. 480 pesetas which the United States holds in Spain. Mr. Rubottom said that this, and any other Paraguayan loan proposal, would receive careful attention in Washington but that naturally he could not commit the United States then and there. The Minister said two items of business remained. The first was the Minister’s information copy of a lengthy telegram which President Stroessner had just sent directly to President Eisenhower. The Minister rendered an eloquent reading of the telegram.5 Stroessner, saying that his message was inspired by the traditional friendship between Paraguay and the United States and was a reaffirmation of ­Pan-American ideals and principles, urged that the United States lend its whole-­hearted cooperation in the current gathering of the Foreign Ministers of the American Republics who had met to discuss the ­proposed “Operation Pan-America” of Brazilian President Kubitschek. Stroessner noted that a united America, closely bound by ties of friendship and understanding, can serve as an example to the world. The second item was the Minister’s request that Mr. Rubottom arrange an appointment for him with Secretary Dulles. He wished to make a courtesy call, and had no intention of discussing Paraguayan problems with the Secretary. Mr. Rubottom said he was very sorry, but the Secretary had left that afternoon for Boston and would not return before the Minister’s scheduled departure for Paraguay. The Minister said he would be remiss should he fail to call attention to the fine work of Ambassador Ploeser who had created so many friends for himself and his country in Paraguay. Mr. Rubottom said he knew the Ambassador would be pleased to hear this. The conversation ended in the same cordial atmosphere in which it began. 5 [illegible in the original].
