1378
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
year and take into account my most recent consultations with President
Sadat and Prime Minister Begin.2
As you know, during my December visit both leaders agreed that
important progress had been made in the negotiations toward realiza-
tion of the objectives of the Camp David Accords and they expressed
their confidence that they would be able fully to fulfill the promise of
Camp David.
President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin also affirmed3 their
strong conviction that the process which you had developed with them
at Camp David is, in their words, “the only viable path toward compre-
hensive peace in the Middle East today.” I share that conviction and
deeply believe that it is in the highest interest of the United States to
press forward in the weeks and months ahead in order to conclude the
negotiations at the earliest possible date.
I have been honored to serve as your representative in these
negotiations.
Respectfully submitted,
Sol M. Linowitz4
Personal Representative of the President
for the Middle East Peace Negotiations
2 Linowitz visited Egypt and Israel December 15–17 for meetings with Sadat and
Begin. Meeting with Sadat on December 15, Linowitz conveyed to the Egyptian President
a message from President-elect Ronald W. Reagan stating that he would support the
Camp David process. Sadat, Linowitz noted, gave the impression that he remained “fully
committed” to the process and was “most concerned that the new administration under-
stand it is critical for the United States to remain a full partner in the negotiations.” How-
ever, Sadat also gave the impression that he was “suspicious of the Saudis”and “opposed
to any role for Hussein until autonomy agreement has been reached,” and that Egypt
“will take no initiatives at this juncture.” (Telegram 27630 from Cairo, December 16; Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–2029) Linowitz met twice
with Begin December 16–17, during which Linowitz briefed him on his conversations
with Sadat and conveyed a message from Carter stating that this was a “decisive mo-
ment” for the Camp David negotiations as it was necessary to demonstrate to Reagan
that the peace process was an “active and viable one.” These meetings are summarized in
telegram 22588 from Tel Aviv, December 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P880139–2142)
3 On December 18, Sadat and Begin issued a joint statement affirming their con-
tinued commitment to the Camp David process. For the full text of this statement, see tel-
egram 3917 from Jerusalem, December 17 (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800600–0668)
4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
