718.1915/701: Telegram
[Document 312]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
WASHINGTON, February 6, 1925—3 p.m.
17. Your 15, February 2, 11 a.m.27 You will please address the following note to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs reading a copy thereof to President Chiari:
“Under instructions from my Government I have the honor to advise you that
in view of the obligation assumed by the United States Government in Article
I of the Treaty of 1903,28 the question of Panama’s boundaries is of great
concern to it. Panama’s difficulties with its neighbors have in very large
measure arisen through disputed boundaries and have caused Panama on
several occasions in the past to call upon the United States Government for
assistance under the terms of the treaty stipulation referred to.
The guarantee by my Government of the independence of Panama has made
it necessary for it to examine carefully into the question of Panama’s
boundaries in order to satisfy itself regarding the extent of the territory
covered by that guarantee. The Government of the United States was highly
gratified at the satisfactory solution of the boundary question between
Panama and Colombia.29 It was also gratified that the boundary with Costa
Rica was established by Article I of the Porras-Anderson Treaty of 191030
and by the White Award.31 It is a source of profound regret to it, however,
that that Award has not yet been executed by Panama. While this
noncompliance with the Award persists the possibility of misunderstanding
and even of a re-occurrence of the regrettable incidents of 1921 between
Panama and Costa Rica is ever likely. In view of the treaty provisions above
cited such incidents would inevitably involve the United States Government.
Therefore, in the interest of peace, friendly relations between Panama and its
neighbors, and orderly procedure the United States Government would learn
with pleasure of the definite settlement of Panama’s only remaining boundary
controversy.
The Costa Rican Government has informed my Government of its earnest
desire to have removed any possibility of the friction that is apt to occur
through the lack of precise knowledge, until it is definitely surveyed and
marked off, of the actual boundary between the two countries. To this end it
has asked the United States Government to cooperate with it in having the
