600 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 205. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, March 27, 1979 SUBJECT Summit Preparatory Group Meeting in Tokyo2 (U) There was a general consensus that the three main Summit topics should be energy, macro-economic policy, and North-South relations. Papers on these and other issues will now be prepared. Under each heading, we will be looking for concrete decisions that the heads of government could take in addressing both immediate and longer-term problems. (C) 1. Energy. An international working group under Japanese leadership will consider: measures to restrain consumption (the British and others said that under this heading they will want the US to report what it is doing to fulfill our Bonn commitment); a large-scale and coordinated increase in investment to produce alternative forms of energy, e.g., coal liquidation and gasification; a major international research and development effort concerning renewable energy sources; and a program of increased and more effective aid to help LDCs increase their energy output.3 (C) 2. Macro-Economic. An international working group under Charlie Schultze’s leadership will examine both short-term and medium economic prospects for the Summit countries. Discussions in Tokyo focused on: —Asking Germany and Japan to maintain presently projected rates of growth (4% for Germany and 6% for Japan). The representatives of other European countries (particularly France) believe that their countries have benefited substantially from the 1% additional 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects File, Henry Owen, Box 30, Summit: Preparatory Group Meeting: 5/18–19/79 in Washington: 5/79 [I]. Confidential. Sent for action. Carter and Brzezinski both initialed at the top of the page. 2 The G–7 Summit Preparatory Group met in Tokyo March 22–23. On March 28, Owen and Hormats provided a more detailed report on the meeting to Cooper, Solomon, Gramley, CEA senior staff economist Val Koromzay, and NSC Staff member James Cochrane. (Memorandum of conversation, March 28; ibid.) Owen, Schultze, Cooper, Solomon, Hormats, Koromzay, and Cochrane held a meeting on March 15 to discuss the U.S. approach to the Summit Preparatory Group meeting. (Memorandum for the record, March 15; ibid.) 3 Carter wrote “& solar” at the end of this paragraph. He also wrote “good” in the margin adjacent to the paragraph.
