893.74/570 [Document 750] The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State MEMORANDUM The Japanese Government have given a careful consideration to the two memoranda of the Department of State, dated respectively February 28, and April 8, 1925, relating to the question of wireless telegraphy in China. They are gratified to note in these communications the full sympathy and readiness with which the United States responds to their invitation to seek reconcilement of the divergent radio interests in China, and to bring about an amicable settlement of this question of controversy between the two countries. 2. It is doubtless known to the American Government that the Mitsui Company, according to the contracts of February and March, 1918, has completed the radio station at Peking. Regarding these contracts, the only point in dispute between Japan and the United States is the right of monopoly created in favour of the Mitsui Company to establish and operate all overseas radio service in China, to the exclusion of other nationals interested in such enterprise. The establishment and operation by the Mitsui Company of the Peking station have never been questioned by the American Government or the Federal Company. 3. The question, however, of the proposed stations of the Federal Company at Shanghai and elsewhere, stands on an entirely different footing. It is to the establishment of these stations by the Federal Company that the Japanese Government felt constrained to take exception as an infringement of the contractual right already acquired by the Mitsui Company from the Chinese Government. As a question of law, the Japanese Government still hold to the belief expressed in their previous communication that such contractual right of the Mitsui Company as opposed to the claim of the Federal Company, is not inconsistent, either with treaty provisions between the United States and China, or with the principle of equal opportunity, and finds ample support in a series of international precedents. 4. It seems that this distinction of legal status, between the Mitsui station at Peking and the proposed Federal stations, has not been taken into account in the plan of adjustment suggested in the Memorandum of April 8, 1925, as a substitute for that which is embodied in the Japanese Embassy’s
