3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 795 in resources allocated to these activities. At a minimum they merit classification as essential national security operations subject to real annual increase of 3–5% on a par with defense outlays.6 (U) • The creation of one or more semi-autonomous institutions for sustained implementation of human rights goals, with perhaps a combination of governmental and private funding, should be urgently studied. (C) • Expansion and refinement of radio programming by all instrumentalities available—VOA, RFE/RL—should be undertaken at a steady tempo. (U) • Plans should be made for future expansion of radio transmitters to counter continued Soviet increases in transmitter power and efforts to jam our transmissions. The long lead-time required for building transmitters makes this essential. (C) • Expansion of publication and distribution operations should also be undertaken. Even modest increments of funds enable existing publication and distribution projects to perform at a much higher level of efficiency. E.g., publishing 6,000 rather than 3,000 copies of a Ukrainian dissident book costs much less than the initial cost of the original 3,000. (S) • A tape-cassette distribution program should be developed to augment existing book and magazine programs; there is increasing evidence that cassettes are popular and effective in the Communist world. (S) • Substantively, areas and peoples who are poorly served by current or even planned publication and distribution programs include: —The Baltic States, especially the Lithuanians. —The Ukrainians. —The Caucasus, including the Georgians, Armenians and Muslim peoples. (C) • Religion, not only Islam, should be given higher priority for planning new operations. E.g., the potential of persistent Orthodox tradition in the Ukraine and among Russians as a focal point for anti- Communist nationalism (or nationalism that regards Communism as irrelevant) needs to be examined. (C) 6 Brzezinski wrote in the margin, “reprogramming of budget (CIA).”
