Chapter 4, February–April 1990 623 Akhromeyev: Fifth point. The sides would agree on a ban on MIRVed ALCMs. The sixth. Outside the 1,600 ceiling. It would be a certain number of heavy bombers with a range over 600 kilometers and that number would be 90–115. The Soviet Union is withdrawing its proposal that nuclear ALCMs have clear functional related differences from non-­nuclear ALCMs, we accept in general the US proposals for non-­technical means of verification and for the procedures for inspections. But we would like there to be outside visible differences, but we agree in general. There may be legal and technical details that are going to have to be specified, but this is the package as I understand it. Bartholomew: Let me summarize briefly the outcome of our discussions and this will be the same summary I gave to Akhromeyev. With two exception, the elements that we agreed to on ALCMs in Moscow are still agreed to. These were elements that were read into the record by Kanter in the meeting of two ministers. These agreed Moscow elements are agreed here with the exceptions of the future counting rule and also the number of ALCM-­carrying bombers. And that’s the question of 100 versus 115. These were the agreed common elements that we gave you in Moscow. Shevardnadze: You were speaking about a so-­called Moscow agreement. I want to know what is not agreed to now. Bartholomew: Well, there are two questions in addition to those two major issues. One you are very familiar with and that’s range. The other is the sub-­ceiling on heavy bombers. In our view there is a third issue that the Marshal does not mention. The Soviet side now proposes to count as a heavy bomber in START any tactical aircraft carrying a non-­nuclear ALCM above the agreed range. This means that suppose we agreed on a range of 600 kilometers, if we took a conventional aircraft like the F–16 and took a conventional ALCM of over 600 kilometer range, all of a sudden this would become a strategic nuclear weapon to be counted against our strategic nuclear numbers. Shevardnadze: But over 600 kilometers. Baker: But it is conventional, it’s not nuclear. Bartholomew: This would be a major new issue on ALCMs. Akhromeyev: It wasn’t discussed in Moscow. We left it to Geneva. Shevardnadze: Well, it’s a new question, it’s not a simple one. It is a complicated one. Lots of things change. It could be a key problem when we conclude everything. Akhromeyev: At best this could only be discussed at our next meeting in Moscow. Baker: We’re only seven weeks away from the Summit. If we don’t discuss things now, when are we going to do it?
