114
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
me he will remain alert for possibilities and will signal us when he
thinks pressure from you could have a good effect. I see no alternative
but to content ourselves with this for now—since cuts now contem-
plated do not start until 1 October. (S)
Do you3 AGREE
DISAGREE
?
3 Brzezinski did not mark either option.
35.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
for Marshall Brement of the National Security Council Staff1
Washington, August 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Summary of Memorandum Entitled “Preconditions for Instability Begin to
Accumulate in Eastern Europe” [classification not declassified]
A veteran analyst of East European affairs at CIA takes a look at
recent developments in the area, speculating on whether the conditions
preceding past crises are being recreated. [classification not declassified]
On the economic front, the conditions that have allowed the East
European regimes to give their publics steadily rising standards of
living no longer exist. The regimes will thus soon be deprived on one
of the principal arguments in support of their legitimacy. With growth
rates falling, investment plans cut back, and prices rising, it probably
will not be long before economic expectations are dashed, with all that
implies for increased public restiveness. [classification not declassified]
All the East European members of the Council for Economic Mutual
Assistance are aware that their systems of economic management are
inadequate, and all are talking about, experimenting with, or actually
implementing changes. Experimentation of this sort inevitably leads
to greater tensions between those within these regimes who are con-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 12, Europe: 1979. Secret. Brement forwarded the
memorandum to Brzezinski under an August 6 covering memorandum noting it was
prepared at his request and that Brzezinski should read it. A stamped notation on the
first page of the covering memorandum indicates that Brzezinski saw it.
