1978 499 and continuity-­of-­government programs—­all this requires explicit and farreaching, although not necessarily radical, strategic choices to be made. (S) The Administration has from the beginning been in a process of making those choices: PD–18, PD–37, PD–42, budget decisions, and your sustained interest in C3I issues have been part of this process.6 The next major step is SCC/NSC consideration of the DOD reports on nuclear targeting and the Secure Reserve Force, a step we are currently organizing. (S) After several months of wrestling with the challenge of strategic planning from the NSC staff, I’ve come to the view that a) the politics, bureaucratics, and substance of strategic policy reform insist on an evolutionary approach, and b) the process currently in train appears very promising. Our challenge is to keep it on track and moving. (C) Much hinges on implementation of policy guidance emanating from the NSC. The DOD studies reveal the extent to which current strategic failings result from inadequate follow-­through on NSDM 242 and PD–18.7 To assure that follow-­through we shall have to enhance the visibility of the policy, program, and budget process within DOD, exerting corrective influence where necessary. (S) To help shape this evolutionary process, I propose to organize a small, relatively informal Strategic Planning Group, on the model of the East-West Planning Group. Some 6–8 people from NSC, State, and Defense would constitute the group.8 (U) C3I Organization (U) Making things come out right is more than a matter of the right guidance. Especially for large and continuing activities, they must be structured so that the actors have the right incentives. Bill Odom has pointed out in numerous memos how the Service-JCS-Command-OSD structure short changes C3, perhaps not in terms of money—­much is spent, but in terms of purposefulness and cohesion (the Russian term tselestremlyonst’ is very apt; it comes up often in their discussions of the C3). The “I” of C3I, meanwhile is not structured outside of DOD to look earnestly at military support roles where they compete for budget with peacetime requirements. (C) The marriage of C3 and Intelligence in C3I is useful in bringing related things together. But it is still a shotgun marriage, dominated 6 PD–37 on National Space Policy, May 11, 1978, and PD–42 on Civil and Further National Space Policy, October 10, 1978, are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXV, Global Issues; United Nations Issues. 7 For NSDM–242, see footnote 2, Document 29. PD–18 is printed as Document 31. 8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the margin to the left of this paragraph and wrote: “good.”
