1978вҖғ 499
and continuity-Вӯof-Вӯgovernment programsвҖ”Вӯall this requires explicit 
and farreaching, although not necessarily radical, strategic choices to 
be made. (S)
The Administration has from the beginning been in a process of 
making those choices: PDвҖ“18, PDвҖ“37, PDвҖ“42, budget decisions, and 
your sustained interest in C3I issues have been part of this process.6 
The next major step is SCC/NSC consideration of the DOD reports on 
nuclear targeting and the Secure Reserve Force, a step we are currently 
organizing. (S)
After several months of wrestling with the challenge of strategic 
planning from the NSC staff, IвҖҷve come to the view that a) the politics, 
bureaucratics, and substance of strategic policy reform insist on an evo-
lutionary approach, and b) the process currently in train appears very 
promising. Our challenge is to keep it on track and moving. (C)
Much hinges on implementation of policy guidance emanating 
from the NSC. The DOD studies reveal the extent to which current 
strategic failings result from inadequate follow-Вӯthrough on NSDM 242 
and PDвҖ“18.7 To assure that follow-Вӯthrough we shall have to enhance 
the visibility of the policy, program, and budget process within DOD, 
exerting corrective influence where necessary. (S)
To help shape this evolutionary process, I propose to organize a 
small, relatively informal Strategic Planning Group, on the model of 
the East-West Planning Group. Some 6вҖ“8 people from NSC, State, and 
Defense would constitute the group.8 (U)
C3I Organization (U)
Making things come out right is more than a matter of the right 
guidance. Especially for large and continuing activities, they must be 
structured so that the actors have the right incentives. Bill Odom has 
pointed out in numerous memos how the Service-JCS-Command-OSD 
structure short changes C3, perhaps not in terms of moneyвҖ”Вӯmuch is 
spent, but in terms of purposefulness and cohesion (the Russian term 
tselestremlyonstвҖҷ is very apt; it comes up often in their discussions of the 
C3). The вҖңIвҖқ of C3I, meanwhile is not structured outside of DOD to look 
earnestly at military support roles where they compete for budget with 
peacetime requirements. (C)
The marriage of C3 and Intelligence in C3I is useful in bringing 
related things together. But it is still a shotgun marriage, dominated 
6 PDвҖ“37 on National Space Policy, May 11, 1978, and PDвҖ“42 on Civil and Further 
National Space Policy, October 10, 1978, are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 
1977вҖ“1980, vol. XXV, Global Issues; United Nations Issues.
7 For NSDMвҖ“242, see footnote 2, Document 29. PDвҖ“18 is printed as Document 31.
8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the margin to the left of this paragraph and 
wrote: вҖңgood.вҖқ
