Human Rights 4. Economic Assistance US use of economic assistance—whether bilateral or through international financial institutions (IFI’s)—is another means to promote human rights. It fosters economic and social development which is itself a plus for general human rights and a basis for better observance of political and civil liberty and provides a specific tool (positive or reactive) for dealing with individual country performances on human rights. A. Bilateral Programs. The US Government needs to take several general steps to assure that economic assistance reinforces respect for human rights. —AID country programs should be consistent with other US efforts (security, information) in a given nation. We should not, for example, withdraw economic assistance on human rights grounds at the same time USIA praises the human rights record of the host nation. —Since promoting human rights is a long-term process, we must resist quixotic fluctuations in our use of economic assistance to further human rights. —We could help human rights and economic development by increasing participation by the poor in both the direction and benefits of US programs for development aid. Specific action programs which merit attention include: —Follow-up and expansion of AID’s program for “New Initiatives in Human Rights.” Launched by the then Administrator in 1975 as a complement to the Agency’s “New Directions” program for stress on the poor,30 this effort has foundered on lack of staff, meager encouragement from high levels of the State Department, and specific resistance from certain regional bureaus within the Department. The AID program could address the following: increased cooperation with international and regional organizations, help for the rural and urban poor in gaining effective access to rights and protections provided for them under the law and in development programs, and sponsorship of studies and conferences on human rights problems and their relation to economic development. —Increased consultation with other industrial nation donors. The US Government should follow up on a proposal made last year by the then UK Minister for Overseas Development to confer on best means to wed
