Chapter 7, January–May 1991 1035 New Kinds 9. Nazarkin raised the notification of the development of a new kind of strategic offensive arm. Although in December the sides had agreed to require such a notification within one year after an initial flight test, the Soviet side believed that period was too long. It was important to have the notification early enough so that the outcome of discussions in the joint compliance and inspection commission was not prejudged. 10. Brooks said that it was equally important to allow the testing side time to evaluate the results of a test prior to giving any notification. No useful purpose would be served by debating the wisdom of a new system which the developing side intended to cancel. Brooks noted that the U.S. side had originally proposed having a mandatory period between the notification and initial deployment. The Soviet side had rejected such a period on the grounds that mentioning deployment prejudged the issue. 11. Nonetheless, Brooks continued, if the issue could be closed out by dropping the notification to a period of several months after the initial test, he would be willing to consider such a solution. Nazarkin said the Soviet side sought a notification a few days after a test; Brooks said this was unworkable. Nazarkin then agreed to consult with his experts and propose a time frame for the notification. Operational Dispersals 12. Drawing on the U.S. non-­paper of April 25, Nazarkin asked a series of questions on operational dispersals: Q: Why did the U.S. side list specific requirements for road-­mobile ICBM to return within deployment areas and for rail-­mobile ICBMs to return to their garrisons when these provisions were already in the treaty? A: Operational dispersals authorized a side to ignore treaty restrictions on mobile ICBM locations. It was important that there be an obligation to resume these locational restrictions. Brooks was prepared to have the text of the treaty simply refer in general terms to the obligations of Article VI, rather than listing specific restrictions on mobile ICBMs. Q: Why did the U.S. side propose two different provisions concerning post-­dispersal notification? A: The initial U.S. proposal had been for all notifications which should have been given during a dispersal to be given after the fact. On reflection, Brooks agreed with the Soviet concern that this would require sharing information on, for example, where rail-­mobile ICBMs were located during crises. Brooks would be prepared to recommend
