82 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement in dollar reserves. However, the picture is gloomy for 1960; further retrenchment may be necessary and the GOH will have to reduce its fiscal budget for the year. New investment for electric power from the IBRD may be helpful. Mexico. While there was a general economic improvement in 1959 over the bad year of 1958, it has been very limited. Economic growth has been slowed down or even stopped and imports sharply reduced as export markets for cotton and Mexican, non-­ferrous metals have been weak. The GOM faces the problem of resuming economic expansion in 1960 in face of failure to increase foreign income. Although foreign exchange reserves have grown, they are inadequate to support a large increase in investment without improvement in demand for Mexican exports. Nicaragua. With somewhat improved exports and production; balance of payments showed modest improvement in 1959. Expected that 1960 may be difficult year with cotton export availabilities down so that may have to turn to IMF for financial assistance. U.S. loan to Central Bark should alleviate situation. Panama. Economic deterioration and unemployment are important problems. Large fiscal deficits and inadequate taxes have caused some loss in dollar reserves. Outlook for 1960 is for no significant change with GOP being pressed for funds and structural problems continuing. Paraguay. Modest improvement in balance of payments occurred during 1959 but national income not increasing. Government controls still hampering production, stabilization program has achieved financial objectives but without elimination state controls and additional investment, expected that 1960 will see continuation 1959 conditions. Peru. As result of drastic reduction imports obtained balance of payments surplus of about $15 million in 1959 compared with deficits for two previous years. Global output probably declined in 1959. Major problem for 1960 will be budgetary equilibrium. With exports likely to expand owing to new copper production facilities balance of payments situation should continue to improve in 1960. Uruguay. A record payments deficit ($50 million) is expected in 1959 because of lack of export products and unwise state intervention in the economy. Very likely national income shows a sizeable decline in year. No significant improvement may be anticipated in 1960 as the GOU has not yet shown desire to cope with its difficult economic problems or invite IMF advice. Venezuela. Owing to economic and political uncertainties there was a sharp run on the bolivar, and dollar reserves fell by $400 million in 1959. Official announcements unfriendly to the private oil industry
