1114  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
of itself. Similar to that of man who injures his own toes by dropping 
stone (cuts off nose to spite face). Policy embargo unbalances normal 
international situation and has caused opposition and hostility from 
countries of world. Remarks I made this morning in effort justify that 
policy embargo could only be termed without justificaton. I had made 
charges with regard Chinese making threats of force. He could only 
say this is putting shoe on wrong foot. It merely lame argument trying 
justify US threat force against China. I could never succeed in making 
embargo policy appear reasonable.
14. Wang could not agree to my remarks on what I termed relation 
between question embargo and renunciation force. US embargo policy 
first most unfriendly and hostile act of US against China. If there really 
desire improve relationship between two great powers, this policy 
embargo mustn’t be allowed remain. That policy not in interests either 
people. That why he proposed we discuss this question. I had also said 
we mustn’t abandon subject renunciation force declaration. As he had 
repeatedly said this is up to US and depends on whether US willing 
put forward constructive opinion this regard. Obstacle now in way 
of agreement on renunciation force declaration can only be removed 
by giving up one-­sided and unilateral interest and adopting principle 
meeting interests both sides.
15. I replied, I had already this morning covered my view obstacle 
which confronts us with regard declaration. I thought his last remarks 
though again tended point up difference between us. That is, he spoke 
of declaration we been discussing as resolving difficulties in dispute 
in Taiwan area. That is resolving it on his terms. That is, he continued 
first to confuse question origin, nature, possible resolution on situation 
Taiwan area with first step of simply saying both of us determined it 
would not be cause of war between us. No amount of words or ration­
alization could obscure fact he intended in one way or another to pre­
serve freedom use force in that area. No suggestion for any declaration 
and no draft I had ever proposed required him recognize anything in 
that or any other area which his government did not want recognize. 
US interest has been and remains that of assuring that situation did 
not lead to war. Every proposal I made solely had purpose saying this 
clearly. This was what he referred to as one-­sided, unilateral interest. 
If that be correct I could only conclude his government considered it 
to its interest to maintain ability threaten utilities in area. He had spo­
ken of my position having remained same spot with regard principle of 
agreeing between us that our differences would not lead to hostilities 
and saying so clearly. I still hoped by agreeing with this principle his 
government would remove this obstacle to agreement between us and 
thus permit us to make real meaningful declaration and open way for 
fruitful discussion other subjects he desired raise. This would permit
