282
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
is well to remember that while Russia always enjoyed great popularity
among the Bulgarian people, the country was in the Austro-Hungarian
or German sphere of influence for a good part of its history since 1878,
and the people overwhelmingly accepted alliance with Germany in
the two World Wars. In Czechoslovakia, I felt that the Czechs were a
Western people being held prisoner by the East; in Bulgaria, I feel that
the Bulgarians are a Balkan people who would swing with the wind
if Moscow ever loosened its hold. But so long as Moscow’s hold is
secure, the position of the Communists is also secure. As for alternative
centers of power, there are none now in existence to compare with the
Catholic Church in Poland, or with the potential for independence
among workers in Poland or Hungary. On the other hand, there is not
the fell hand of enforced uniformity that I gather one feels in Romania.
The Orthodox Church is used by the regime, but its independent exist-
ence keeps some thoughts alive of alternatives to Communist rule.
Even the puppet Agrarian Party serves something of the same purpose.
I suppose the answer is that if events ever loosened the Party’s hold
even somewhat, then the inclinations of the Bulgarians of pluralism
would rapidly grow and spread. In this sense—and in the sense that
it rules without the consent of the governed—the position of the Com-
munist Party here is firm, but fragile.
11. Fifth, how sound is the society?
12. I see a great deal of sickness, and hypocrisy, and disillusion.
In contrast to Prague, where I felt making the best of a fairly bad deal,
but they do not believe in the system or in their part in it. Corruption
is widespread, and cuts deeply. High living by the big shots is widely
known and resented. The workers are to a large extent bought off,
because—in a country which has largely industrialized itself over the
last thirty years—they have privileges, and their pay is comparatively
good. A huge proportion of this country moved to the towns and cities
since 1944, and whatever the shortcomings, they are finding life one
hell of a lot better than it was in a Balkan village before. As for the
intellectuals, they are also bought out by being treated well by the
regime—Zhivkov has been very clever at this—so that any potential
dissident is usually headed off with a sinecure or a reward. Bulgaria
is a rather old-fashioned country, with a lot of family life still going
on, and in this sense it is still sound. But much is changing, and fast,
and the system is based on deception and corruption. In this sense,
the stability of the society is also becoming more fragile.
13. Sixth, how good, and reliable, are the armed forces?
14. Bulgarians have been good fighters in history, they are patriotic,
and the soldiers would probably obey orders and acquit themselves
tolerably well. Their equipment is spotty, and the tasks they could
carry out are limited. In a general conflict, if they were to drive towards
