their Governments. This practice had also extended to foreigners residing outside the Settlements and in the Railway Zones and even the Chinese had resorted to the practice of not paying their taxes in the Settlements and Railway Zones. This, according to the Chinese view, ran counter to the spirit of the Washington Conference which was designed to respect the territorial and administrative integrity of China. The statement submitted gave a brief historical and legal review of the question of the taxation of foreigners in the Settlements. The Declaration Regarding the Abolition of the Export Duty and Coast Trade Duty, as its name implies, proposed to discontinue the collection of export duty on native goods not destined for exportation to foreign countries and on native commodities entering into the coast trade. This was announced to be an initial step in the direction of the ultimate abolition of likin. After Sir Ronald Macleay had expressed his appreciation of this practical demonstration of the intention of the Chinese Government to make early progress toward the abolition of likin, the Committee adjourned. Sub-Committee on Rates of Surtaxes, Third Meeting, December 23, 1925. Admiral Tsai opened the third meeting of the subcommittee on Rates of Surtaxes by presenting a condensed list of “B” Grade Luxuries. The old “B” Grade Luxury List containing 152 items, was reduced to 104 items. Mr. Fox, on behalf of the British Delegation, inquired whether the reclassification would increase the revenues, and if so, he would like some statement with regard to it. Other inquiries were made in this regard, but no reply was forthcoming. Mr. Hioki wished to know what was meant by Article 4 of the Rules which read as follows: “The final decision in any future case of dispute as to what is covered by each item in this List of Luxuries is to be given solely by the ‘Board of Review’.” The chairman replied that it was intended to create a Board, consisting of the Shui-Wu- Chu,2 the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce, and also technical advisers, to pass on questions relating to goods and imports. Committee on Provisional Measures, Sixth Meeting, February 18, 1925 [1926].
