Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I were only about $200 million a year, and they were basically for operating expenses. Now the budget of the U.N. system, excluding the development banks, exceeds $2.5 billion per year, and the organization is active not only in four major peacekeeping operations but also is devoting more than 90% of its budget to economic and social problems. At our urging the United Nations has entered such fields as technical assistance, environment, population, and drug control. With this new scope and with new resources—with several key countries, in addition, using the U.N. system as a channel for their development assistance—the United Nations has assumed unprecedented significance. Meanwhile, the World Bank has become a much more important vehicle for development assistance than the U.S. aid program (which tends to be focused on a few swing countries in sensitive regions of the world). Indeed, a major triumph of U.S. diplomacy has been success in using international institutions to persuade other countries to assume a major share of the burden of global development efforts. Only a few years ago our share was around 40%; now it is closer to 20%. Yet today international institutions are under unprecedented attack—an attack much more dangerous than some of the rhetorical assaults we have witnessed in the past. There are efforts to place totally unworkable restrictions on our contributions to international institutions. If these efforts succeed, no international agency will, for example, be able to assist any government to increase production of certain products whose potential export might at some future date be competitive with American producers. We are asked, as World Bank President Robert McNamara has pointed out, to deny Papua New Guinea the right to increase palm oil production on the theory that this might be competitive with our soybean production when, in fact, our troubles— if we at some point have any—will stem from soybean production in Brazil; and this is the result of investments from a Japan still shocked by our decision in 1973 to ban soya exports to Japan in order to hold down prices here.5 At the same time, popular rhetoric continues to denounce the domination of the United Nations by ministates; yet anyone with knowledge of international organizations knows that the true influence is exerted by countries of growing power and influence—countries such as Algeria, Brazil, Egypt, India, Iran, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Tanzania, and Yugoslavia. By the end of this century, it is expected that the top 12 countries in the world in terms of population will not include a single Western power except the United States. The
