Chapter 4, February–April 1990 639 attached onto the points for a non-­nuclear ALCM. He said this was important because, even if inspectors established that at a certain base only non-­nuclear ALCMs were deployed, unless EODs were functionally related to some extent, this would not constitute clear proof that the heavy bombers at that base could not possibly also be used to carry nuclear ALCMs. In other words, at the point in time when an inspection took place there might be no nuclear ALCMs at a base, but a short time later they could be shipped there and mounted onto the bombers if the attachment points were identical. He urged that this possible avenue of circumvention be closed off. Wheeler said he understood the Soviet position, but maintained that even this would not be sufficient to close off possible circumvention. This was why the U.S. approach was designed to enable monitoring of how ALCMs were actually deployed at heavy bomber operating bases, rather than seek to use extraordinarily intrusive inspections to seek to close off hypothetical possibilities. Peresypkin countered that the Soviet side could not accept this position because it was important to construct heavy bombers not equipped to carry nuclear ALCMs in such a way that their mounting stations would be incapable of switching for nuclear use; if they could switch, they would have to be counted as LRNHBs. Conversion of “Older” Bomber Types for Conventional Roles Peresypkin noted that in the previous evening’s discussion Amb. Burt had called the Soviet proposal on the conversion of older bomber types for conventional roles a fair one, but had said he wanted to consult on it. Peresypkin asked for the military point of view. He noted that the concept of “older” types of bombers would change with time, and said the Geneva delegations would have to work out criteria for what constitutes an “older” type—­for example, from what year a bomber would be considered an older type. Peresypkin suggested that one criterion would be the aircraft’s length of service in the air force; this could be ten, fifteen or twenty years as the sides might agree. This was necessary, Peresypkin said, to prevent the conversion of “contemporary” types of heavy bombers so that they would not count under the 1600 ceiling. Curtin noted that such converted bombers could be used to carry non-­nuclear weapons or as reconnaissance, tanker or jammer aircraft. He thought it unlikely a side would build a new heavy bomber for such missions, and therefore asked why such a rule was necessary. He said Congress would laugh the Pentagon out of Washington if it proposed to buy B–2 aircraft for conventional-­only missions; he said the natural trends of force structure evolution over time should resolve this question. In time, however, the B–1 might be converted to conventional uses. Peresypkin said that new types of heavy bombers, even if converted for
