504
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Conversely, if you do not appear, this might be taken as a sign of
benign neglect, which would adversely affect the attitudes of the audi-
ence and might affect the strength of the dollar.3
Denis Healey has indicated to our London Embassy that he is trou-
bled by the possibility you will not appear. When Mike Blumenthal met
today with his small advisory committee of top bankers and ex-
Secretaries of the Treasury, they expressed a strong hope you would
appear.4
I have written a three-page speech which (if I do say so myself)
should get a good reaction—from the audience and the US media. If
you decide to appear, I will submit it to you, after it has been reviewed
by Treasury and Jim Fallows.5
3 In his September 15 memorandum to Carter, Blumenthal suggested that he “indi-
cate at a minimum that you will announce in the near future a significant strengthening
of our anti-inflation program, and reaffirm your determination to achieve an effective en-
ergy program.” He also recommended that Carter “reaffirm your August statement of se-
rious personal concern about the dollar situation,” as well as “demonstrate to this audi-
ence that you are determined to deal with our fundamental economic problems.” (Ibid.)
4 No record of this meeting was found.
5 Hutcheson reported in a September 21 memorandum to Owen that “the Presi-
dent’s schedule does not permit his speaking at the annual IMF–IBRD meeting this year.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/Dollar: 1978) In the end, Carter did address the
opening session of the IMF-World Bank meeting; for the text of his September 25 re-
marks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp.
1627–1629.
162.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, September 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Probable Decisions at Forthcoming Meetings of IMF and IBRD
As you know, the IMF membership has been engaged for the last
year or so in negotiations on an increase in quotas and an allocation of
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
File, Box 102, 9/22/78 [2]. Confidential. Sent to Carter under cover of a September 22
memorandum from Owen, who noted that State, CEA, and OMB concurred in Blumen-
