Sources
Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1, Iran:
Hostage Crisis, November 1979–September 1980
In preparation for this volume, the editor made extensive use of
Presidential papers and other White House records held by the Carter
Library, which proved the best source of documentation on President
Carter’s and the National Security Council’s role in conceptualizing,
formulating, and implementing the response to the Iranian hostage
crisis. Within the National Security Affairs Files, Brzezinski Material,
the Country File, General Odom File, and the Subject File were particu-
larly valuable. Among the Staff Material, the Middle East File and the
Office File were critically important. The editor did not have access to
the personal diaries of either President Carter or National Security Ad-
visor Brzezinski.
Second in importance to the records held by the Carter Library
were the records of the Department of State. The Department’s central
files contain the cable traffic recording U.S. diplomatic relations with
Iran, Panama, and all countries critical to the hostage crisis, memo-
randa of diplomatic conversations, and memoranda proposing action
or providing information.
The Department of State Lot Files provided material not dupli-
cated elsewhere, and, in some cases, provided access to materials either
destroyed or displaced within the federal government. Essential to the
compilation were Lot Files 81D154 and Lot 82D85, both records of
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David D. Newsom. Both
were extensive, especially in the area of Nodis cables and the Iran Up-
dates. The Updates, prepared daily under the supervision of the Assist-
ant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Hal
Saunders, often attached backchannel messages from the Swiss that
were not available elsewhere.
The Central Intelligence Agency provides access for Department
of State historians to high-level intelligence documents from those
records in the custody of that Agency and at the Carter Library. This
access is arranged and facilitated by the History Staff of the Center for
the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, pursuant to a
May 2002 memorandum of understanding. Among the intelligence
records reviewed for the volume were files of the Director of Central In-
telligence, the CIA Registry of National Intelligence Estimates and Spe-
cial National Intelligence Estimates, and Files from the Office of Re-
search and Reports. Job 82M00501R from the Executive Registry was
XV
