434  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
COSTS
Before turning to the possibilities of novel basing systems, I would 
like to elaborate on my statement above that dyad and triad costs need 
not differ appreciably. By way of illustrating that, below are outlined 
three forces, all roughly comparable in capability (aside from the inher-
ent differences in characteristics noted above) to each other and to the 
Soviet forces expected under SALT II. One is a triad, with 400 MXs in a 
MAP deployment; the other two are dyads, one heavy in the airbreath-
ing half (100 cruise missile carriers with 60 ALCMs each), the other 
heavy in the SLBM half (768 D–5 Trident II missiles in 32 SSBNs).
[table not declassified]
These differences in costs are well within the accuracy of estimation.
One would normally assume that the failure of a single leg would 
affect a dyad more than a triad. However, it’s not that simple if costs 
are held constant—­if the three legs of a triad are smaller than the two 
legs of a dyad. For example, if the most expensive and least effective leg 
of a triad were eliminated, and its funding applied instead to the more 
efficient two legs that remain, conceivably each could be made strong 
enough to match any two legs of the old triad.
How that works out depends on the relative costs and effective-
ness of the three legs that happen to be involved. In the example above, 
if the ICBMs fail, either dyad (both of which omit the ICBM leg) is of 
course superior to the triad; if the bombers fail, the triad is better than 
the first dyad but worse than the second; if the SLBMs fail, the triad is 
worse than the first dyad but better than the second.
Thus, dyads and triads of roughly equivalent capability—­insofar 
as it is possible to make them equal—­need not differ appreciably in 
cost, and may not differ appreciably in hedging against failure of any 
single leg—­it depends on which leg fails.
NOVEL SYSTEMS3
As for novel basing alternatives to the MAP system, I should cau-
tion first that none has been thoroughly studied (at least not recently), 
and experience teaches us that many concepts that initially seem to 
be ingenious ways of solving existing problems later turn out, after a 
closer look, to be flawed with new problems of their own. Furthermore, 
it is most important to understand that none of these novel propos-
als is really a substitute for the ICBM force; though they surely could 
add to our strategic nuclear force, none could preserve all the valuable 
characteristics of the ICBM force—­excellent warfighting capability and 
3 Carter wrote: “MAP is very ‘novel’” in the right margin next to this heading.
