604 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement appearance of agreement that further understanding, but carrying out of announcement. It was only because of my tremendous interest in furthering progress that I had discussed matters the way I had. I regret­ ted that matter was going to enter propaganda field, which could not but inhibit discussion of subject here. 82. I said I regretted that Wang had again spoken of state of our relations as factor in determining release of Americans. I had previ­ ously given my views on this and the inevitable interpretation that must be placed upon it. Improvement of relations is two way street. I had tried since beginning of talks point out as clearly as I could relation­ ship between improvement of relations and views of American people concerning continued imprisonment of Americans. This not subject to arbitrary control of U.S. Government or anyone in U.S. Government. But is basic fact that must be taken into consideration in discussing our relations. I would not be honest and would not be doing service to our relations if I did not point this out frankly. 83. I said there were only two other small items. I had previously tried to make clear that group of 103 Chinese he had referred to were not persons who had demanded return, but were people who may or may not have desired to return against whom restraining orders were issued. 84. I said I failed to see any relationship between Mrs. Huizer and my explanation of immigration laws concerning temporary visitors. I was sure he did not mean to imply that if she had been Dutch subject she would not have been permitted leave. 85. I said concerning requirement of immigration law regarding temporary visitors, his country and every other country must have sim­ ilar regulations. PRC certainly did not admit foreigners on temporary visits unless they able go somewhere else at end of visit. Various coun­ tries may administer such measures in various ways. As I had pointed out, U.S. requirement can be satisfied in various ways. Certainly it did not interfere with ability Chinese in U.S. proceed PRC if they decided to do so. Therefore, requirement had no relation to implementation agreed announcement. 86. Wang said he still did not agree to my explanation of INS requirement for Chinese in U.S. obtain entry permits Taiwan. Chinese students in U.S. all came from mainland of China. What right did U.S. Government have compel these students proceed to Taiwan? He had referred to case of Mrs. Huizer because PRC had regarded her as Dutch subject. I had regarded her as American national. Citation of Mrs. Huizer was designed show how Chinese Government has been han­ dling problems in friendly spirit. Whereas U.S. side handling problems of Chinese in U.S. in unfriendly spirit.
