454  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
he was to be considered a friend by President Echandi, a feeling which 
he sincerely reciprocated.
Minister Borbon briefly mentioned the Water Works Project loan 
application which he had discussed with EXIM Bank officials and that 
he had provided them with the documentation they had requested. He 
stated that Ambassador Escalante had raised with DLF the question of 
the local money component which would amount to about 50% of the 
loan requested. Mr. Mann expressed interest in this project and asked to 
be kept informed of the status of the loan application.
Minister Borbon referred to a new loan application he had made 
at his meeting with EXIM Bank officials to enable Costa Rica to import 
U.S. cattle for breeding purposes and thereby raise the quality and 
quantity of local cattle. Minister Borbon believed that the export of 
cattle and cattle products from Costa Rica would serve to somewhat 
diversify the production of exportable products and thereby lessen the 
country’s dependance on coffee and bananas. Mr. Mann agreed that 
this was a worthwhile objective and expressed confidence that such a 
project would receive a sympathetic hearing by the EXIM Bank.
Mr. Borbon then brought up the question of augmenting the U.S. 
sugar quota assigned to Costa Rica. He stated that such an increase 
would assist Costa Rica in its efforts to lessen its dependence on coffee 
and bananas for income, and would complement the agrarian reform 
program since the new farms could then augment not only the dairy 
but also the sugar production as well. Mr. Mann explained that the set-
ting up of new sugar quotas was a function of the U.S. Congress, and 
that the quota assigned to Cuba could not realistically be cut too deeply 
since a new Cuban regime would require assurance of U.S. sales to sup-
port the Cuban economy. Mr. Mann pointed out that if sugar quotas 
were increased for some countries at the expense of the Cuban, that 
the time might come when the Cuban sugar quota might require revi-
sion upward and this might have to be done by appraising and cutting 
back the newly established quotas. Such action would have a delete-
rious economic effect on those countries which had expanded sugar 
production to meet the larger quotas assigned them. Minister Borbon 
agreed with the seriousness of the problem. Mr. Mann suggested that 
Representative Cooly3 might be the appropriate person with whom to 
discuss the assignment of a larger sugar quota to Costa Rica, and he 
expressed his willingness to favorably support such apportionment.
Minister Borbon informed Mr. Mann that the Costa Rican 
Government is having to pay a $500 a day penalty because the Pan 
American Highway was not completed by a certain specified date. 
3 Harold D. Cooley (D–N.C.), Chairman, Committee on Agriculture House of 
Representatives.
