Summaries of Compilations LXXI Haiti U.S. Relations With Haiti Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. Haiti had the misfortune to be the poorest nation in the Western hemisphere. President François Duvalier was popularly elected in 1957, a break in the usual cycle of presidential succession by military coup, but soon after his election Duvalier proved himself another Haitian dictator. Duvalier ruled through control of the National Police, the Presidential Guard, and the secret police, all chosen for their personal loyalty to him and meant as a counterweight to the Haitian Armed Forces. Haiti’s economy was virtually bankrupt. Graft and administrative ineptitude discouraged international lenders from providing Haiti with additional loans. Because Haiti’s economy was dependent on coffee, a wild crop harvested by peasants, its revenues fluctuated wildly. During 1958–1960, U.S. officials responsible for relations with Haiti faced three overriding questions: how closely should the United States become associated with Duvalier, how could the United States use its influence to mitigate Duvalier’s dictatorial rule, and how much money should it give Haiti? As 1958 began, the Department of States was restoring normal relations with Haiti that were broken in late December 1957 when U.S. Ambassador Gerald Drew was recalled to protest the beating death by Haitian police of an American citizen, Shipley Jean Talamas, a political opponent of Duvalier. The Talamas family received compensation, and some official action was taken against his murderers. The Department of State then outlined a program of improved relations: restoration of grant assistance, military assistance, and loans; recreational visits of the U.S. fleet; possible augmentation of U.S. military training missions; and increased U.S. tourism, private investment, and technical assistance. (HA–1) In June 1958, Ambassador Drew expressed concern about this program. Speaking specifically of a U.S. Marine Training Mission that Duvalier avidly wanted, Drew confided: “I find myself becoming increasingly repelled by the thought of a mission here when the jails are crammed with political prisoners . . . ; when defeated candidates . . . are beaten, tortured and hounded into exile; when a restrained opposition press has been ruthlessly snuffed out of existence; and when masked night riders, . . . operate from their headquarters in the National Palace.” Drew suggested that in return for the U.S. Marine
