1979  525
emphasis on defenses against aerodynamic penetrators at low altitudes. 
By 1988, our best estimate projects the deployment in the western USSR 
of about 900 lookdown/shootdown fighters of several different types 
for area defense, and nearly 300 sites with low-­altitude SA–X–10 SAMs 
having point defense capabilities.
—The top right-­hand graph shows that, as Soviet lookdown/
shootdown fighters increase in numbers in the middle and late 1980s, 
the improving Soviet air defense warning and control systems would 
have the technical potential to direct them to the vicinity of low-­altitude 
bombers in an area growing from about 15 percent to about 35 percent 
of the western USSR. In the middle and late 1980s, the potential to vec-
tor fighters against cruise missiles at very low altitudes would exist in 
about 20 percent of this area. Much of the potential coverage is concen-
trated in the northwestern and Baltic approaches to Moscow and other 
major centers, and we expect this concentration to continue.
—The bottom left-­hand graph shows the potential area in which 
improved SAM systems will have the technical potential to direct their 
missiles against low-­altitude targets. The graph shows that the area of 
the western USSR afforded SAM coverage against low-­altitude bomb-
ers is projected to grow from very little at present to about 25 percent 
in 1988, and against cruise missiles at very low altitudes from none at 
present to roughly 15 percent. These areas are much smaller than the 
roughly 45 percent of the western USSR now afforded coverage against 
high-­altitude aircraft by point-­defense SA–2 and SA–3 SAMs, but could 
include a number of high-­value economic and military assets. It should 
be noted that the total area of future SAM coverage could be less than 
shown here, depending on the degree to which the Soviets deploy 
SAMs with overlapping coverage.
—The bottom right-­hand graph illustrates our estimate of the off-
shore defense capabilities the Soviets would acquire by deploying an 
AWACS to cover overwater approaches in order to detect US bombers 
and ALCM carriers and direct interceptors to their vicinity. By the late 
1980s, the Soviets will probably have the potential to maintain contin-
uous forward defense coverage some 1,000 to 1,500 kilometers from 
Soviet borders along all overwater approach routes to the western 
USSR, for periods of up to about three days during a crisis or follow-
ing Soviet counterforce attacks against the United States. There would, 
however, be gaps in the potential coverage against cruise missiles once 
they were launched.
20. These graphs do not measure the probability that Soviet weap-
ons would destroy penetrators, nor do they measure the overall effec-
tiveness of the air defense system under operational conditions. We are 
unable to quantify the attrition which Soviet air defenses would be able 
to inflict on US low-­altitude aircraft and cruise missiles, in large part 
because of uncertainties about key technical characteristics of future 
systems. Further, the actual attrition achieved would be influenced by 
other factors not measured or shown on the graphs, such as the man-
ner and depth of defense deployments and the number of strategically 
important installations included in defended areas. Nor have we been 
able to quantify important operational factors and interactions [2 lines
