United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 103 disappointment that the Bank would not help increase the export of capital goods through export financing. On a country basis, he reported the following: Venezuela appeared very unstable, the reduced money supply adding to this difficulty. President Betancourt worriedly stressed the bad social conditions in Caracas, the problem of unemployment, inflation, and the danger from the Fidelistas and other leftist elements. There is a dire need for housing and adequate water supply, according to Betancourt. In reply to Under Secretary Dillon’s inquiry as to what Venezuela had done to reduce its debt, Mr. Herrera replied that it had cleared its short-­term debt, balanced its budget, and had kept its exports high. Venezuela’s problems, he reiterated, remained inflation, unemployment, and pressure from the communists and the Fidelistas. Peru and Colombia have strong leadership, and there is much sentiment for an agrarian reform and housing program. Everyone is puzzled concerning Ecuador, but agree that agrarian reform and housing are also the two most pressing needs. In Chile the people are of the opinion that the stabilization policy should be relaxed but, despite this, the government is maintaining a strong anti-­inflation stand. There has been a strong emotional response to United States generosity, the recent earthquake disaster relief resulting in great U.S. popularity in the area. Mr. Herrera then mentioned that 75 percent of the Bank’s quotas had been paid, with Bolivia and Paraguay presenting the greatest problems in this respect because of their inability to pay their first instalments on their small subscriptions. Mr. Dillon mentioned that the U.S. should assist these two countries to meet their participation in the Bank. Mr. Rubottom inquired whether Mr. Herrera was of the opinion that Uruguay would come into accord with the IMF. Mr. Herrera said that that was his impression, despite the slim chamber majority (one vote) held by the Government. He added that the Government had already instituted some reforms. Mr. Dillon inquired when the Bank would become operative, and Mr. Herrera replied that by October 1 the Bank would be in operation and by the end of the year should commence making loans. The Undersecretary asked whether the IDB would reasonably be in position to administer monies entrusted to it by the U.S. Government under the Latin American economic cooperation program contemplated by President Eisenhower. Messrs, Herrera and Cutler replied in effect that by next June or July—­presumably after the Congress had its first opportunity in the spring to appropriate funds for the accelerated economic program—­ the Bank would be in a good position to administer any trust fund
