820 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement the Bureau of the Mint and arsenals? What preference should be given to disposals from the Defense Production Act inventory? Should a more intensive effort be made to cancel contracts for delivery of materials in excess of stockpile objectives? Discussion: 1. Character of the Strategic Stockpile The strategic stockpile has been accumulated as an industrial mate­ rials inventory for meeting military, defense-­supporting and essential civilian needs. It contains raw and semi-­processed forms of minerals, metals, industrial oils, fibers and certain other materials such as crude natural rubber that are basic to manufacturing. It is not an end-­product stockpile to be used directly by ultimate consumers. 2. History of the Strategic Stockpile The strategic stockpile originated because of experience of the U.S. in relying on foreign sources of supply for materials that are indispensable to meeting military and other essential needs of the U.S. in time of emer­ gency. The U.S., despite its enormous productive capacity, is seriously deficient in some raw materials. This problem of dependence is recog­ nized in the first section of the postwar Stock Piling Act passed in 1946. The U.S. is completely dependent on foreign areas for one-­third of the 75 materials on the current stockpile list. It is completely self-­ sufficient in peacetime in only 3 of the materials. These are molybde­ num, magnesium and vanadium. In other cases, the U.S. has varying degrees of foreign dependence. The strategic stockpile as originally established under the Stock Piling Act was on a 5-­year basis and had only one set of objectives which assumed partial dependence on foreign sources. In 1954 following a review by a Cabinet Committee on Mineral Policy, long-­term objectives were added which completely discounted for a 5-­year period the supplies originating beyond North America and comparably accessible areas. In the same year, the one-­year rule was introduced which provided that when a metal or mineral is declared to be strategic and critical the long-­term stockpile objective shall not be less than 1 year’s normal U.S. use. Also in 1954 the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act was passed which provided for accelerated barter of agricultural commodities for strategic materials on the assumption that it is bet­ ter to have non-­deteriorating materials with low storage costs than to retain surplus agricultural commodities that are subject to deteriora­ tion and have high storage costs. Early in 1956, all cash purchasing for the strategic stockpile was cut back to meeting needs for a 3-­year emergency period, but minimum and long-­term objectives were kept on a 5-­year basis.
