German Democratic Republic southern and western GDR. Consisting of pastors, lawyers, academics, intellectuals, and a few workers, most of these contacts are very politically aware and are in a position to reflect not only their own views but also those of their professional clientele and communities. All of the conversations dwelt both on the East German popular mood in mid-October and changes in that mood in the year since the reporting officer’s previous visits. What follows is a distillation of the most politically significant themes. 4. Poland dominated every conversation: The future of Poland was almost synonymous with a palpable fear that deterioration of East- West relations could lead to war. Most contacts believed that the Soviet Union probably would eventually use military force against Poland, that the GDR Armed Forces would be compelled to participate, and that the Polish workers and army would resist fiercely. All felt that such a conflict would at best lead to the total breakdown of detente in Europe and the freezing of internal reform in Eastern Europe for a generation, and at most to a general conflagration. None of the contacts believed that the GDR leadership would have any substantive say in these events but would simply be led into them by the Soviet Union; none believed that the GDR or its Armed Forces would disobey Moscow’s orders. While admiring the courage and audacity of the Polish workers, most contacts feared that the Polish workers’ movement lacked sufficient self-control and realism to stop short of provoking Soviet military intervention. All contacts were extremely depressed at the prospect of another German invasion of Poland, even if only in the Soviet wake. However, it was the broader question of what a Polish war could lead to for Europe and the world which caused the most pessimism. While there was considerable hope expressed that sober counsels would prevail in East and West, there was little optimism that the deteriorating world situation could be controlled. 5. Inner-German deterioration: The deterioration in inner-German relations was linked by everyone to the Polish situation and to fears in Moscow and East Berlin of destabilization within the Soviet Bloc. Most contacts believed that Honecker’s recent hard-line attitude toward Bonn was the result of direct orders from the Soviet Union and reflected also a dominance in SED decision-making by an internal security-minded faction led by Paul Verner. Most contacts believed that the new GDR foreign currency exchange requirements would significantly reduce human contacts between the two German states for the foreseeable future, and that access to West German people, products and literature would decline sharply. No one felt that Western influence in the GDR could really threaten the stability of the regime or that East German workers would follow the Polish example. Most believed that the hardening of GDR and SED politics reflected, in
