Romania 735 —In dealing with diplomatic or congressional queries, we will take the position that US willingness to consider exports of certain commercially-available non-sensitive munitions list items to Romania would not mark a significant new departure in US military export policy. End text. 5. If the Embassy believes it would be helpful to the Romanians, the Defense Attache may also convey the following factual information on the procedures for making purchases of US munitions list items. Begin text. The US Government does not act as an intermediary for commercial munitions sales. Romania must deal on its own with US manufacturing firms. Once the terms of a sale had been worked out between Romania and the firm concerned, the firms would request US munitions licenses from the Department of State. Prior to requesting an export license, a firm may seek an advisory opinion to determine, before negotiating a sale, whether a munitions license would likely be approved. If Romania desires names of US firms which produce certain specific items of equipment, Romania could make inquiries to the Defense Security Assistance Agency (DSAA) in Washington. Romania could also consult the Department of State (PM) regarding possible release of specific munitions list items. End text. 6. In addition to receiving a report of the meeting with Admiral Dinu, we would also appreciate having your assessment of how future exchanges with the Romanians on this issue should be handled. Admiral Dinu appears to be a channel trusted by Ceausescu, but if the Romanians express continued interest we believe it may be essential to have an exchange in political channels to ensure that there are no misunderstandings.4 Muskie 4 In telegram 7097 from Bucharest, August 30, the Embassy reported the August 29 meeting between Dinu and the Defense Attaché: “While Dinu conveyed the impression of being personally pleased by the DATT’s response, Dinu sought to place the onus of further movement on the U.S. with his persistent request for an indication as to which item the US might favorably consider.” Noting that when the Defense Attaché suggested that further conversations might take place in political channels Dinu did not respond. The Embassy recommended that “if the Department still considers it necessary to be more fully informed of Romanian intentions, we could wait for Dinu to convey the response of his superiors.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870104–0582) Dinu did not follow up on the discussion.
