378
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“First of all”, he said, “I firmly believe that President Carter was
sent by God to help us secure a just and lasting peace in the Mideast. I
have the utmost faith in his integrity and high motives. We cannot fail
to support him in this time of need. And I want you to take to him per-
sonally what I am about to say to you.” “I was terribly pained,” he said,
“Yes, actually in physical distress when I could not offer more support
at our last meeting (October 18) with the President’s representative, Mr.
Saunders.5 However, I could not tell him that I would do that which at
that time I was not certain that I could do. So I had to be frank and
honest although I’m sure he felt that I was negative and not giving the
support which he would have liked.”
“After that meeting”, he added, “I went into a period of deep
thought and concentration on what I and Saudi Arabia could do to give
the support to the President which he wanted, needed and deserved.
As a result of that period of concentrated thought and study I would
like to tell you what I have done, what I am doing, and what I am going
to do” he added with a smile.
“First of all” he said, “I sent a message to President Sadat that I
would like him to send here a trusted emissary. He immediately sent
his special advisor, Sayid Marii. I gave to Marii the strongest possible
message of support for Sadat and Egypt. The message should make
President Sadat feel strong, independent and good. I assured him that
Sadat could count on continued support, both economic and political
from Saudi Arabia. I told him that we would not allow any action to be
taken against him as a result of the Camp David meeting.” Marii said
that this strong message of Saudi support would definitely make Sadat
heave a big sigh of relief and resume breathing comfortably.
“Sayid told me that Egypt now needed badly some funds to pay
for some military equipment. He said $108 million was needed now to
pay for some military vehicles. I told him that this was no problem, and
he could get it anytime.”6
“We then discussed the payment for the F–5s. I told him that we
had a cash problem; that our oil production was down from last year;
that the decline in the value of the dollar had substantially affected our
purchasing power. However, I told him that I was setting aside $350
million now to be applied on the F–5 purchase; that I would work with
them on the balance and it would be taken care of somehow. Perhaps
the U.S. would help.”
“I asked Marii to urge Sadat not to heed what he might hear or
read about Saudi frigidity towards him, or that Saudi Arabia does not
5 See footnote 4, Document 92.
6 An unknown hand wrote “!” in the right-hand margin next to this sentence.
