Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 fense budget, the buildup and improvement of Soviet strategic nuclear forces, the modernization of Soviet ground and tactical air forces in Eastern Europe, and the growing sophistication of Soviet naval forces, which include a gradually expanding capability to project military power at considerable distances from Russia itself. Whatever the motives behind it, the challenge is serious; we must not underestimate it. At the same time, we should recognize that the resulting competition is not an all-out contest compared with arms races of the past. It isn’t a purely military competition either. We are spending a little more than 5 percent of GNP on our defense establishment. Our best current estimate is that the Soviets are allocating between 11 and 13 percent of a much smaller GNP to their military effort, with the bulk of it designed to give them a capability against the United States and its immediate allies, although a significant amount reflects the problem posed by the People’s Republic of China. Both sides—and especially the United States—could invest a great deal more in defense. As of now, however, it would be a mistake to concentrate all our attention or the bulk of our resources on the arms race. The competition reaches into other areas also, and we have comparative advantages in them, whereas in the military arena the present balance and prospective potentials of the two sides are close. In fact we welcome peaceful competition because when it comes to industrial, agricultural, and technological strength; to the efficiency as well as the humaneness of our system; and to relative political influence, we have it all over the Soviet Union, and we can act with the confidence and restraint that knowledge justifies. We must take account of the Soviet challenge at all times. Failure to do so will be dangerous and could be fatal. But there are other trends in the world that could have long-term effects, either helpful or perilous to our security; we must recognize them as well. We have every reason to be encouraged by the revival of freedom in Greece, Portugal, and Spain. We may possibly find some hope in the possible rejection by the Eurocommunists—a posture we must view with caution—of Moscow as the sole font of wisdom and authority. It is even conceivable that some “Socialist” nations, particularly those that do not live right in the shadow of the U.S.S.R., are becoming dissatisfied with having no alternative to dealing with and depending on the hardcore Soviet bloc for their security and well-being. That is the good news. The bad news is that we also face a number of more dangerous developments. Nuclear weapons already are an unprecedented threat to mankind; their continued proliferation—horizontal as well as vertical—can only make matters worse. More generally, the violent settle-
