Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
239
fense budget, the buildup and improvement of Soviet strategic nuclear
forces, the modernization of Soviet ground and tactical air forces in
Eastern Europe, and the growing sophistication of Soviet naval forces,
which include a gradually expanding capability to project military
power at considerable distances from Russia itself.
Whatever the motives behind it, the challenge is serious; we must
not underestimate it. At the same time, we should recognize that the re-
sulting competition is not an all-out contest compared with arms races
of the past. It isn’t a purely military competition either.
We are spending a little more than 5 percent of GNP on our de-
fense establishment. Our best current estimate is that the Soviets are al-
locating between 11 and 13 percent of a much smaller GNP to their mil-
itary effort, with the bulk of it designed to give them a capability
against the United States and its immediate allies, although a signifi-
cant amount reflects the problem posed by the People’s Republic of
China.
Both sides—and especially the United States—could invest a great
deal more in defense. As of now, however, it would be a mistake to con-
centrate all our attention or the bulk of our resources on the arms race.
The competition reaches into other areas also, and we have compara-
tive advantages in them, whereas in the military arena the present bal-
ance and prospective potentials of the two sides are close. In fact we
welcome peaceful competition because when it comes to industrial, ag-
ricultural, and technological strength; to the efficiency as well as the
humaneness of our system; and to relative political influence, we have
it all over the Soviet Union, and we can act with the confidence and re-
straint that knowledge justifies.
We must take account of the Soviet challenge at all times. Failure to
do so will be dangerous and could be fatal. But there are other trends in
the world that could have long-term effects, either helpful or perilous
to our security; we must recognize them as well.
We have every reason to be encouraged by the revival of freedom
in Greece, Portugal, and Spain. We may possibly find some hope in the
possible rejection by the Eurocommunists—a posture we must view
with caution—of Moscow as the sole font of wisdom and authority. It is
even conceivable that some “Socialist” nations, particularly those that
do not live right in the shadow of the U.S.S.R., are becoming dissatis-
fied with having no alternative to dealing with and depending on the
hardcore Soviet bloc for their security and well-being. That is the good
news.
The bad news is that we also face a number of more dangerous de-
velopments. Nuclear weapons already are an unprecedented threat to
mankind; their continued proliferation—horizontal as well as ver-
tical—can only make matters worse. More generally, the violent settle-
