422 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement unfriendly to China and carried out acts against it should be released early. He said he did not propose to deal further with this point. 19. I next presented prepared statement on renunciation of force as follows: A. Mr. Ambassador I have very carefully studied remarks which you made at our last meeting concerning proposal of my government that each of us should renounce use of force to achieve our policies when they conflict and specifically that both sides declare that they would not resort to use of force in Taiwan area except defensively. B. During your discussion at our last meeting you introduced several subjects, in particular that of status of Taiwan and presence of United States forces in that area. These are subjects upon whch our respective governments hold different views. I have carefully avoided attempting to force on you views of my government with regard to these complex matters. Although my government is entirely convinced of rightness and justness of its position with regard to these matters, it is not now asking your government to accept our views. My govern­ ment full well recognizes that its views are different from those of your government and that each of our governments has policies which are in certain respects incompatible with each other. C. On other hand I have noted your demand that my government should withdraw its forces from Taiwan area. In effect you are demand­ ing that United States should change its policy and that my govern­ ment should abandon those whom it has solemnly pledged to defend from attack. You state that your government will, if circumstances per­ mit, seek what you term the liberation of Taiwan by peaceful means. I cannot but read into your statement the clear implication that if you are not able by peaceful means to achieve your national objectives with respect to Taiwan area, you will resort to force. What you seem in effect to be saying is that you will use peaceful means as long as your national objectives can thereby be achieved but that if they cannot be achieved by such means, you threaten to use force. Therefore, it seems to me that what you in effect have said is that if United States does not accede to your government’s demand that my government change its policies, your government threatens use of armed force. D. Just so that we may be entirely clear, I want to say very frankly and very bluntly that United States does not intend to yield to threat of force. E. My government does not consider that force is admissible means of settling differneces between us. My government is not demanding that your government alter its views or its objectives. Proposal which I have made is only that both sides declare their willingness to renounce force to implement these policies. Then and only then can these dif­ ferences between us be freely and hopefully discussed. They cannot
