66  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
in the inevitability of the Communist victory; while they have turned 
some of their attention to other areas of the world where opportunities 
have been greater, they have not given up the effort to find some way 
to bring about a Communist victory in Europe. Thus, the XXth Party 
Congress acknowledged the possibility of different roads to socialism, 
an attempt to provide doctrinal justification both for a more liberal evo­
lution in Eastern Europe and for acceptance of parliamentary methods 
in Western Europe.
41. In spite of these new doctrinal approaches, there does not seem 
to be any likelihood that Soviet Communism per se will gain any greater 
acceptance in either Eastern or Western Europe than it has in the past. 
The greatest political concern of most Eastern Europeans is to escape 
from the Soviet yoke; although some of the social and economic changes 
which have occurred have been welcomed, few Eastern Europeans 
would willingly have paid the price for them which has been extorted 
by Moscow and the local Communist leadership. Despite the pressures 
which exist, it does not appear to us that substantial changes in Eastern 
Europe will occur, although minor modifications, for example through 
a more liberal evolution, are possible.
42. Possibilities of Negotiation. In Western Europe there is great 
anxiety to find some way to escape from international tensions, the 
build-­up of armaments, and the dangers involved in the confrontation 
of US and Soviet forces in the heart of Europe. Although repeatedly 
frustrated by Soviet intransigence, the desire to explore the possibilities 
of a settlement is readily revived at every suggestion of flexibility in the 
Soviet position.
43. There are many uncertainties about Soviet intentions, and US 
policy will affect the development of the situation. The greatest prob­
lem will be that of developing an arrangement for Germany which 
will be acceptable to both sides. Since the USSR almost certainly con­
siders that it occupies a position of considerable strength, we con­
sider it most unlikely that the Soviet leaders would give up very 
much without very great concessions from the West. Yet they must 
realize that, unless they are prepared to make substantial concessions 
in East Germany, no settlement will go very far toward the reduction 
of international tensions. These concessions they are unlikely to make 
because of fear that the release of Soviet control over East Germany 
would weaken Soviet authority in other parts of Eastern Europe, 
and because of a longer-­run fear of a revived nationalistic Germany 
backed by the US and determined to establish hegemony in Europe.
44. West German governments will continue to regard the achieve­
ment of reunification as a major political goal and they will seek sup­
port toward this end from their allies. In general, bloc proposals on the 
present scale are recognized as attempts to consecrate the political status
