Non-Proliferation 809 326. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, March 11, 1977 PARTICIPANTS FRANCE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF Francois de Laboulaye GERMANY Political Director Gunter van Well Political Director UNITED KINGDOM Sir Michael Palliser UNITED STATES Permanent Under Secretary Ambassador Henry Owen Sir John Hunt President’s Representative Cabinet Secretary Arthur A. Hartman Reginald Hibbert Assistant Secretary Deputy Under Secretary David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President Robert Hunter, Senior Member National Security Council Roger Waldman, Assistant to Ambassador Owen James F. Dobbins, Jr. EUR/WE (Notetaker) Owen opened the meeting by noting that its purpose was to review the handling of non-economic issues which President Carter wished to raise at the summit.2 President Carter wished to raise these issues for two reasons: first, because he thought they were important and deserved discussion; and second, because he was of the general view that Japan should be involved more extensively in consultations with the United States and Europe on non-economic issues. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.] Turning to proliferation, Owen said that there had been bilateral contacts between the US and all the participants in the summit of the seven (Italy was to be contacted in the near future) on the US proposal for a fuel cycle evaluation program. In his own discussion with Japanese officials, Owen said, he had found them extremely interested. The subject of proliferation was on everyone’s minds and would certainly be discussed at the summit. Certainly President Carter would do so. Owen suggested that there were two aspects of non-proliferation—restraints and how to meet legitimate needs. The question of restraints was being dealt with in the London suppliers group. It did not appear 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 76, United Kingdom: 1–3/77. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Old Executive Office Building. 2 Reference is to the G–7 Summit scheduled for May in London.
