Non-Proliferation 789 320. Memorandum of Conversation1 Tokyo, February 1, 1977 SUBJECT Vice President Mondale—Prime Minister Fukuda Conversation II PARTICIPANTS Japan Takeo Fukuda, Prime Minister Iichiro Hatoyama, Foreign Minister Sunao Sunoda, Chief Cabinet Secretary Fumihiko Togo, Japanese Ambassador Bunroku Yoshino, Deputy Vice Minister Toshio Yamazaki, Director General, American Bureau Hisashi Owada, Private Secretary to the Prime Minister Ryuchiro Yamazaki, Interpreter United States The Vice President Richard Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs C. Fred Bergsten, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs Thomas P. Shoesmith, Minister Michael Armacost, NSC Senior Staff William C. Sherman, Director for Japanese Affairs James Wickel, Interpreter [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.] The Vice President said that there were several points he wished to make: First, with respect to nuclear proliferation, he said the US had pressed both Germany and France to exercise great circumspection with respect to their sales of sensitive materials and technologies to such countries as Pakistan and Brazil. Reprocessing facilities which could produce weapons grade material are simply bomb factories. The question is one in which the President has a great personal concern. We understand Japan’s concern for assured supplies of fuel for nuclear power plants. We are also grateful for Japanese ratification of the NPT. The US hopes to continue discussions with the GOJ about the aspects of the problem which may be of concern to Japan. We want to cooperate to keep the problem under control. The Vice President continued, saying that he understood the GOJ was interested in sending a team to discuss Japanese views with US ex- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 8, Japan: Prime Minister Fukuda, 3/21–22/77, Briefing Book [II], Folder 6. Secret. Drafted by Sherman. The meeting took place in the Prime Minister’s Office. The memoranda of conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIV, Korea; Japan.
