339 3 0/
8 S/800 8
About the Series
V
from the General Editor and the Chief of the Editing and Publishing Di-
vision. The documents are reproduced as exactly as possible, including
marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes.
Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions
for the publication of historical documents within the limitations of
modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for
each document included in this volume. Spelling, capitalization, and
punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that ob-
vious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and
omissions in documents are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correc-
tion is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words and phrases
underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and
contractions are preserved as found in the original text, and a list of ab-
breviations is included in the front matter of each volume. In telegrams,
the number (including special designators such as secto) is printed at
the start of the text of the telegram.
Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that
deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classi-
fied after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and,
where possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been
noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of text that were omit-
ted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been
accounted for and are listed with headings, source notes, and number
of pages not declassified in their chronological place. All brackets that
appear in the original text are so identified in footnotes. All ellipses are
in the original documents.
The first footnote to each document indicates the source of the doc-
ument, original classification, distribution, and drafting information.
This note also provides the background of important documents and
policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy ad-
visers read the document.
Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent 
material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional 
documentary sources, provide references to important related docu-
ments printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide sum-
maries of and citations to public statements that supplement and eluci-
date the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and 
other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supple-
ment or explicate the official record.
The numbers in the index refer to document numbers rather than
to page numbers.
Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation
The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documenta-
tion, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records,
