893.00/6681: Telegram
[Document 445]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 17, 1925—5 p.m.
[Received October 17—2:10 p.m.]
448. My telegram number 445, October 16, 5 p.m.33
1. Although no overt acts of hostility have yet been reported, there has come
to exist a situation of great tensity between the forces of Chang Tso-lin in
Kiangsu and the Chekiang forces under Sun Chuan-fang who is believed to
be acting upon an understanding with Feng Yu-hsiang and Wu Pei-fu for the
purpose of driving Chang back into Manchuria and eliminating him from the
coalition which has been supporting Tuan Chi-jui in power here. It is possible
that Sun is seeking merely to increase area of his individual power and will
be content with obtaining possession of Shanghai. If, however, he actually
brings on a conflict with Chang forces it will apparently indicate that Wu has
aligned himself with Feng for the purpose of obtaining definite control over
Central Government to the exclusion of Chang and forestalling the possibility
that Tuan might intrench himself in power as a consequence of increased
revenues to be derived from the results of Customs Conference.34
2. Should that prove to be the case it seems likely that the whole of North
China will be involved in a new civil war between Feng and Chang with the
possession of Peking as the principal objective. It is only possible to
conjecture the course of such a struggle; but it would seem that Feng is in
stronger position to obtain control of the Capital and of such authority as still
rests with Central Government. It seems likely that in that case he would
eliminate Tuan. It is possible that, if the new administration established by
him were to be recognized by the powers, Feng would ask the Tariff
Conference to stop; but it is at least equally probable that Feng who is
strongly under Soviet influences and beholden to them for the very large
quantities of arms and ammunition with which he has recently been able to
supply his armies would refuse to have anything to do with the conference
and would emulate Turkish example of baldly denouncing so-called unequal
treaties.
3. Should Feng accomplish his purpose against Chang, there is, nevertheless,
prospect that the coalition between him and Wu would break down as it is
