Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 579 now move into a more technical phase leading to the drafting of articles of agreement, a process which could be concluded as early as the end of this year. In the past few years, industrial nations and international institutions have undertaken a number of other important measures of concrete benefit to the developing countries. • Multilateral and bilateral aid flows have increased steadily in recent years. Agreements have recently been or will soon be concluded to enable the multilateral development banks to increase significantly, in real terms, their lending levels over the next 3 to 4 years. • Resources available through the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for financing balance-of-payments difficulties have been substantially increased—through liberalization of the IMF Compensatory Financing Facility; through the fourth IMF quota increase; and through the establishment of new IMF facilities including the trust fund and the $10-billion Witteveen facility. • Consuming countries have agreed to the concept of shared responsibility with producing countries for financing buffer stocks to stabilize prices in commodity markets. Agreements for coffee and tin were renegotiated; a new agreement for sugar has been reached;4 and negotiations on rubber and a new cocoa agreement are underway. Such agreements can have important anti-inflationary benefits for our own economy. • All Western industrial countries have implemented preferential tariff systems for developing countries. The multilateral trade negotiations will provide new opportunities for all nations to increase their economic welfare. Just as consumers and producers will benefit in our own country, so they can gain in the developing world. • And donor countries have agreed to the concept of easing or eliminating the official debt burden of the poorest countries. The United States has played a leading role in many of these and other international initiatives and we have taken national measures to support them. • We have increased our foreign economic assistance from $3.7 billion in fiscal year 1975 to $7 billion in fiscal year 1979. • In the commodities field, the United States is a member of the tin agreement, and we intend to make a contribution to the tin buffer stock. We are seeking Senate approval to join the sugar agreement, and we hope to conclude new cocoa and rubber agreements in which we can 4 These agreements regulated commodity prices and sales among signatories. The United States signed the most recent versions of the coffee agreement in 1975, the tin agreement in 1976, and the sugar agreement in 1977.
