114  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
to determine the precise state of readiness in the USSR”, and secondly, 
the first sentence of paragraph 11, reading “The adequacy of protec­
tion afforded by the shelter program outlined in the above paragraphs 
has not been analyzed in this report.” General Cutler also pointed out 
that Ambassador Thompson was of the opinion that no shelters were 
being provided in the enormous Lenin Hills housing development 
in Moscow. Mr. Dulles replied that he was inclined to disagree with 
Ambassador Thompson’s interpretation of what had been observed in 
the Lenin Hills development.
General Cutler said that in any case Mr. Dulles presumably agreed 
with his advice to Mr. Dulles that he should not go out too far on a limb 
with respect to this estimate of the Soviet program. Mr. Dulles indicated 
that he had been inclined to go along with this view when it had first 
been expressed to him by General Cutler, but that he had somewhat 
changed his mind after seeing more of the concrete evidence to sup­
port the existence of a Soviet civil defense and air-­raid shelter program. 
General Cutler inquired whether Mr. Dulles proposed to continue his 
efforts to discover the size and character of the Soviet program, and he 
received an affirmative answer.
Mr. Gordon Gray questioned whether it was meaningful to cite as 
evidence of a modem Soviet program shelter structures which had been 
built as early as 1949. To Mr. Grey, such structures would have little or 
no use in a future nuclear war. Dr. Killian, however, pointed out that 
such structures might still prove helpful as shelter against radioactive 
fallout as opposed to blast or thermal effects. Secretary Dulles agreed 
with this opinion, but pointed out that this was not the type of shelter 
which the United States was contemplating in its current study of shel­
ter programs.
Mr. Stans inquired of Mr. Allen Dulles how many of our American 
population could be protected by some of the same sort of measures, 
such as subways, which the intelligence estimate cited as being part of 
the Soviet program. There was no answer to this question.
The National Security Council:
Noted and discussed an estimate on the subject by the Director of 
Central Intelligence, prepared pursuant to NSC Action No. 1842–­f and 
transmitted by the reference memorandum of March 14, 1958.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.]
S. Everett Gleason
