North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 —Since the LDCs are likely to reject the proposal and because Group B could not agree to substantive revisions in it, tabling the proposal would be an empty tactical ploy. —Tabling the proposal may make it an important part of subsequent discussions of debt relief with developing countries. C. AN INITIATIVE ON RETROACTIVE TERMS ADJUSTMENT, BUT NO US/EEC PROPOSAL The terms of old aid are harder than the terms of new aid for a number of LDCs. For the least developed, which generally receive grants now, there is a significant discrepancy between current terms and past terms. At the moment, AID assistance to the LLDCs is solely in the form of grants; P.L. 480 is extended on a mixture of grants and loans. In a DAC meeting last month, the Netherlands proposed that donor countries give consideration to some form of retroactive terms adjustment for the poorer developing countries. The UNCTAD Secretariat sees agreement on this as the major accomplishment of the March ministerial meeting. Section 208 of the International Development Cooperation Act of 1978 (S.2420) would partially modify current U.S. policy by authorizing the new aid agency—on a case-by-case basis—to waive interest payments and use payments of principal (in the form of local currency) for development purposes. The authority would extend only to existing Foreign Assistance Act loans to the LLDCs. The authority proposed is similar to existing authority covering new P.L. 480 loans under Title III. If approved, the Humphrey Bill would, in effect, permit retroactive terms adjustment for past FAA loans for LLDCs.14 The rationale for and the effect of retroactive terms adjustment is to increase resource transfers through a debt relief process. There are three basic options for case-by-case retroactive adjustment of past loan terms; two with respect to the least developed countries and one with respect to other low-income countries. 1) For the 15 least developed countries that owe the U.S. ODA debt, convert the loans provided under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) to grants. (This is basically consistent with the debt provision contained in the recently proposed Humphrey Bill.)
