International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1033 the community; (3) training paramedics and others to provide primary health services, including family planning, in communities (villages) where these people are known and trusted and ensuring that these paramedics provide personalized family planning advice and support; and (4) advancing the legal, social, and economic status of women. Although U.S. policy requires that our leaders, Ambassadors, and others be knowledgeable on population issues and that they discuss them, as appropriate, in their contacts with key figures in other governments, particularly those in developing nations, this is often overlooked in the press of day-to-day business. Opportunities are thus lost for high-level exchanges, at least on an informal basis, on an issue widely seen by developing country leaders as the most fundamental one their nations face. It is not a matter of our lecturing them or they us, but of learning from each other and discovering ways in which we can be of greatest mutual help in carrying out successful programs of development, including adequate attention to demographic issues. These discussions should not focus exclusively on the adverse effects of high population growth rates on economic development. Our concerns relate in a major way to how high birth rates impair the health of mothers and children and limit prospects for a better life for children now, and for generations to come. This broadly relates to human rights and meeting basic human needs. B. Strengthening Community Organizations. Population programs have enjoyed greater success in communities where there are strong local organizations. The stronger the community, the greater the community awareness of the need for action in limiting population growth, and the greater the opportunities for promoting peer pressures within the community for reduced fertility. Strengthening community organizations serves many purposes, including the achievement of demographic goals. Stronger village or community organization involves enlisting the support of people in self-help programs, and engendering a stronger sense of participation on the part of individuals in the communities in which they dwell. This will not occur spontaneously. Above all, it requires that national governments take the lead in strengthening local organizations, and in providing direction and assistance for mutually supportive programs at the village level whether these programs are in education, health, family planning, nutrition, or rural development, and include cooperatives or other means to expand the income of local communities. While it is true that broad, multi-purpose programs may suffer from organizational complexity, this could be offset to some extent by greater reliance on community organizations for the execution of pol-
