Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 301 — Chemical: Compare assessments; propose cooperation on Canberra follow-­up. — Nuclear: Seek Shevardnadze response on Soviet action on North Korea, raise Iran. All or even a good part of the foregoing would be a solid, substantive outcome for the Ministerial. On START, the package includes four of the five subjects that Rick and Nazarkin identify as ready for the Ministers to address. (You should read Rick’s very good message at Tab A). It will take some doing to get interagency agreement on the START package, especially the ALCM/ heavy bomber element, but it would give a big boost to START and we should go for it. On the fifth element that Nazarkin identified— SLCMs—Rick says we should consider an agreement to discuss SLCM verification but as he also notes, DOD will strongly resist doing anything on SLCMs for fear of the “slippery slope”. On nuclear testing the Soviets have offered a package solution in which we get CORRTEX and they get three seismic stations in both countries. This is an attractive offer that we should work with (we would negotiate over the trigger level and the number of seismic stations). But DOD will strongly oppose this because they fear seismic stations could lay the basis for verification of a CTB. If we can overcome DOD resistance so that you and Shevardnadze could agree on the basic solution at the Ministerial, that would allow the delegations to complete the TTBT and PNET protocols in time for signature at a spring summit, which would be a considerable achievement. On CW, we are going to try to work out the data exchange/visits MOU at the August bilaterals with the Soviets in Geneva, along with the communique that would record the MOU and other progress that has been made toward a CW treaty. These steps would support our efforts at the Canberra Conference which will be held at the same time as the Ministerial. On the CW treaty, the Soviets are zeroing in on the inconsistency between our CW and START positions on challenge inspection. We are trying to get a meeting scheduled with the President and Cheney to discuss a CW initiative, including moving from “anywhere/anytime” to a START-­like approach to challenge inspection. Soviet Objectives at the Ministerial and Our Response We will know more about Soviet aims for the meeting when we see the Gorbachev letter. Everything indicates that the letter will be substantive. We expect at a minimum that it will respond and make counterproposals on CFE and V/S and it may well include a menu of proposals on other subjects.
