Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX measures to halt or prevent the violation, ensure observance of the Treaty of Peace, enhance friendly and peaceful relations between the parties and promote peace in the region, and will take such remedial measures as it deems appropriate, which may include diplomatic, economic and military measures as described below. 3. The United States will provide support it deems appropriate for actions taken by Israel in proper6 response to violations7 of the Treaty of Peace. In particular, if a violation of the Treaty of Peace is deemed to threaten the security of Israel, including, inter alia, a blockade of Israel’s use of international waterways, a violation of provision of the Treaty of Peace concerning limitation of forces or an armed attack against Israel, the United States will be prepared to consider, on an urgent basis, such measures as the strengthening of the United States presence in the area, the providing of emergency supplies to Israel, and the exercise of maritime rights in order to put an end to the violation. 4. The United States will support the parties’ rights to navigation and overflight for access to either country through and over the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba pursuant to the Treaty of Peace. 5. The United States will oppose and, if necessary, vote against any action or resolution in the United Nations which in its judgement adversely affects the Treaty of Peace. 6. Subject to Congressional authorization and appropriation, the United States will endeavor to take into account and will endeavor to be responsive to military and economic assistance requirements of Israel. 7. The United States will continue to impose restrictions on weapons supplied by it to any country which prohibits their unauthorized transfer to any third party. The United States will not supply or authorize transfer of such weapons for use in an armed attack against Israel, and will take steps to prevent such unauthorized transfer.8 6 An unknown hand moved the word “proper” up between “for” and “actions” in this sentence to read “The United States will provide support it deems appropriate for proper actions taken by Israel.” 7 An unknown hand inserted the words “such demonstrated” between “to” and “violations” to read “to such demonstrated violations.” 8 The final version of the memorandum added two further paragraphs. Paragraph 8 reads: “Existing agreements and assurances between the United States and Israel are not terminated or altered by the conclusion of the Treaty of Peace, except for those contained
