664 Chapter 5, May–June 1990 112. Memorandum of Conversation1 Bonn, May 4, 1990, 3:30–7 p.m. PARTICIPANTS 1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross Files, US/Soviet Memos of Conversation—1989/1990. Secret. The meeting took place in the Hotel Maritim Koenigswinter. The complete memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post- Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. 2 See Document 91. 3 See Document 88. US The Secretary Dennis B. Ross, Notetaker Interpreter USSR Eduard Shevardnadze Sergey Tarasenko Interpreter Baker: There are three principal issues that I’d like to spend our time on today. One is arms control, the other is German unification, and the last is Lithuania. If there are any others you’d like to talk about just let me know. [Omitted here are discussions not related to START.] Baker: We’re running out of time now. And I have some important items on arms control to discuss. And I think we really need to do it because we are getting so close to the Ministerial and the Summit. But before I go to that, I’d like to make one final comment. You say you want us to stay at least for the near term. And what I want you to understand is that the raison d’etre of our presence is the existence of NATO. That’s why NATO is so important. Let’s move on to arms control. You mentioned in Washington that the letter from President Gorbachev2 was not the final word on the MIRVing idea. When I raised banning mobile MIRVs in Namibia,3 I said I thought it would be a stabilizing move that would benefit both of us. But I also said I did not want it to impede the negotiations. We’re coming very close to the Summit, and I really need to know how you would like to proceed. Should we put it aside? Or is there some chance that you have an interest still in exploring it even now? In other words, is this idea still alive at this point and should we pursue it or is it really not realistic for the current treaty and should we put it aside for the time being?
