722 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III estimates of the costs and benefits of import restraints under various assumptions.)10 (11) The Commerce Department, in May, completed and released a survey of auto trade restrictions in other countries that indicates most other markets have substantially higher barriers to imports than the United States. Decision Some of your advisers feel that you should request the USITC to accelerate its investigation and announce that you will expedite your decision on import relief should the USITC find injury. Others feel you should permit the investigation to go forward as scheduled.11 The current USITC schedule calls for a public vote on injury about November 10 and submission of its report to you in mid-December. You would then have 60 days to review the report and decide whether to grant import relief (by mid-February). If you were to decide to negotiate orderly marketing agreements, you could take an additional 90 days to conclude and implement such agreements (by mid-May). If you request the USITC to accelerate its investigation, it is conceivable that its injury determination could be made 4–6 weeks earlier. It is unlikely the USITC could move much faster, given the time required to complete statistical surveys, hold public hearings, and receive post-hearing briefs. (In a recent case on canned mushrooms, the USITC accelerated its investigation by one month at USTR’s request.)12 Assuming the USITC would be willing to respond in a similar fashion on autos, its injury determination could be made in early October (possibly late September). At that point—that is, before USITC’s recommendations for relief are submitted—USTR’s General Counsel believes it would be within 10 Attachment B, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Costs of Trade Restrictions.” 11 In a June 30 memorandum to Carter, Mondale supported the acceleration of the USITC investigation. In a July 1 memorandum to Carter, Eizenstat and DPS member Ralph Schlosstein summarized the positions of several U.S. officials on accelerating the investigation: Eizenstat, President’s Deputy Assistant for Intergovernmental Affairs Gene Eidenberg, McDonald, and Butler favored acceleration, while Schultze opposed it. Owen advised Carter to “proceed with efforts to obtain a favorable Japanese statement regarding plans for future Japanese capacity, and decide later whether to accelerate the ITC investigation only if Japan is not forthcoming.” McDonald offered his views in a July 1 memorandum to Carter entitled “Automobile Imports.” All three memoranda are in the Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 194, 7/3/80. 12 Askew sought Carter’s decision on whether to provide relief for U.S. canned mushroom producers in an October 10 memorandum. Carter decided in favor of providing tariff relief. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 51, Memos from President [1])
