Chapter 7, January–May 1991 1013 essential in Washington. We will need top-­flight people thoroughly familiar with the treaty, at least while the JCIC is essentially completing the negotiation of the treaty. We also need to consider how we intend to conduct the “consultations” to which we are committed which lead to START II (and shed some light on the offense-­defense relationship?). I would not give this task to the JCIC, but if this is done, it makes this body even more important. Conclusion 16. We could be 4–6 weeks away from the completion of nine years of work, or we could let it slip away from us. The next few days could be crucial—­keep your fingers crossed. Burt 204. Memorandum From Richard Davis of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)1 Washington, March 5, 1991 SUBJECT Your Meeting With Rick Burt, 3:00 P.M., Tuesday, March 5, 1991 Rick Burt is returning to Washington to push for a final deal on START before his imminent departure as the negotiator. He is scheduled to see Secretary Baker Tuesday morning and may see Secretary Cheney as well before he returns to Geneva Wednesday. Rick’s primary message will be that the U.S. should make a high-­ level push to complete the START Treaty as soon as possible. Although he is clearly motivated in part by a personal desire to finish the Treaty, Rick will make the case that the remaining three or four issues must be resolved at the political level. He believes that now is the time to make our best deal in START, and we must seize the opportunity or see the chance for a treaty slip away. 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, USSR Chronological Files, START Files, OA/ID 91122–008. Soviet Power Collapse in Eastern Europe—Strategic Arms Control (March 1991). Secret. Sent for information. Sent through Kanter. A stamped notation indicates Scowcroft saw the memorandum. A second stamped notation reads: “Noted.”
