In previous messages I have referred to the national importance of the
proper development of our water resources. The great projects of extension
of the Mississippi system, the protection and development of the lower
Colorado River, are before Congress, and I have previously commented
upon them. I favor the necessary legislation to expedite these projects.
Engineering studies are being made for connecting the Great Lakes with the
North Atlantic, either through an all-American canal or by way of the St.
Lawrence River. These reports will undoubtedly be before the Congress
during its present session. It is unnecessary to dwell upon the great
importance of such a waterway not only to our mid-continental basin but to
the commerce and development of practically the whole Nation. Our river
and harbor improvement should be continued in accordance with the
present policy. Expenditure of this character is compatible with economy; it
is in the nature of capital investment. Work should proceed on the basic
trunk lines if this work is to be a success. If the country will be content to
be moderate and patient and permit improvements to be made where they
will do the greatest general good, rather than insisting on expenditures at
this time on secondary projects, our internal waterways can be made a
success. If proposed legislation results in a gross manifestation of local
jealousies and selfishness, this program can not be carried out. Ultimately
we can take care of extensions, but our first effort should be confined to the
main arteries.
Our inland commerce has been put to great inconvenience and expense by
reason of the lowering of the water level of the Great Lakes. This is an
international problem on which competent engineers are making reports.
Out of their study it is expected that a feasible method will be developed for
raising the level to provide relief for our commerce and supply water for
drainage. Whenever a practical plan is presented it ought to be speedily
adopted.
RECLAMATION
It is increasingly evident that the Federal Government must in the future
take a leading part in the impounding of water for conservation with
incidental power for the development of the irrigable lands of the arid
region. The unused waters of the West are found mainly in large rivers.
