1544  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
415.	 Telegram Supnu 230 From Geneva1
Geneva, January 27, 1959, 1 p.m.
Supnu 230. Ref Nusup 174. For Herter (S) from Wadsworth.
I fully agree we must concentrate on control issues. I believe our 
public position on these is excellent. The Brit yesterday took lead in 
putting forward our ideas on staffing a control organization in a way 
which showed clearly how effectively this could work in contrast to the 
Sov position of self-­inspection. The Sov delegate was obviously at a loss 
and floundered for reply. We have started to build our case on workable 
inspections and should have no trouble in exposing the absurdities of 
the present Sov position. On the veto also I think we are in a strong 
spot and can at the proper time further strengthen our position by sug­
gestions of a composition of the control commission which would give 
some voice to “non-­committed” countries.
I am honestly not able to reach a firm conclusion on whether the 
Soviets will eventually accept the right kind of control organization. 
Their statements and tactics, particularly since the recess, seem to point 
the other way, but I am still clinging to the idea that for some reason 
they want a treaty, perhaps even on respectable terms, and that they 
may possibly come around to it if our public position is kept strong. 
Their post-recess tactics may in fact be for any of three purposes: to 
prepare for a break; to try to bring pressure on West to compromise in 
order “to save conference”; or to build up to a major “concession” their 
part.
As far as keeping propaganda advantage goes, and this is essen­
tial whether there is eventually to be a treaty or a break, the only haz­
ards I see are the questions of duration and of threshold. The threshold 
problem need not come up soon, and in any case is not raised by the 
remainder of our draft treaty. So I will give you my thoughts on this 
question later. The duration problem is immediate. We have been 
helped enormously by our dropping of the disarmament link. We can 
now say quite rightly that duration only hinges on controls. But we 
still have the weak points, as far as public position goes, of the year-­
by-­year basis and the unilateral right of withdrawal. The Sov line in 
and outside of the meetings has been to attack these points, particu­
larly the year-­by-­year, and to demand that we make it clear whether 
we hold to these positions by tabling a duration article. They have 
1 Source: Urges tabling proposed duration clause of draft nuclear testing ces­
sation treaty. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. 5 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 
700.5611/1–2759.
