Arms Control and Disarmament 1261 PRESENT AND POTENTIAL CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS FOR THE DETECTION OF NUCLEAR TESTS ABSTRACT A long range detection system consisting of seismic, acoustic, electromagnetic and air sampling components is presently deployed around the USSR. This system can detect and identify nuclear tests of 10 KT or larger conducted within the USSR and China as shallow sub-­surface, surface or air bursts up to 50,000 ft with an estimated reliability of 90–100 per cent. Nuclear tests as small as 3 KT in the same environments can be detected and identified with a reliability of 30 per cent. Underground explosions of 10 KT or larger can be detected with a certainty of 90–100 per cent but cannot be identified as nuclear explosions. Underwater explosions of 20 KT or larger con­ ducted in deep ocean areas of the Northern Hemisphere and some parts of the Southern Hemisphere can be detected with 90–100 per cent certainty and probably identified as an explosion rather than an earthquake. Since the present system was designed to detect tests conducted in the USSR, its capabilities for tests outside the USSR are limited. Nuclear tests as large as a few hundred kilotons and possibly even one megaton might be missed if conducted in areas remote from the present detection network. A system of improved capability for the detection of nuclear tests possibly conducted on a clandestine basis in the USSR or China is described. This system would consist of about 70 geophysical sta­ tions in the USSR and China plus an aerial sampling network involving overflight of critical areas as required to intercept radioactive clouds for the purpose of proving the nuclear nature of the explosion. It is estimated that this system could detect and identify with 90–100 per cent certainty nuclear tests of 1 KT or larger conducted as shallow sub­ surface, surface or air bursts up to 50,000 ft within the USSR and China. Underground explosions of 1 KT or larger in the USSR and China could be detected with a certainty of 90–100 per cent but not identi­ fied as nuclear in nature. Identification of such underground distur­ bances may be possible through the use of on-­the-­spot inspection teams investigating about 300 unidentified sub-­surface disturbances of 1 KT or larger per year in the USSR and China. If inspection only of those disturbances of 5 KT or larger is contemplated, only 35 events per year would require investigation. A system for the detection and identification of nuclear tests in areas of the world remote from the present detection system is described. This system would consist of about 30 geophysical stations located principally in the Southern Hemisphere plus an aerial sampling network necessary to intercept radioactive clouds to prove the nuclear
