160 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III fight against any discord in US–FRG relations by maintaining personal contact. The President instructed Powell to inform the press that the U.S. is very pleased with Germany’s economic performance and attitude toward the nuclear fuel cycle evaluation. We are pursuing the same goals, and the U.S. and European publics should know that. The President joked that agreement between the two leaders is so broad that they needed to find an area of disagreement. The Chancellor suggested one: on the phone the President should speak more slowly. [Omitted here is discussion of the Law of the Sea negotiations.] The Chancellor said he hoped that the President would come to Germany soon. He understood the President’s schedule problems and did not expect an immediate answer, but said that a Carter visit would be received enthusiastically. After Germany itself, Germans look to the U.S. for leadership. All Germans would see a Presidential visit as indicative of the close relations between the two countries. The President was grateful for the invitation as well as for Schmidt’s visit to the U.S. He and the Chancellor spoke briefly about a “Friendship Force” visit to West Berlin. The President agreed in principle to visit the FRG in the near future.3 3 In a July 16 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski relayed a report from Hiss that Schmidt was “delighted by his visit here. It confirmed him in the impression, which he had formed at London, that you and he could work well together.” Schmidt also “profited from the economic discussions with Blumenthal and then with you” and “was comfortable with the way you discussed the growth targets.” After discussing Hiss’ thoughts on the date for the next economic summit, Brzezinski noted Hiss’s confidence “that the Chancellor will press his subordinates and his allies to fulfill the ambitious schedule on trade negotiations that Bob Strauss and Jenkins agreed to last week, to fulfill his summit pledge.” Carter wrote “Good” on the memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Republic: 4/77–3/78)
