North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
955
303.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Caracas, March 29, 1978, 9:15–10 a.m.
SUBJECT
North-South Dialogue, Energy, the Caribbean and Law of the Sea
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
W. Anthony Lake, Director, Policy Planning Staff
Robert A. Pastor, NSC Staff Member
Ambassador Viron P. Vaky
Guy F. Erb, NSC Staff Member
Venezuela
Carlos Andres Perez, President
Simon Bottaro Consalvi, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Manuel Perez Guerrero, Minister of State for International Economic Affairs
Valentin Acosta Hernandez, Minister of Energy and Mines
Carmelo Lesseur Lauria, Minister, Secretariat of the Presidency
Hector Hurtado, Minister of State, President of the Investment Fund
Ambassador Ignacio Iribarren
Dr. Reinaldo Figuerido, Director of Foreign Trade Institute
North/South
Saying he would like to exchange ideas on North-South matters,
Perez observed that President Carter’s administration had given an-
other cast to the dialogue. Recalling that the developing nations waited
for President Carter to take office before concluding the CIEC talks,
Perez noted that while the termination of CIEC was not entirely satis-
factory, nevertheless new perspectives opened up on such items
as the Common Fund and the debt problem. Even though the pro-
posals agreed upon were relatively modest, the U.S. had showed
understanding.
Since that time, however, virtually nothing has happened, and he
felt very pessimistic. Perez said he would be meeting with European
Chiefs of State in Jamaica in June. They would try to move the “hard
heart” of Germany’s Schmidt. The U.S. position, however, would be
key and the attitude of the United States could support other U.S. pol-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 36, Memcons: President: 2–3/78. Confidential. The meeting took place in the Mira-
flores Palace. Carter visited Caracas March 28–29. The portion of this memorandum of
conversation on energy is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy
Crisis, 1974–1980, Document 146.
