Chapter 4, February–April 1990 649 Secretary Baker said he did not believe there needed to be any reports from the regional working groups. He suggested that he and Shevardnadze proceed directly to the reports of the arms control working groups. He also suggested that they forego the closing plenary. He asked Shevardnadze whether the exact dates for the next ministerial could be announced at their press conferences. Foreign Minister Shevardnadze replied that it would be the correct thing to announce the dates—­or at least it would do no harm. The Ministers had already mentioned that another meeting would be necessary before the summit. Therefore if the Secretary agreed he would say that the Secretary’s visit would take place in mid-May. Alternatively, he could say that it would take place on May 16–19. The Secretary replied that it was fine to go with the exact dates. He then asked Ambassador Burt to report on the START working group’s activities. Working Group Reports: START Burt said that he and Nazarkin, together with their delegations, had had a productive meeting in several areas. They had substantially narrowed the sides’ differences on non-­circumvention; pending the results of a legal review of the language that had been discussed, we believed a solution had been found. Similarly, progress had been made on treaty duration. The sides had agreed on 15 years with the provision for extending it for an additional five years under certain circumstances. The only thing left to agree was the mechanism for extension. There had also been a productive exchange on the Soviet approach to the verification of road-­ mobile ICBMs and this would be pursued further in Geneva. Burt said that he and Nazarkin had agreed on a list2 of 32 START issues to be resolved in Geneva before the May ministerial. This list would serve two functions: it would give him and Nazarkin added impetus to curtail their lengthy lunches in Geneva; and it would give impetus to the bureaucracies in Moscow and Washington to provide the guidance needed to achieve results before mid-May. Therefore, while there were still some disagreements remaining on START-­related issues, Burt believed the sides could meet the goal of completing a START agreement this year. Nazarkin said that Burt had correctly presented the results of the working group and he had nothing to add. The Secretary asked whether anyone else had any comments on START. If not, he would turn the floor over to the CFE working group. [Omitted here are discussions not related to START.] 2 Not found.
