672
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
the clerical regime, with a complete breakdown of public order or even
civil war. Not only would this situation endanger the hostages, but it
would sorely tempt the Soviets to move across the border. The Soviets
might cite our military actions as armed intervention, permitting them
to invoke the 1921 Treaty.3 They might also be able to assemble a
Tudeh-dominated government in Azerbaijan or even in Tehran in the
name of protecting the Islamic Revolution. The Soviets have steadily
been building their military capability near the Iranian border, and
they have been accumulating political support by their support of
Khomeini against the U.S. A small, disciplined group with outside
resources can be very effective in conditions of anarchy and political
collapse. (S)
Finally, even if we succeed in pressuring Khomeini to strike a deal,
we will have a problem in extricating ourselves from the confrontation.
In short, though superficially cautious and controlled, it is a high-risk
strategy which sets in motion forces that are dangerous and beyond
our power to control. (S)
Rescue Operation
The alternative is to force the issue to a resolution by unilaterally
seizing the hostages away from the Iranians. From a political point of
view, this course of action has enormous appeal. It is quick and almost
totally under our control. A sudden strike with the sole objective of
rescuing our people would be understood—and perhaps applauded—
by regional states and allies alike. It would provide almost no opportu-
nity or excuse for the Soviets to intervene. And it would embarrass
the Ayatollah and show him and his regime to be inept. (TS)
The difficulties of making a decision turn almost entirely on ques-
tions of capability and risk. Can we get in and out before the Iranians
can react militarily? Can we get all the hostages? Do we believe that
we could act swiftly enough to avoid having many of the hostages
executed? Can we avoid losing many of our own military people? (S)
I am struck by the evaluation of some of those closest to the situa-
tion. My staff assistant, Gary Sick, who has been living with this issue
day and night for the past five months, has personally and privately
urged me in the strongest terms to adopt this course of action, and has
proposed this memo. He has also informed me that the three best
Persian-speaking officers in the Foreign Service have recently gone to
3 In the Russo-Persian Treaty of 1921, the Soviet Union renounced Tsarist Russia’s
imperialist policies including all treaties with Persia (Iran), and promised non-interven-
tion in Persia’s internal affairs. Article V prohibited any armed organization in either
Persia or Russia whose aim was to engage in “acts of hostility” against the other, and
Article VI allowed the Soviet Union to intervene against the troops of any power using
Persia as a base of operations against the Soviet Union.
