Czechoslovakia detained and questioned several hours in tourist kiosk, from which he says he saw Polish police round up KOR members Jan Litynski, Adam Michnik and Piotr Naimsky. Detained Czechs were held in various places for up to 59 hours and most then released. Sabata, however, was held first in village jail and punched about by uniformed police, then reportedly was transferred to Ministry of Justice jail in Hradec Kralove. There he is said to have been officially charged with violating two articles of penal code relating to using force and verbal abuse against public officials. This account leaves unclear whether Sabata still in detention, but rumors in Prague as of October 6 say he is. Account concludes by denying that Sabata in any way resisted police and stating he is being persecuted. It proclaims development of cooperation between Czechoslovak and Polish human rights supporters cannot be stopped. 4. Comment: Whether or not meeting of Polish and Czechoslovak Party Ideological Secretaries last month (ref A) led to this cooperative move against dissidents, such cooperation is obviously under way. Report cited above also says police were allegedly also watching other border tourist areas suitable for meeting, but we suspect police had enough information from Charter leaks to pinpoint actual rendezvous. Beating of Sabata could have been action of undisciplined rural police, but placing of formal charges against him almost certainly was directed from Prague. It suggests authorities have become sufficiently concerned about developing Charter-KOR ties to shift to heavyhanded efforts to intimidate potential participants in future border meetings. End comment. 5. In other Chartist activity, Pavel Kohout has renewed his quest for permission for self and wife to make short visit to Western Europe and the United States, but so far has received no travel documentation. His daughter Teresa tells us Kohout and wife would like to depart the week of October 16 for Switzerland (where Kohout may wish to visit another daughter presently studying in Geneva, as well as his Swiss publisher). Comment: Kohout has been telling friends he hopes to return to Prague after forthcoming visits to the West, but we doubt he will be able to do so in light of longstanding warnings from Party officials that if he leaves, he cannot return. 6. Teresa Kohoutova indicates police have begun to intimidate those involved in recent productions of Macbeth. She was taken from a family dinner party October 5 for three hours’ interrogation, including threats to desist from further non-sanctioned acting. She reports Vlasta Chromastova, talented former actress who has been playing Lady Macbeth in Kohout’s version of the Shakespeare classic, has also been interrogated at length. Moreover, police recently broke up a performance of the play, and when it was rescheduled, blocked would-be audience from attending it.
