130
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
regime could be brought to power in Tehran without overt Soviet
intervention, but would appear much greater if military intervention
were required. How much greater would in turn depend on Moscow’s
assessment of the “correlation of forces.”
9. In that the Politburo members would see geography as on their
side. Not only are their general purpose forces stronger than those of
the U.S. (and any allies that might become involved), but their ability
to project that power into Iran far exceeds that of the U.S. Against this
they would weigh the danger that a venture in Iran could not be
confined to Iran and its neighbors but might escalate to nuclear confron-
tation. The critical factor for them would be the U.S. leadership. They
clearly see the present one as weak and indecisive, but they do not
fully understand the U.S. political process. To them the U.S. is unpre-
dictable and especially dangerous in adversity, when it may react like
a wounded animal. Both these considerations will be strongly operative
in the election year 1980. Moreover, they may calculate that the adminis-
tration that takes office in 1981 will have a mandate to restore U.S.
military strength, although any actions it could take would not substan-
tially affect the power balance for several years.
10. This is not an estimate that the Soviets will seize the Iranian
oil fields. It is rather that the combination of the Soviet need for oil,
the power vacuum in Iran, the “strategic window” of the early 80s,
the perceived weakness of U.S. leadership, and the geographic advan-
tages of the USSR make such an action a thinkable course either for
an erratic older Soviet leadership or an aggressive younger one. The
Politburo might come to see Iran as the schwerpunkt2 of the long Soviet
struggle with the U.S. A successful Soviet operation in Iran, even if it
did not lead to a cut-off of other Gulf oil, would affect the power
balance almost as decisively as a long-term disruption of that supply.
C. Avoid Confrontation with the USSR
11. Controlling risks by avoiding confrontation is obviously a desir-
able goal for the U.S., but it ranks below those of protecting the other
Gulf states and denying Iran to the Soviets. These are vital to the U.S.
national interests in the long term. Indeed, they may only be achievable
by risking confrontation. That said, the arguments that make military
action appear less risky for the USSR in the early 80s window are
equally applicable to risk-taking by the U.S. Short of a direct threat to
our vital interests, the risk of military confrontation with the USSR
2 A German military term variously defined as the focal point, concentration of
effort point, central point of attack, center of gravity of an attack, i.e., that thing which
is most important as a target.
