1118  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
After an exchange of greetings, the President, saying that he had 
been disappointed with the turn of events in Paris,3 expressed hope 
that events since then, like the announcement of the Khrushchev visit 
to Cuba, would bring the American Republics closer together than 
ever—if so, this would be a constructive result.
Prime Minister Beltran said that he wanted to bring greetings 
from President Prado and to say how much the latter had regretted 
that President Eisenhower had been unable to visit Peru. He turned 
quickly from this point to comment on the deteriorating situation in 
Latin America, stressing the aggressiveness of the communists who 
were falling in line behind the Castro mystique. The latter’s slogans 
calling for “economic freedom” and “non-­intervention in their internal 
affairs” attracted wide public support. Whereas the communists might 
have once hoped to get a foothold in Bolivia, now they were well estab-
lished in Cuba.
The President raised two questions: 1. Would Latin America toler-
ate a Moscow-­dominated government in the region? and 2. What does 
Latin America expect the United States to do? Are we supposed “to sit 
and do nothing?”. Mikoyan4 went to Cuba and signed a trade agree-
ment; now Khrushchev5 is reported to be going.
The Prime Minister said that William Randolph Hearst, Jr.6 and 
Bob Considine7 had asked him similar questions a few weeks ago and 
he had honestly replied “I don’t know”. Now he is deeply concerned 
because the communists are acting aggressively everywhere, as in 
Peru where he recently had to deal with the crisis provoked by a mass 
demonstration in favor of a few students who were mistakenly placed 
with confirmed criminals in the prison.8 The demonstration was actu-
ally intended to bring down the government and the responsible 
3 Documentation on the meeting of the Heads of Government (Summit Conference) 
of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union at Paris in May 
1960 is presented in volume VIII.
4 Anastas Ivanovich Mikoyan, First Deputy Chairman, Soviet Council of Ministers, 
and Cuban Premier Castro signed an agreement in Habána on February 13 for Soviet pur-
chase of Cuban sugar and extension of $100 million credit to Cuba. For documentation, 
see volume V.
5 Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev, First Secretary of the Central Committee, 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union; and Chairman of the Soviet Council of 
Ministers.
6 Editor-­in-Chief and Chairman, Editorial Policy Board of the Hearst Newspapers.
7 Syndicated columnist.
8 In despatch 705 from Lima, May 26, the Embassy reported that Minister of 
Government and Police Carlos Carrillo Smith resigned on May 25 after a mass demon-
stration protesting confinement of three students, arrested on May 19, in cells with 
hardened criminals and sexual perverts. Minister of Education José Rubio Rolando also 
resigned on May 25. (723.00(W)/5–2660)
