March 1952–February 1953
395
velopment would probably result in still greater leniency being shown
by the Iranian security forces toward Tudeh and a disposition on the
part of the government to crack down on certain political factions that
are Tudeh’s most bitter opponents. CIA would thus find it increasingly
difficult to induce anti-Tudeh individuals and groups to speak out or
take action against Tudeh. CIA-induced or supported anti-Tudeh
propaganda activities would be particularly hard hit. An increasing
number of newspapers would be reluctant to print anti-Tudeh material
and thus risk government suppression or the destruction of their facil-
ities by Tudeh activists.
2. A significant increase in Tudeh influence would probably have a
less serious effect on CIA preparations to support potential resistance
groups and might, in fact, increase CIA capabilities. Such a develop-
ment might well increase the willingness of these groups to deal more
closely with the U.S. and might even induce them to request assistance
in opposing Tudeh.
C. CIA Capabilities in the Event of Tudeh Domination of the Iranian
Government and Army (Para 6, NSC Draft)4
1. Special political operations would probably largely cease. Many
CIA agents would almost certainly have to leave the country. The most
optimistic estimate is that CIA could induce sporadic terrorist activity
against Tudeh leaders, initiate rumor campaigns, and in general keep
the public aware of an underground, Western-oriented resistance
movement.
2. In view of its current limited resistance assets in Iran, CIA could
do almost nothing directly to oppose the establishment of a Tudeh re-
gime. It could, however, encourage and assist certain tribal groups to
maintain control of their own territory against a Tudeh central gov-
ernment. Under the assumed circumstances, these groups would prob-
ably be very receptive to a U.S. offer of assistance and might even take
the initiative in contacting U.S. representatives on the subject.
3. The establishment of a U.S. military base in Iraq, which we un-
derstand to be under consideration in the Department of Defense,
would greatly improve prospects for maintaining special political op-
4 Paragraph 6 of the draft revision of NSC 107/2, October 13, reads: “In the event
that a communist government achieves complete control of Iran so rapidly that no legal
Iranian Government is available to request assistance, the position of the United States
would have to be determined in the light of the situation at the time, although politico-
military-economic discussions leading to plans for meeting such a situation should be
carried on with the British Government and, as appropriate, with the Turkish Govern-
ment. In this contingency, the United States should make every feasible effort, particu-
larly through special political operations, to endeavor to develop or maintain localized
centers of resistance and to harass, undermine, and if possible, to bring about the over-
throw of the communist government.”
