1410 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 824. Letter 73 from Clough to Johnson1 Letter No. 73 Washington, September 6, 1957 Dear Alex: Your letter of August 29 was very timely reaching us yesterday in time to permit me to comment on it prior to your meeting next week. I anticipate as you do that Peiping will eventually admit only a few American correspondents. However, they may now seek to use the reci­ procity issue as leverage on us to admit Chinese Communist correspond­ ents to the U.S. As you will see from the enclosed copy of the Secretary’s August 27 press conference, the door to that possibility has been left ajar. So far no application for entry of a Chinese correspondent has been received. The decision to authorize limited travel to Communist China by correspondents has greatly reduced the pressure on the Department over this issue. Some of the correspondents waiting in Hong Kong have criticized the wording of the Department’s announcement as predis­ posing the Chinese Communists to reject the proposal but for the most part the onus now appears to be shifted to Peiping. I think you are wise in not wishing to take the initiative in raising the travel issue with Wang at the next meeting. Wang may raise it taking the same line as the original Peiping reaction to our announce­ ment. But his position is an awkward one and you will have no diffi­ culty in handling it. It is possible that a Chinese Communist newsman will apply before the next meeting to be admitted to the U.S., in which case you could simply reiterate our position that such individual applications would be considered on their merits and in the light of the applicable U.S. laws and regulations. We are trying to get a copy of the new law on fingerprinting passed by Congress last week but may not have it in time to enclose with this letter. Briefly it authorizes the Secretary of State and the Attorney General jointly to waive fingerprinting requirements in certain cases for persons coming to the U.S. as temporary visitors. This will make it possible to admit visitors from iron curtain countries and even from Communist China without fingerprinting and without declaring the individuals to be officials which as you point out would be out of the question in case of an unrecognized regime. I enclose a copy of the order issued by the Federal District Court in the Powell-Schumann Sedition Case calling on the Chinese Communist courts for judicial assistance. This was sent by the court direct to Peiping. The Executive Branch of the Government did not participate in 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. A copy was sent to Martin.
