United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  25
From the brief survey we were able to make of the Central 
American area, I am personally convinced that the countries involved 
need economic assistance from an external source at this time. The econo-
mies of each of the Control American countries have been adversely 
affected by the serious drop in the price of coffee and in some cases 
also by lowered production and declining sales of bananas. I believe 
that each of the countries is in a position to do more for itself than it 
has done; more could and should be done by the governments and by 
the wealthy citizens. Nevertheless, I feel that they are in acute need of 
economic aid and that it is in the interest of the United States that we 
extend some economic assistance to the Central American countries 
at this time.
In my opinion, economic assistance should be given to the Central 
American countries in the form of loans from three sources, namely:
1. The Export-Import Bank
2. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
3. The Development Loan Fund
Although the lending activities of the above named institutions are 
already coordinated to some extent, particularly through the National 
Advisory Council, I feel that a greater and well-­coordinated positive effort 
is desirable. Conferences should be arranged between executives of 
the three lending institutions to study the economic problems of the 
Central American area, to compare notes and opinions, and particu-
larly to consider projects in each country which would most quickly 
and effectively aid the economy of the country. More particularly, I feel 
that in the proposed conferences between the three lending institutions, 
the following factors and conditions should be studied:
1. The present economic and financial condition of each country.
2. Economic projects most urgently needed in each country.
3. Estimated capacity of each country to repay additional loans in 
dollars and possibly in local currency.
4. Recommended allocation of essential projects to the three lend-
ing institutions, or possible participation by DLF and the Export-Import 
Bank and/or the International Bank wherever this seems advisable.
In my opinion such a joint study would be of considerable value, 
and it should be possible to reach an agreement among the lending 
institutions as to the approximate amount of loans to be considered by 
each institution and the specific projects to be covered by each of such 
loans.
In addition to the extension of economic assistance by the 
three lending institutions, I feel that ICA (International Cooperation 
Administration) should be urged to increase, if possible, the amount of 
its technical assistance in each of the Central American countries. In my 
opinion it would be helpful if through ICA some experts could be sent
