60
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
with modernization of Soviet forces. It is difficult for NATO to do so,
within realistic fiscal ceilings, without rationalization of NATO pro-
grams to reduce waste and overlapping. Continuation of present
trends could eventually threaten the balance of military power that
keeps peace in Central Europe.
These two problems interact: Political and economic trends hinder
defense efforts in some European countries, and an evident weakening
of European defense could hinder European recovery.
Meeting these problems will require cooperative effort by the main
industrial countries. In the economic field they will need to confirm
each other in sensible domestic policies, and to join in enlarging inter-
national financing, reducing artificial obstacles to trade, improving the
balance between global energy demand and supply, and providing
more effective help to developing countries. In the security field, they
will need to modernize NATO forces and rationalize NATO defense
programs.
Action to these ends will confront major obstacles. These cannot be
overcome without a powerful political impulse. The purpose of the
Seven Nation and NATO Summits should be to generate that impulse.
Implementing action can then be taken in other forums.
II. Specific Actions
Seven Nation Summit. To serve this purpose, we are negotiating in
the international preparatory group to include the following in the
draft Seven Nation Declaration:
1. Domestic. Germany, Japan, and the United States would commit
themselves to achieve present expansionist targets; Britain, France, and
Italy would pledge to maintain their stabilization policies until infla-
tion had been brought under control; and both groups of countries
would agree to concert about these actions in the OECD.
2. Financing. The seven nations would agree to support Wit-
teveen’s proposal to expand the IMF’s resources in order to help debtor
countries finance their deficits on current account.3
3. Trade. The seven participating governments would agree to seek
specified substantive results, including progress toward an interna-
tional system of national grain reserves, in 1977 in the multilateral
GATT trade negotiations.
3 In February 1977, concerned that delays in the expansion of IMF member quotas
would combine with large-scale demands on IMF resources to produce a situation in
which the IMF could not meet its members’ financial needs, Witteveen proposed the cre-
ation of a “supplementary financing facility.” Also known as the Witteveen Facility, this
initiative would allow the IMF to borrow funds from member countries that it could then
lend to other member countries. (De Vries, The International Monetary Fund, 1972–1978:
Cooperation on Trial, vol. I: Narrative and Analysis, pp. 545–546)
