Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  429
ALCMs in Soviet Forces. In resisting constraints on ALCMs, we also 
recognized that the Soviets would have an equal right to exploit the rules, 
and that an expanded heavy bomber force may be attractive to them 
under START ballistic missile warhead limits which will require about a 
50% reduction in Soviet RVs. So far, the Soviets appear not to be interested 
in taking full advantage of the Reykjavik counting rule, since both of the 
new Soviet heavy bombers will apparently carry ALCMs. Nevertheless, 
NIE 11–3/8 projects that the Bear H ALCM carrier, Blackjack, and two 
long-­range ALCMs, may nearly triple the number of Soviet heavy bomber 
weapons by 1995, to well over 2000 weapons, notwithstanding the lower 
projected production of Blackjack.
Negotiating Precedents. Our position on discounted ALCMs also 
preserves the negotiating principle that air-­breathing weapons should 
be limited less strictly than ballistic missiles. A decision to accept the 
Soviet-­proposed “as equipped” counting rule for ALCMs in START 
could limit our ability in the future to negotiate favorable treatment 
for weapons on heavy bombers, including gravity bombs, SRAMs and 
ALCMs, as well as SLCMs.
Monitoring. An additional important consideration underlying 
the U.S. START position is our conclusion that realistic ALCM limits 
cannot be monitored with any degree of confidence. As a corollary, 
the U.S. position recognizes that any binding limit at a level lower 
than the maximum capacity of the entire heavy bomber force could in 
practice constrain the U.S., but would not preclude a realistic Soviet 
breakout capability. In order to insulate SRAMs and non-­nuclear 
ALCMs from START limits, we have proposed range threshold and 
distinguishability rules, even though they cannot be monitored with 
any confidence. We propose to sidestep the monitoring problem with 
regard to counting ALCMs deployed on heavy bombers by attrib-
uting an assigned number of ALCMs to each ALCM-­heavy bomber. 
This approach—­in contrast to the Soviet “as equipped” approach—­
removes the formal need to verify that ALCM loading limits are not or 
cannot be exceeded. In the end, however, verification of ALCM limits 
could be a political issue, especially if the Soviets chose to highlight it.
Stabilizing Reductions. A related premise of the U.S. position is that 
stability is improved if U.S. and Soviet forces depend more heavily on 
“slow-­flying” heavy bomber forces that are inherently not capable of 
conducting a short-­warning first strike. Under the agreed counting 
rule for bombs and short-­range missiles, both sides will have enhanced 
incentives to increase their reliance on heavy bombers (notwithstand-
ing the low Blackjack production rate). In addition, the more lenient 
U.S. proposal on ALCM counting rules could mean up to 1000 addi-
tional ALCMs for the U.S., but only 200–300 for the Soviets, given the 
lower ALCM capacity of their current bombers. The effect of this force
