628  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
In discussing the environmental impact of such a system, it was 
pointed out that the governors of the states where the system might be 
deployed—Utah and Nevada—­had objected to the kind of area secu-
rity that an open trench system would require. With a covered trench, 
we could go to point security, and the public could be allowed to use 
much of the deployment area, though the area would be kept under 
surveillance using national park-­type security, and would be periodi-
cally swept for covertly implanted sensors. Mr. Jordan commented that 
while the environmentalists would like an underground system better 
than one on the surface, both environmentalists and politicians would 
be shocked at the extent of the system, and it should be concentrated 
in as small an area as possible. Secretary Brown commented that the 
construction should be confined, at least initially, to DOD land so the 
public could see how little impact a completed system would have. (S)
In discussing the survivability of this trench system, Dr. Perry 
pointed out that this basing mode is unique in having two methods 
of achieving survivability—­deceptive location and a dash-­on-­warning 
capability. He further noted that while the system was designed to 
initially include 8,000 hardened shelters, another 8,000 could be built 
between the original shelters for about $1B in additional costs. This 
would defeat greater than expected Soviet efforts to fractionate their 
missile throw-­weight, and any amount of further fractionation could 
be similarly defeated. Mr. Seignious commented that this capability to 
cope with increased fractionation should provide minimum incentives 
for Soviet fractionation and thus help to preserve one of SALT II’s most 
valuable achievements—­fractionation limits. (S)
Stan Turner questioned whether the Soviets would let us achieve 
the high level of survivability anticipated for this system, when they 
would be starting so far ahead in the warhead versus shelter race we 
would be running. [3 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown argued that 
many of the RVs in this estimate are below the 1 MT size used as a 
design threat for the trench system, and many are [2 lines not declassi-
fied] He also argued that we can pour concrete faster than the Soviets 
can build missiles, and that if the Soviets abrogate the SALT limits in 
an attempt to maintain a high level of threat to the system, we could 
conceivably defend it with an ABM system. Mr. Aaron suggested that 
an analysis be carried out of the relative efforts required to expand and 
to offset the threat to the trench concept. (S)
Finally, Dr. Press asked how the system would cope with a sce-
nario in which the Soviets use SLBMs to deprive the transporters of 
their mobility, and then use ICBMs to attack shelters that have been 
identified as containing missile transporters by covertly implanted sen-
sors. Secretary Brown commented that this scenario seems unrealistic, 
particularly given the fact that the Soviet SLBM attack would provide
