Peru  1067
[Enclosure]
Memorandum of Conversation
August 3, 1959.
SUBJECT
Beltran’s Program
PARTICIPANTS
Sr. Pedro Beltran, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance
T. C. Achilles
Over the week-­end I was the only guest at Beltran’s hacienda and he 
and I spent Saturday afternoon and evening and all day Sunday discuss-
ing what he hoped to achieve, how he hoped to do it, and what assistance 
from the U.S. might be practicable. His hopes from us are much more 
modest and much sounder than those of his recent predecessors.
Why He Accepted Office
Having participated in 48 hours of soul searching with him last year 
before he turned down the same two positions, I was surprised that he 
had accepted them this year. He said that a month ago he had been con-
vinced that Prado was about to fall, that no successor to the President 
or Prime Minister was in sight who could hope to change the three-­year 
drift into inflation and economic stagnation and the centuries-­old resis-
tance to social progress. He foresaw nothing but accelerated deterio-
ration, with or without a military government, and probably an early 
Communist-­fomented social revolution. He believed that the President 
would not have turned to him except from similar acute pessimism. The 
friends he had consulted had urged him to accept as a patriotic duty. He 
had debated waiting until after “one more government had fouled things 
up worse” but concluded that might be too late.
The President had promised him full support. He did not count 
on this except insofar and as long as the President considered their for-
tunes linked. He had been assured of full support by the military and 
believed them. (Top Army and Navy sources have confirmed this to 
me.) He had not sought APRA support but had been assured of it at 
least on a trial basis. (Prialé4 has confirmed this.) He could count on the 
support of the wealthy class in their own interest, except for the Miro 
Quesada group. (Presumably correct.) In Congress the MDP would 
have to support him in their own interest. They with APRA constituted 
4 Ramiro Prialé, Secretary General of APRA.
