1162  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
launchers of ICBMs of other new types of ICBMs with their associated 
missiles installed.
(h) Mobile launchers of ICBMs converted into launchers of ICBMs 
of another type of ICBM shall be distinguishable from mobile launch-
ers of ICBMs of the previous type of ICBM. Such converted launchers, 
with their associated missiles installed, shall be distinguishable from 
mobile launchers of ICBMs of the previous type of ICBM with their 
associated missiles installed. Conversion of mobile launchers of ICBMs 
shall be carried out in accordance with procedures to be agreed within 
the framework of the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission.
10. As of the date of signature of this Treaty:
(a) Existing types of ICBMs and SLBMs are:
(i) for the United States of America, the types of missiles designated 
by the United States of America as Minuteman II, Minuteman 
III, Peacekeeper, Poseidon, Trident I, and Trident II, which are 
known to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as Minuteman II, 
Minuteman III, MX, Poseidon, Trident I, and Trident II, respectively.
(ii) for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the types of missiles 
designated by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as RS–10, 
RS–12, RS–16, RS–20, RS–18, RS–22, RS–12M, RSM–25, RSM–40, 
RSM–50, RSM–52, and RSM–54, which are known to the United 
States of America as SS–11, SS–13, SS–17, SS–18, SS–19, SS–24, SS–25, 
SS–N–6, SS–N–8, SS–N–18, SS–N–20, and SS–N–23, respectively.
(b) Existing types of ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs are:
(i) for the United States of America, the type of missile designated 
by the United States of America as Peacekeeper, which is known to 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as MX;
(ii) for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the types of missiles 
designated by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as RS–22 and 
RS–12M, which are known to the United States of America as SS–24 
and SS–25, respectively.
(c) Former types of ICBMs and SLBMs are the types of missiles 
designated by the United States of America as, and known to the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics as, Minuteman I and Polaris A–3.
(d) Existing types of heavy bombers are:
(i) for the United States of America, the types of bombers desig-
nated by the United States of America as, and known to the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics as, B–52, B–l, and B–2;
(ii) for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the types of bomb-
ers designated by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as Tu–95 
and Tu–160, which are known to the United States of America as 
Bear and Blackjack, respectively.
(e) Existing types of long-range nuclear ALCMs are:
