893.00/6453: Telegram [Document 661] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State PEKING, July 28, 1925—9 a.m. [Received 7:40 p.m.] 293. 1. It may be helpful to the Department to receive an analysis of the tentative impressions I have thus far been led to form in regard to the present situation in China which seems to me more critical than any since Boxer year. Among the vicinal elements I have found Chinese feeling, primarily racial, secondarily national, aroused to an emotional fervor which I was scarcely prepared to realize even after a dozen years of observing the growth of national self-consciousness in China. The Shanghai incident seems to have awakened instincts and passions hitherto dormant, and given an element of fanaticism to what were behind the somewhat unsympathetic and desultory aspirations of the small articulate portion of the Chinese people. 2. I am not inclined to believe that an outburst of feeling has resulted solely or even primarily from Bolshevik incitement. The propaganda of the Soviets has no doubt hastened and given direction and impetus to the new development, supplying it with catch words and lending it the encouragement of Soviet moral and material support; but the movement seems to me to be fundamentally an evolution of native Chinese thought and feeling. 3. It is so much a matter of psychological rather than material considerations that I feel that any attempt to evaluate the situation must take account of imponderable emotional elements far more than of any concrete claims or grievances. The basic factor seems to be that the Chinese, in common with other Asiatic peoples, have particularly since the war been growing more favorably self-conscious, less in awe of the western peoples, and more determined to assert themselves and resent the assumed superiority of the white races. Insofar as it was political in character, that tendency has, I believe, been fully appreciated and discounted by the Department, which has foreseen the difficulty if not in fact the impossibility of maintaining special treaty rights in the face of growing nationalism in China.

4. That tendency has recently been vastly complicated however by more subtle elements of feeling latent in the minds of the Chinese and now brought to the surface by an emotional upheaval. Chinese who were heretofore most friendly and congenial with foreigners are now stirred to intolerance and pour out of their memories long
