454
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
accompanied by a diplomatic demarche explaining our human rights
concerns and making it clear that we are seriously taking human rights
considerations into account in our foreign assistance decisions. In gen-
eral and where possible under applicable law, we prefer to discuss our
human rights concerns through diplomatic channels before taking any
steps with respect to foreign assistance.
When the human rights situation in the proposed recipient
country is poor and not improving, the Group may recommend that
the U.S. not support the proposed assistance. This will particularly be
the case where the assistance will not be likely to benefit the needy. In
these circumstances the Group will frequently recommend that a diplo-
matic demarche be made to the government concerned, explaining our
position and urging human rights improvements.
The Group stays abreast of human rights developments in the
countries receiving U.S. foreign assistance and has on a number of oc-
casions recommended approval of loans or programs as to which it had
previously recommended opposition, abstention or deferral.
Needless to say, for a variety of reasons, including the range of
human rights violations, no automatic formula can be applied to decide
how to vote on particular loans to particular countries, and inevitably
seeming inconsistencies will appear. But the Group has learned that the
diversity of cultures, the different stages of economic and political ma-
turity, and the range of fundamental U.S. interests make it essential to
treat each country on the merits of its own situation and not to attempt
to pursue our human rights objectives in precisely the same way as to
all countries. Within the limits of applicable law, we are primarily con-
cerned with taking steps that are most likely to promote human rights
in a particular situation. In short, tactics must differ from country to
country, but our goal—to enhance respect for human rights—remains
constant as to all countries.
The Group is continually examining its own procedures to deter-
mine how best to improve its operation and effectiveness. The Group is
conscious that in systematically bringing human rights considerations
to bear on the range of our foreign assistance decisions, it is performing
a new function. Inevitably, performance of this function has at times
been controversial, as the various participants grow accustomed to the
new situation. Nevertheless, we believe it is an important function that
must be performed if we are to comply effectively with statutory com-
mands and to be true to our human rights commitments.
With respect to possible improvements in the process, the Treas-
ury Department believes it would be useful to attempt to develop com-
prehensive human rights strategy papers for some of the major human
rights problem countries. In Treasury’s view, such papers could ana-
lyze three key issues: our specific human rights objectives in such coun-
