3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 391 figures. The Soviet Union proposed that military budgets be reduced in terms of specific figures. These would not necessarily have to be identical, but obviously should be of the same order of magnitude. The Secretary would understand, of course, that it would be ridiculous for one nation to reduce its military budget by one billion dollars, while another reduced it by one million dollars. The present proposal completely eliminated the question of differences in the structure of armed forces. He would ask the Secretary to look into the new proposal in detail. (The Secretary said he would look into it.) Gromyko continued, saying that if one listened to the statements on the Western side, one heard that military budgets had not been increased at all. In actual fact they had increased by leaps and bounds to their present astronomical proportions. The Secretary pointed out that they had not increased in real terms. He was speaking of the U.S. military budget not in terms of dollars, but, in view of inflation, of arms expenditures in real terms. Gromyko remarked that next the Secretary would blame the Soviet Union for not having an inflation. He was sure that Western military budgets had increased in real terms as well. Now Gromyko wanted to turn to the fourth item the Secretary had mentioned African affairs. Here he had to point out that the actual situation had been grossly distorted. If he were to take a cue from the statements of some of the responsible officials in the United States who sometimes made statements bordering on insults aimed at representatives of foreign powers, he would not use the word “distortion,” but something much stronger. Incidentally, he would note that officials inclined to be insulting toward representatives of foreign states should really be sent back to school to be taught what was proper in normal human behavior, particularly behavior toward representatives of foreign states. What we were witnessing here was a gross distortion of the facts. He could not believe that the United States with its broad intelligence gathering facilities was not aware of the fact that the Soviet Union had absolutely nothing to do with the situation in Rhodesia or Namibia or Zaire. As for Ethiopia, when Somalia had attacked that country, the Soviet Union had come to the assistance of a victim of aggression at the request of that country by supplying arms and a certain number of experts as instructors in the use of such arms. At that time the Soviet Union had felt that it would have been good if the United States had supplied Ethiopia with similar assistance. The myth about a Soviet commander in Ethiopia was pure invention. It had been surreptitiously fed to the President and to the Secretary. The Soviet leadership had been dismayed by all these accusations and myths. After all, they were not only realists, but also Marxists, and as such they wanted to get to the bottom of things and find the reasons underlying these accusa-
