LXXX Summaries of Compilations Paraguay U.S. Relations With Paraguay Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text During the final years of the Eisenhower administration, U.S. relations with Paraguay experienced no extraordinary departures from normal; indeed, the issues discussed and the policies pursued reflected the same concerns as in the preceding and succeeding periods. At the outset, Ambassador Walter C. Ploeser set the tone in a letter to Assistant Secretary of State Roy Rubottom. The primary concern of the United States was to avoid the possibility of any disorderly change in the Paraguayan Government, change which might open the door to Communist infiltration of the government. (PA–1) President Stroessner, who had seized power in a coup in 1954, would have to employ all of the political sagacity and astuteness at his command to defeat the threat of unrest stemming from Communist provocations. Ploeser was quick to point to Stroessner’s constant support for the United States in the world arena, even at the risk of alienating his own neighbors, yet the Ambassador and his colleagues were skeptical of the President’s assurances that he was leading the country in the direction of gradual democratization. Ploeser urged impetus for economic projects that would aid Paraguay, chiefly by improving the infrastructure of the country. He also asserted the constant and continuing theme of the United States in dealing with Stroessner that the U.S. goal was to ensure the stability of Paraguay by supporting the country and its people, but not necessarily the Stroessner government. Support for democracy in Paraguay did not mean showing favors to the current regime there. (PA–3) In September 1958, Paraguay attempted to exert a little leverage to gain U.S. attention when it registered complaints about U.S. aid to Bolivia at a time when that country was expressing interest in recognition of the Soviet Union. (PA–5, 6) Foreign Minister Raul Sapena Pastor said that lack of U.S. economic assistance might force Paraguay to turn to Soviet bloc countries and commented on the seeming incongruity of aid to Bolivia rather than to Paraguay, even though the latter had no dealings with any Communist states. The Department of State’s response was to put forcefully to Paraguayan officials the position that efforts to play East vs. West were inappropriate. On September 25, 1958, Sapena met with Rubottom in Washington. (PA–7) The atmosphere was cordial. The Foreign Minister stressed Bolivia’s support for the United States especially in terms of air bases should the United States desire that. Rubottom emphasized the need
