946 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX is the food of the people. If Egypt could buy it elsewhere it would do so, but it can’t. On maize, he asks for 100,000 tons more; 20,000 tons more of edible oils; frozen chickens, 5,000 tons more; and animal fats, 40,000 tons more. They have asked for rice since their population is increasing, and they must send some to Sudan, which is in a crisis. He had a message from Numeiry’s aides asking for wheat and sugar; Egypt has to send it from time to time when it is needed. So, he is asking for 60,000 tons of rice. Also about 250,000 tons of iron. If it were a gift—as with the Japanese—this would be even better! These are nearly the whole requirements, and are very vital for the Egyptian people. He has talked with Vance and Strauss and Brzezinski. He told Vance that he would not leave here without a solution! Where can they buy it? So he insisted! (Note: all this with humor.) President Sadat two days ago had told him to tell of the urgency of increases, that they have no money to buy these commodities elsewhere. The President asked what the level of wheat shipments to Egypt had been over the past five years. Secretary Vance said that Egypt is getting about one-third of the world-wide total. It is very large. Shipments to other countries are in dollars; Egypt gets its in terms of quantity. Therefore Egypt gains the benefit that it does not have to worry about fluctuating prices. The President asked how much was shipped three–four years ago. Ambassador Ghorbal said it was one million tons. Last year it was 1.5 million. Now they badly need to have 2 million tons. Vice President Mubarak said that this was the point: Egypt has a difficult situation on wheat. It has no relations with the Arabs; if it did, then it could buy elsewhere. But it can’t find it. The President asked whether other Egyptian aid programs could be reduced to provide more here. What about their CIP program? Secretary Vance said that he would take a look at it, but there are difficulties there. Therefore we hadn’t gone forward. Vice President Mubarak said that he had talked with Khalil: this is difficult. Egypt needs all the items, and their sources are limited. This is a problem for this year. The President said that he understood. The total is difficult, with the budget, the Congress, and our other aid programs. Vice President Mubarak said that they can’t find the money anywhere. The President said that he understood. Vice President Mubarak said he would stay until he gets it! Ambassador Strauss said that if his wife stays, as well, that is ok.
