480
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
sweeping changes in trade, aid, and investment policy, was brought be-
fore the sixth special session of the United Nations in 1974.3 The United
States found itself virtually isolated as European countries expressed at
least rhetorical sympathy for the thrust of this new order. That session
brought home starkly to American policymakers for the first time the
potential impact of these demands on our political as well as our eco-
nomic relations with the developing world.
The next 2 years, then, saw the beginning of a fundamental reas-
sessment of how the have and have-not nations would relate to each
other. At the seventh special session, in September of 1975, with the
memory of the fruitless confrontations the previous year still fresh in
their minds, both sides began to rethink their respective positions and
to search for areas of constructive dialogue and possible cooperation.4
One of the results was the formation, in December of that year, of
the Conference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC) with
8 members from the developed world and 19 from the developing
world.5 While CIEC did not, over the some 18 months of its existence,
succeed in finding accommodation between all of the issues where the
North and South differ, it did contribute measurably to the ongoing di-
alogue and resulted in concrete progress on some issues such as food
and agriculture and technical assistance. And while CIEC did narrow
some gaps between the North and the South, many of the developing
countries were unhappy with their exclusion from the limited member-
ship of the CIEC.
As a result, CIEC was succeeded by the Committee of the Whole
which includes all member states of the United Nations. This is now an
important forum for discussion of economic matters relating to the
North-South dialogue. The developing countries would like to give it a
decisionmaking role. We continue to believe decisions on major eco-
nomic issues should be made by existing organizations having respon-
sibilities in the specific functional areas, for example, the GATT [Gen-
eral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade] for trade, the IMF [International
Monetary Fund] for monetary affairs.
There were other elements to the dialogue. The year 1976 saw the
Nairobi meeting of the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development,
known as UNCTAD 4.6 While providing its share of confrontation, this
3 The Sixth Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly met in New
York, April 9–May 2, 1974. For additional information, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976,
vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy, 1973–1976, Document 257.
4 See footnote 11, Document 62.
5 The Conference on International Economic Cooperation met in Paris December
16–19, 1975. For Scowcroft’s report to Ford on the conference, see Foreign Relations,
1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy, 1973–1976, Document 300.
6 See footnote 7, Document 47.
