280 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Accords, but he is under a bit of a cloud because of his long association with Dobrynin, Gromyko and Kornienko. — The attempt to work out a separate agreement on telemetry encryption last fall was “sabotaged” by Karpov in a cable to Dubinin, who did not understand the issue. I conclude from this that there is still interest in Moscow in a separate agreement on telemetry encryption. Burt 37. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, July 15, 1989, 1127Z 6211. Subject: START Mid-Round Guidance 1. Secret—Entire Text. 2. To date round XI has proven to be a useful reengagement/reconnaissance exercise. My meetings with my Soviet counterpart have generated proposals from them on the ALCM counting rule, SSI unique identifiers and continuous monitoring/PPM. The Soviets have also elaborated on their road mobile and rail mobile verification positions and on heavy bomber inspections. I have presented the President’s verification/stability initiative and we are in the process of executing our guidance in the five working groups related to the treaty text and protocols. The Soviet approach has been constructive. They seem eager to resolve issues and remove brackets. 3. I believe that much more could be accomplished in the remainder of this round if additional guidance could be provided in a variety of issue areas. More detailed guidance requests will follow, but I would like to draw your attention in a general way to opportunities the U.S. delegation has identified. Joint Draft Treaty Text 4. U.S. positions in the treaty text are in relatively good shape with the exception of NDMs, PPM and suspect site inspection, all of which are already in Washington’s field of view. RV counting for future types of missiles, and our position on downloading, remains a 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D890609–0160. Secret; Immediate; Exdis.
