898 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI If the single-­warhead mobile small ICBM and any silo-­based variant becomes accountable under START, the final assembly facility will be subject to PPCM. Until then, the US would be prepared to continue the current PPCM site at Magna. — I strongly urge you to accept this compromise proposal for verifying production of ICBMs subject to NDM limits. I will be prepared to discuss it further when we meet in Moscow.3 We must resolve this issue soon if we are to meet the goal of our presidents of completing START this year. Sincerely, James A. Baker, III Eagleburger 3 In telegram SECTO 24037, November 9, the Secretary’s Delegation in the Soviet Union transmitted Baker’s November 8 memorandum to Bush on discussions with Shevardnadze and Gorbachev about the ongoing crisis in the Persian Gulf and the status of Soviet political and economic reforms, which concluded: “On START, we closed out the non-­circumvention issue, and may, with some effort, be able to resolve the remaining issues in our next ministerial. That would put us on track for a January summit. (Gorbachev is eager to nail down the summit date, but joked that a mid-January summit might be especially interesting given what we might be doing in the Gulf at that time.)” (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, N900008–0257) 167. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, December 4, 1990, 1723Z 13125. Subject: Official–Informal 1. Dave, the following is a two-­on-­two report from November 20 submitted for your clearance. 2. Begin summary. Amb Kuznetsov complained there had been no forward movement to implement the sides’ summit instructions. To achieve movement the Soviet side had taken a number of steps. It had proposed a common understanding on permitted and prohibited ABM activities, but the U.S. side refused to discuss the issue. It had offered a free-­standing Predictability Measures (PM) agreement, and moved toward the U.S. position by accepting voluntary laboratory visits and 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D901136–0254. Secret; Immediate; Stadis.
