financial, commercial and industrial activities, and which are usually of
mutual benefit to Australia and the United States.
It may be pointed out that American citizens are free to enter Australia, and
to establish business offices in any part of the Commonwealth. There are no
restrictions, and, consequently, full advantage is taken of this opportunity to
engage in the ever-increasing trade as between the United States and
Australia. One of the many instances which might be cited for the purpose
of emphasizing this feature, is the trade in automobiles and motor trucks.
Australia today imports more American-made automobiles than any other
country in the world, and in this activity alone there are a great many
Americans who are engaged in American offices established in Australia.
On the other hand, if an Australian business house desires to extend its
operations to the United States, a representative of the firm must enter this
country either under (a) the Australian quota, or (d) as a temporary visitor.
The annual quota for Australia is so limited that the opportunity to enter
through that channel (a) is denied to many Australian business men. whilst
the regulation which classes them as visitors (d) leaves no freedom to
establish and maintain proper business offices with continuity of operations
by those who are best qualified with a knowledge of the business.
It is desired to urge that consideration be given to the wish of the
Government of the Commonwealth of Australia that the concessions
granted to business men of the United Kingdom, who establish offices in
the United States, be extended in like manner to citizens of Australia.
The privilege enjoyed by British citizens was made possible under the
Treaty between the United States of America and Great Britain, proclaimed
on December 22nd, 1815.1 That Treaty was designed to regulate commerce
and navigation between the respective countries, and to ensure full liberty
on both sides in connection with the commerce of the two countries. Its
purport is that the merchants and traders of Great Britain and the United
States shall enjoy the most complete protection and security for their
commerce in such a manner as to render the same reciprocal, beneficial and
satisfactory. The Treaty definitely limits its operation to “all the Territories
of His Britannic Majesty in Europe.” The words “in Europe” isolate
Australia, a country virtually unknown (at least in a trading sense) in 1815,
