893.74/502 [Document 733] The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State MEMORANDUM In February and March 1918, the Mitsui Bussan Kaisha Ltd. entered into contracts with the Chinese Ministry of the Navy for the establishment of a high power wireless station in China and these contracts were duly approved and accepted by the Chinese Government. Subsequently, in January and September, 1921, the Federal Telegraph Company signed with the Chinese Ministry of Communications contracts of a similar nature conflicting in many ways with China’s prior commitments to the Mitsui Company.99 The anomalous situation thus created gave rise to protracted discussions between the Governments of Japan and of the United States, without, however, any appreciable result. Attempts were made at the Washington Conference to find a more comprehensive plan of settlement, with the participation of other Powers interested in China. Once more these efforts proved unavailing. 2. The points at issue between Japan and the United States on the subject may be summarized as follows: (a) In the judgment of the Japanese Government, the exclusive right granted in 1918 to the Mitsui Company by the Chinese Ministry of the Navy respecting external wireless communications of China cannot be abridged or revoked by any arrangement which the Chinese Ministry of Communications may have made subsequently with the Federal Telegraph Company. On the other hand, it is contended by the American Government that the Mitsui’s monopoly is inconsistent with the treaty provisions between the United States and China respecting the principle of equal opportunity, and that the conventional obligations of China preclude her from creating such a monopoly in favour of any foreign nationals. Without entering into a detailed examination of the treaty provisions in question, it will be conceded that international precedents are not wanting in support of an exclusive right of the nature now under review, which, in the conduct of certain undertakings, and more particularly in the case of radio enterprise, is necessary to ensure, for a definite period of time, a reasonable profit on the investment. The contract of September 1921 of the Federal Telegraph Company seems to afford in itself an example of such right, since under Article 14 of that contract the Company is to be exclusively authorized to handle radio communications between the United States and China during twenty years.
