1979 595 new generation, that sees little to choose between democratic and dictatorial values, we may be able to avoid a military-­political crisis that would require a return to a defense share of GNP corresponding to that of the 1950’s and 1960’s (or even the early 1940’s). It is less likely that we will be able to hold to the present share. I will present a more detailed analysis of some of these issues in the forthcoming PRC meeting on Defense Consolidated Guidance. 4. (S) In the past two years, the Soviets have continued to stress technology to improve significantly their military capabilities. Military R&D in the Soviet Union is of high priority; the current level of effort as measured in dollars approaches twice that of the US. They are moving forward with an intensive and comprehensive program of development—­and deployment—­of systems: strategic and tactical; ground, air and naval; nuclear and non-­nuclear weapons. We are just now seeing the results of this emphasis in systems being deployed or in advanced testing: a. Their new ICBM guidance systems (SS–18 and SS–19) will have approximately the accuracy of Minuteman III. b. Their new SLBM (SS–N–18) has a MIRV system (7 RVs) comparable to TRIDENT I. c. Their new fighter aircraft are being tested with a look-­down shoot-­down radar/missile system capable of engaging four low-­ altitude aircraft simultaneously, similar to the AMRAAM system under development by the US. All of these are areas where we have enjoyed in the past a significant military advantage because of our substantial technological lead. (S) Additionally the Soviets are pushing very hard on military technology not yet ready for systems applications. Perhaps the most dramatic example of this is their high energy laser program, where their R&D effort is equivalent to about $1 billion a year, compared to about $200 million a year in the US (and that is our largest single technology program). They appear to be moving to prototype weapons, whereas we are still in the exploratory development phase. (S) As a result of this emphasis on military R&D, the Soviets are closing the quality gap in military systems. The momentum established poses a real problem for the future military balance—­affecting the strategic balance in the early 80’s and the tactical balance in the late 80’s. In addition, there will be an increasing risk during the 80’s of a real technological surprise—­a Sputnik-­like event in the military field leading to both substantive military and perceptual political problems. (S) On the other hand, the Soviet military R&D program is inefficient. There is unnecessary duplication (e.g., 4–5 parallel new ICBM programs). There appears to be no good way of stopping programs—­ even low payoff programs such as air defense—­once started in earnest.
