which they exercise their functions. All consular officers and employees,
nationals of the State appointing them, shall be exempt from the payment of
taxes on the salary, fees or wages received by them in compensation for
their consular services.
Lands and buildings situated in the territories of either High Contracting
Party, of which the other High Contracting Party is the legal or equitable
owner and which are used exclusively for diplomatic or consular purposes
by that owner, shall be exempt from taxation of every kind, National, State,
Provincial and Municipal, other than assessments levied for services or
local public improvements by which the premises are benefited.
ARTICLE XVI. Consular officers may place over the outer door of their
respective offices the arms of their State with an appropriate inscription
designating the official office. Such officers may also hoist the flag of their
country on their offices including those situated in the capitals of the two
countries. They may likewise hoist such flag over any boat or vessel
employed in the exercise of the consular function.
The consular offices and archives shall at all times be inviolable. They shall
under no circumstances be subject to invasion by any authorities of any
character within the country where such offices are located. Nor shall the
authorities under any pretext make any examination or seizure of papers or
other property deposited within a consular office. Consular offices shall not
be used as places of asylum. No consular officer shall be required to
produce official archives in court or testify as to their contents.
Upon the death, incapacity, or absence of a consular officer having no
subordinate consular officer at his post, secretaries or chancellors, whose
official character may have previously been made known to the government
of the State where the consular function was exercised, may temporarily
exercise the consular function of the deceased or incapacitated or absent
consular officer; and while so acting shall enjoy all the rights, prerogatives
and immunities granted to the incumbent.
ARTICLE XVII. Consular officers, nationals of the State by which they are
appointed, may, within their respective consular districts, address the
authorities, National, State, Provincial or Municipal, for the purpose of
