3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
792
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ask himself whether we had concluded that we saw no future between
us for a very long time indeed. That seemed to be the case. Only the
skeleton of the structure of our relationship exists. He wondered where
we would be two years hence and whether we would even have
reached the level of 1979. He bemoaned the fact that it was so easy to
destroy and so difficult and so slow to build. At the moment he saw us
going downhill.
The Secretary said he shared Dobrynin’s worries and that is why
he raised these questions and discussed what we could do in the future.
In summing up the conversation, he would review the situation with
the President. He hoped that Dobrynin would do the same in Moscow.
He thought there should be a meeting with Gromyko within the next
six weeks or so and he looked forward to discussing this with Dobrynin
when he returned. He asked Dobrynin to convey his regards to Gro-
myko and respects to Brezhnev and Dobrynin asked the Secretary to
convey his respects to the President.
273.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 17, 1980
SUBJECT
Dissidence in Eastern Europe and the USSR—Are We Doing Enough? (U)
Dissidence in this paper is used to mean not simply actions by re-
gime critics who achieve prominence, but the entire range of activity,
some obvious, some extremely unobtrusive, which generates pressures
for freedom of thought and expression, human rights and the advan-
tages of a pluralistic society. (U)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 56, Chron: 4/15–18/80. Secret. Copies were sent to Griffith (presum-
ably, William E.), Brement, and Stephen Larrabee. Brzezinski wrote in the upper
right-hand corner, “Good memo. Consult with MB/LB on possible implementation.
What steps? What means? ZB.” MB/LB presumably refers to Marshall Brement and Lin-
coln Bloomfield, both members of the NSC staff. Two papers, “The U.S. and Dissidence in
Eastern Europe,” and “U.S. Government Initiatives on behalf of Human Rights in the
U.S.S.R.,” are attached but not printed.
