422  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
change some time might ensue—­possibly into the next year—­before 
the Internal Revenue Service would reach a decision as to what the 
new allocation of profits would be, since it would call upon United 
Fruit Company to present figures justifying the change in favor of the 
banana-­producing countries. Mr. Lindsay opined that the financial 
statements thus far made by United Fruit were slightly evasive as they 
did not reflect in their entirety profits from sales of fruit in countries 
other than the United States. Internal Revenue would need this addi-
tional information before reaching a decision on the new allocation of 
profits.
Mr. Rubottom inquired whether, in view of the fact that a delay 
might occur in determining the new allocations, the application of 
benefits would be made retroactive to January 1, 1958, and Mr. Smith 
responded that he could not answer the question at this time. He said 
that he and his associates would consult in the Department of the 
Treasury and inform Mr. Rubottom of a decision on this point.
Mr. Smith added that it would be impossible to predict at this 
time what the new allocation would be, since it would depend on the 
presentation made by United Fruit. He said it might be 60–40 or even 
80–20, but emphasized that no guess should be hazarded at this time. It 
was pointed out that United Fruit would present a strong case favoring 
the banana-­producing countries since the difference between the 50–50 
formula and any new one would result in a saving to the Company 
in payment of United States income taxes; any difference in allocation 
favorable to Costa Rica would be taxable at the 38 per cent rate levied 
under the Western Hemisphere Trading Corporation set-­up instead of 
the 52 per cent assessed on United States profits. He said he was not 
happy with this situation but it had to be faced. He said Treasury also 
was disturbed that the Dominican Republic would benefit by the new 
allocation, in view of the fact that United Fruit operates in that country.
(United Fruit, in its request to Treasury for a more favorable allo-
cation of profits to Costa Rica, has pointed out that Treasury should be 
prepared to extend the benefits to other countries in which United Fruit 
has operations similar to those in Costa Rica.)
Mr. Rubottom said that public announcement of the Treasury 
decision should be made as soon as possible, realizing, of course, that 
there would be a delay in arriving at the new allocation formula. After 
a discussion it was decided that President Echandi and the United Fruit 
Company would not be informed of Treasury’s decision until the pub-
lishing of the amended regulations. Mr. Smith said Treasury would 
inform the Department if the benefits would be retroactive to January 1, 
1958, and if this was permissible, President Echandi and the company 
could also be informed, upon publication of the amended regulations, 
of this fact.
