1978 475 recovery, for the surviving skilled labor force will be an important element in achieving recovery. [13 lines not declassified] Under present plans the attack on political leadership would involve substantial collateral damage to the general population assuming that the population is unsheltered and unevacuated. [1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified] The U.S. targets the Soviet nuclear threat to achieve two objectives: the first is limiting damage both to the U.S. and our allies; the second is to prevent the emergence of a post-­war nuclear balance that would facilitate coercion by the Soviet Union. It also is apparent that the criterion for destruction of Soviet nuclear capabilities, i.e., “to the extent practicable with available allocated nuclear forces” is extremely general—­hardly a precise guideline for target planners. Moreover, there are substantial uncertainties associated with this objective (as with others). [5 lines not declassified] One fact is clear, however. The proliferation and hardening of Soviet missile systems have substantially eroded our counterforce capabilities over the past decade. We have found no plausible changes to targeting policy or force structure in the course of this study that give any promise of restoring the relative capabilities we enjoyed in the early 1960’s. This does not mean, of course, that we can or should do nothing to improve the present or prospective balance. Cruise missiles will put Soviet land based missile systems and other hard targets at risk again, but this will not give us a prompt capability; MX and TRIDENT II will, however. With respect to the damage limiting objective, today there are two distinct views as indeed there have been for some time. One view holds that since we cannot expect to limit to low levels the damage resulting from a large scale nuclear attack, that it is no longer a meaningful objective and should be abandoned or at least given a low priority in employment policy. A central concern is that continuance of damage limiting as a major objective of U.S. policy could lead to increased arms competition without any resulting improvements in U.S. security and could divert forces from more promising objectives. The opposing view is that we must continue to do the best that we can to protect the U.S. from the consequences of a nuclear war if deterrence fails. Given the uncertainties of nuclear war, and the wide range of possible scenarios, there might well be situations where the capability to reduce damage by perhaps tens of millions of American lives would be far from futile. This view also stresses the potential effects on deterrence and crisis management in situations short of nuclear war if U.S. society were to become far more vulnerable than the Soviet Union.
