936  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
the document until March 27, 1951 when he was searched . . .” and at the 
bottom of the section it states his expulsion from China began March 25, 
1951. On page 12 under Ford, it seems to me that the logical place for 
the last sentence is up above following the detailing of his torture. On 
page 14 under Giffin, the first sentence is a masterpiece of confused 
writing. As a detail, it also seems to me that where American-­sounding 
names of non-­Americans are mentioned, their nationality should be 
specified. Otherwise, the question immediately arises as to why their 
accounts are not included in this compilation. On page 17 under Greene, 
the statement is made, not even in quotes, “his judge decided that since 
he was only a small cog in the American spy wheel  .  .  .”. Standing 
the way it does this can certainly be easily distorted and twisted into 
an admission by us that he was a “cog in the American spy wheel”. On 
page 20 under Kanady, a sentence reads, “after four and a half years 
of imprisonment he was deported from China in a state of shocking 
physical and mental damage”. This is just poor writing. On page 39 
under Rigney, it seems to me that a sentence such as “any visible mani­
festations of religious devotion were promptly suppressed by cellmates 
with whom he was undergoing ‘re-­education’”, is entirely lacking in 
“punch”. I do not know what the actual facts were but a straightfor­
ward statement such as “when he kneeled to pray he was cuffed and 
spat on by his cellmates”, would be much more effective. It seems to 
me the next following sentence would be much clearer simply stated 
as “although his treatment subsequently improved, at the time of his 
release he still weighted only 100 pounds, compared with 180 pounds 
at the time he entered prison”. Also, it seems to me to be much more 
effective to relate the nine times he “confessed” directly to the account 
of the torture he  underwent. For example, to say that “during one 
period of interrogation he was denied sleep for 11 successive days and 
nights” is not very effective stated in that way and standing by itself. It 
would be much more effective to say that he was interrogated without 
any respite for 11 days and nights and that each time he collapsed from 
fatigue he was beaten into wakefulness until, utterly physically and 
mentally broken, he signed a “confession”. It also seems to me absurd 
to end the Rigney story with the statement that he became a “model 
worker in the production of match boxes”. The whole account, as many 
of the other accounts, shifts back and forth between chronological and 
subject approach in a very confusing manner. Certainly in reading it 
one is not left with any clear picture of exactly what happened and, as 
told, the story simply does not have the impact the facts justify. I feel 
that this is a common fault of most of the accounts.
I have viewed this from the standpoint of our foreign audiences 
in particular who are the ones that need convincing. I feel that for this 
purpose the stories can be told much more effectively than they have 
been. It seems to me that by far the most effective telling would be
