September 18–December 16, 1978 383 the Arab-Israeli controversy can be settled, then our government will have more freedom and more flexibility to counter any threat by the Soviet Union in this area.” With tongue in cheek, Fahd brought up another topic which further illustrated his untiring efforts in the right direction, this time in Lebanon. “We’ve been bending every effort,” he said, “to keep the lid down in Lebanon. We’ve talked to all the leaders: Phalengists, Chamounists, Muslims, Palestinians, Syrians, everybody! President Numeiri of the Sudan wanted to withdraw his forces from the Arab Deterrent Forces in Lebanon. When I heard this, I immediately ordered that 2–3 Saudi battalions be made ready to go to Lebanon to replace the Sudanese. At the same time I sent Abd al-Aziz Thunayyan (Deputy Foreign Minister) to Khartoum to convince Numeiri to keep his forces in Lebanon. The Sudanese President agreed. Now, when the Saudi forces replaced the Syrians in certain areas of Beirut they were received with flowers. This is our way of doing things,” asserted Fahd. “We decide where we want to go and we go toward the goal, whenever possible without fanfare, or rough stuff with anyone unless absolutely inescapable,” he concluded. I next told Fahd that I was sure that the President would like to know what his thoughts were about accepting the invitation to visit the U.S. which had been extended at the time of Secretary Vance’s visit.12 I added that in view of our conversation this evening it would probably be even more important for him and the President to meet as soon as possible. Fahd replied that he would like to come to the U.S. as soon as possible after the King’s return to Saudi Arabia. He said in view of all of the international developments, he thought it essential for him and the President to meet periodically.13 He then mentioned that he would like to suggest that the King not be burdened with any substantive discussions during the luncheon on Friday. I assured him that it was to be a social occasion and that we would not impose on His Majesty to discuss any subject which might cause a strain on his physical condition, and that I know the President would be especially sensitive and solicitous in this regard.14 Fahd replied that he was sure that such subjects as our “special relationship” and the merits of hunting with falcons vs. quail shooting as 12 Vance was in Saudi Arabia September 21–24, to review the Camp David Accords with King Khalid and Crown Prince Fahd. See Document 65. 13 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this paragraph, Carter wrote “good.” 14 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right-hand margin adjacent to this and the next paragraph.
