1977  209
nuclear “crisis management” as it relates to the WHEP and the National 
Command Authority.
3. The steps taken to implement these goals.
The WHEP. An extensive review memorandum for the WHEP was 
developed in February, and after some fumbling between the NSC and 
the Military Office, an ad hoc group, including representatives from the 
NSC staff, the Military Office, WHCA, the FPA, and the NMCC, was 
formed. It met about once a month through mid-­summer to review the 
remedial steps taken by its members. This phase ended when Hugh 
Carter held a meeting with the President to brief him on the progress 
and to ask his guidance on unresolved issues such as the location of 
NEACP and the arrangement between him and the Vice President 
for emergency evacuation. On July 9, an “OPAL III with destination 
NEACP” was executed in 19 minutes, evidence that the system had 
indeed been put in reasonably good order.
Procedures and Doctrine. On March 31, you sent a memorandum to 
the Secretary of Defense asking him and the JCS4 to explain our nuclear 
war procedures and doctrine, including LNOs. The response on June 
3, was set aside pending the outcome of PRM 10, and the follow-­on 
response by Harold Brown arrived on August 19,5 after it was clear that 
PRM 10 produced no definitive basis for a change.
The Defense memorandum of August 19 spelled out the recent his-
tory of our doctrinal development and procedures. It elaborated the 
concept of “escalation control”—­in the event of the failure of “deter-
rence,” and stated the rationale for “Limited Nuclear Options.” Your 
covering memorandum to the President6 pointed out some doubts 
about the feasibility of “escalation control,” especially in view of our 
command, control, and communications vulnerabilities. Nonetheless, 
the Defense memorandum provided a concise history of our efforts 1) 
to define “deterrence” in operational terms for targeting guidance, and 
2) our concept of how we might respond if deterrence were to fail. If the 
President absorbed Harold Brown’s essay, he has a fairly clear idea of 
where we are in our doctrine, its ambiguities and its adequacies.
The impact of your memorandum of March 31 did not end with 
the August 19 response. Several other things also occurred:
—The JCS began a thorough review of LNOs/RNOs to prepare a 
Presidential briefing and to determine where they were going with the 
LNO concept in general. Although Harold Brown offered this briefing 
4 See Document 10.
5 See Tab A, Document 36.
6 See Document 36.
