March–August 1953 557 long as situation re oil remains unchanged obtain support US public opinion for substantial economic aid to Iran. Re question B, we might say in case Shah should desire US assistance in arranging for some friendly country invite him for visit, US Government willing do what it can although it not (repeat not) convinced it in interests Iran for Shah leave country in present circumstances. Re question C, US Government of opinion any attempt effect change in head of state or form Iranian Government might produce situation instability dangerous to Iranian independence. 11. Leave to discretion Department extent to which this conversation should be brought to attention UK. Henderson 201. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, May 5, 1953, 2 p.m. 4324. 1. Key members Embassy staff in agreement with me Amini Acting Minister Court has not (repeat not) as yet proved trustworthiness to extent warranting our giving him specific reply question A [less than 1 line not declassified] (Embassy telegram 4311, May 4).2 Amini member influential family Kajar blood and not (repeat not) likely sincerely support present Shah whose father ousted Kajars. Family considered ambitious and opportunistic prepared form temporary alliances to its advantage. Its friendship with equally opportunistic Qashqai Khans and MFA Fatemi strengthens our doubt regarding its motivations. 2. Various unconfirmed rumors afloat regarding present objectives this family. One is it hopes brigadier brother Minister Court now chief gendarme´rie will be made chief staff and be in position with alliance Qashqais and other prominent political and military figures effect coup which would eliminate both Shah and Mosadeq and make brigadier dictator. Another rumor is that Minister Court working with Mosadeq get Shah out of country and in absence make Prince Abdor Reza suc- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/5–553. Top Secret; NIACT; Security Information. Received at 8 a.m. Printed from a sanitized version; the original was not found. 2 Document 200.
