364 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Beyond the specific and quantifiable, however, there is a perhaps greater danger that we will come to be seen as the self-appointed guardian of the world’s morals, having shifted from an anti- Communist crusade to one equally sanctimonious. If our human rights policy should come to be seen as designed to further some definition of US geopolitical interests, it would not only damage our ability to press the human rights cause, but also make us suspect on other issues. This could be especially damaging to North-South relations. The same human rights policy which many in the third world admire in principle could, as it works out in practice, make us seem insensitive to LDC economic development needs as perceived by the LDCs themselves. So far, the human rights policy has gone far to reverse situations where cooperation with us was based more on need than respect. A perception of moral arrogance and/or hypocrisy in our human rights advocacy could shift the balance once again. IV. Are We Being Consistent? No. And we should not try to be completely so. There are times when security considerations, or broader political factors, lead us to be “softer” on some countries’ human rights performance than others. Moreover, it often is a close call just what action is most likely to produce improvement in a human rights situation. We sometimes, for instance, approve a loan in recognition of a positive trend—even though the overall situation in the country remains as bad or worse than that in countries whose loans we oppose. One of the most difficult questions in the human rights business is what actions on our part are most likely to encourage a government to believe that further progress is worthwhile, without leading it to think we believe its human rights problem is solved. This can only be done on a case-by-case basis, and some of our decisions will turn out to have been wrong. That said, we do have potentially serious problems at least with the appearance, and perhaps with the reality, of inconsistency: Bilateral vs. IFI Loans We often continue bilateral aid programs to countries whose IFI loans we oppose. We understand that bilateral programs, which we control, are designed to serve basic human needs. But it can look to others as though we are only posturing when our votes will not make a decisive difference, but avoiding action which actually would deny a human rights violator any money. Economic vs. Military Assistance We have been far more rigorous in applying human rights criteria to economic assistance, which is designed to help poor people, than military assistance or sales, which are perceived by some as helping
