Peru 1095 When Mr. Rubottom asked whether the Peruvian Government had already contracted for the cruiser, Ambassador Berckemeyer replied in the affirmative. Mr. Rubottom then asked whether there was any truth in rumors we had heard that Peru might acquire a second cruiser from the U.K. Admiral Llosa said that there appeared to be some substance to these rumors and that it was his understanding that if the U.K. were to offer a second cruiser on the same conditions as the first, the Peruvian Navy would probably make an effort to obtain the second ship. He indicated that a specific vessel—not named—now in service under the British flag was involved. Ambassador Berckemeyer, however, said he wished to make it clear that he had received no official notification regarding the second cruiser.2 Mr. Rubottom told his callers that he could only say that the news of the cruiser purchase contract had been very badly received by himself and all his colleagues in the Department, including Secretary Herter and Assistant Secretary Mann. He was also sure that Undersecretary Dillon, presently away from the Department, would not be pleased by this development. Even taking into account all the arguments advanced by the Ambassador, it would be impossible for the Department to attempt to reconcile the cruiser purchase with the policy of austerity proclaimed by Prime Minister Beltrán. It was paradoxical that Mr. Beltrán, who was well-­known and well-­liked in the U.S., had often criticized our Government before U.S. audiences for giving military assistance to Latin America. Mr. Rubottom himself had debated this issue in public with Mr. Beltrán. Ambassador Berckemeyer said he agreed but pointed out that Sr. Beltrán was in a most difficult position. In any event, there was no escaping the fact that the obsolete vessels had to be replaced. When Mr. Rubottom asked whether we had been advised concerning just which ships would be replaced, Admiral Llosa said that this information had already been supplied to the Department. Admiral Llosa then went on to say that one important factor remained to be considered. This was that as a consequence of the lack of support for the Peruvian Navy by our own Navy and the Department of State, particularly in relation to the aid extended to the navies of neighboring countries, the naval equilibrium in the area had been upset. In fact, the situation was continually becoming worse due to the unequal treatment received by Peru. National pride, and the Navy’s pride, had been wounded by the favoritism shown to Chile, Ecuador and Colombia. Even the continental defense program was working
