634  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
weapon would not be subject to Treaty limits and thus should not be 
counted at all; he recalled that this had been the case in SALT II.
Distinguishing Features of Long-Range Nuclear and Non-Nuclear ALCMs
Peresypkin said Bartholomew and Akhromeyev had agreed that 
the distinguishing features of ALCMs should be only external, but reit-
erated the Soviet view that the distinguishing features should also be 
functionally related. He added, however, that he had some questions 
the sides needed to discuss.
After a lengthy exchange, both sides agreed that there was in fact a 
need to find a convincing method of distinguishing physically between 
nuclear and non-­nuclear ALCMs. Wheeler reviewed with Peresypkin the 
ALCM common elements, which included the sides’ agreement at the 
1988 Moscow Summit that for currently existing types whose nuclear 
and conventional variants could not be physically distinguished, all 
ALCMs of such types would be considered nuclear. Wheeler said that 
the sides had yet to agree on the appropriate kinds of physical distin-
guishing features, for instance length, width, placement of fins, or other 
aerodynamic details which were part of a system’s design.
U.S. Rationale
Wheeler presented the context in which the U.S. side had formu-
lated its positions on these issues, reinforcing the explanation with 
points made by General Powell to Marshal Akhromeyev earlier that 
week in a meeting at which Peresypkin had been present. He stressed 
the need to strike a balance between effective verification via monitor-
ing of treaty-­limited items and both sides’ interest in avoiding expo-
sure of design features not related to the need for treaty monitoring. 
He said the sides should seek to achieve a standard of verification that 
was reasonable, effective and adequate; “fool-­proof verification” was a 
loose phrase sometimes used in public, but a phrase which could lead 
to nothing but endless debates.
Wheeler said that after a long and hard look at the question of 
whether there were functionally-­related differences which would sat-
isfy verification concerns, the U.S. side had come to the conclusion 
that functionally-­related distinguishing features did not guarantee that 
a nuclear weapon could not be placed in the cavity of a cruise mis-
sile originally designed and used as a conventional cruise missile. 
(Peresypkin acknowledged that such technology could be created, but 
noted that this would be a treaty violation.) Wheeler explained that the 
logic behind the American approach was that since it was impossible to 
ensure that a system was incapable of being surreptitiously converted for 
nuclear use, it was necessary to design a regime whose purpose would 
be to provide assurance that no prohibited items were deployed. Such 
a regime would be based on such concepts as data exchange, initial
