716 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Baker: Would you explore the possibility of writing me a letter like the one I wrote you on Tacit Rainbow saying, for example, (1) that this would be dealt with in CFE, including that Backfires that have been assigned to naval operations; and (2) that you would not make it into an intercontinental bomber? Shevardnadze: We’ll try to formulate in a written form our attitude towards the Backfire taking into account your concerns. And I will send you an official formal letter. Baker: Okay. [Omitted here is a discussion of the CFE Treaty] Baker: The sooner we get CFE I over with, the sooner we’re going to be able to address that. Shevardnadze: I agree, there’s no difference here. We have an interest in getting this done soon. So let’s wrap up the agreement and we can then interact on the follow-­on talks that were done in Geneva. Baker: Well we can work on that document, that’s a different issue, but we can work on that document here. Shevardnadze: Yes, that’s true. But if we need to have intensified work on a follow-­on statement, maybe our experts can come and see yours in Washington. The original START agreement is one that is obviously close to conclusion. The main provision of the 50% reduction treaty is done, we have five days before the Summit and our experts might come with a draft on what we want to say about START as well. And that document could address itself to the main issues that have been resolved. Baker: Well, that’s not what we really had in mind, not what I had in mind. I think that once we start drafting some kind of text, we’re going to find that problems in the drafting will inevitably arise. I don’t rule out doing it, but I’m just saying we ought to consider that that could be difficult. For example, on ALCMs, we have a history of dealing with this issue and finding out that it is very difficult to resolve it in a treaty text. Shevardnadze: Yes, but we ought to at least be able to discuss the main elements without writing out every detail. Baker: If you want to say that the parties agree on a 50% reduction and how they’ve agreed to handle ALCMs and SLCMs, that’s okay. Shevardnadze: In that document? Why couldn’t we just set out everything that’s been agreed to? Baker: You mean record everything on which we agree? Shevardnadze: Yes. I don’t think there should be any difficulties there. A general outline of what we have been able to agree to is
