616
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
198.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to David
Martin of the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs1
Washington, February 29, 1980
My Meeting With The Secretary:
Ratification of the Human Rights Treaties
1. The Secretary said that Frank Church had not asked him to lay
off, but rather that he would move Genocide if we could tell him with
confidence that we had the ability to obtain unanimous consent of the
Senate.2
2. The reason for unanimous consent is his understanding and the
Secretary’s that, because of its placement on the calendar, it cannot be
moved before SALT without unanimous consent. The Secretary added
that eight or nine treaties had already been successfully moved. I don’t
know what the chances are, but it would seem to me that a couple of
possible objections would be inevitable. However, it is worth looking
into.
3. He had no objection to the preliminary steps, i.e., staff work.
4. He didn’t seem to have any objection to all of us going full speed
ahead on the lobbying campaign.
I think the thing to do is to just get going and start counting and
seeing if there is any possibility for unanimous consent, at the same
time pressing for the staff work to be completed and doing some good
lobbying.
David, please give Linc Bloomfield a call. Thanks.
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, Genocide—Action File. Limited Official
Use. Copies were sent to Bennet, Palmer, Salmon, Steven Cohen, Flood, and Roberta
Cohen. Martin sent Derian a memorandum, dated February 28, in preparation for her
meeting with Vance. (Ibid.)
2 There is no indication as to where or when Derian’s meeting with Vance took
place; no minutes were found. In the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s March 5 evening re-
port, Bloomfield noted: “At my suggestion, Patt Derian has talked with Vance re
Church’s problems. Turns out Frank Church told Cy he would be willing to move the
Genocide Convention if the Administration could tell him with confidence that 67 votes
were in hand. Cy has no objection to a lobbying campaign on the Convention. (67 votes is
no mean feat, but the Administration was able to come up with 60 votes last year when
Church made the same stipulation with regard to a cloture motion.)” (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File,
Box 37, Evening Reports: 1–3/80)
