844  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
SEACP
A recent Navy study concluded that it would be feasible to convert 
a POLARIS SSBN to perform most of the missions associated with a 
national-­level command post. However, the concept was judged to be 
deficient in the following areas:
—Safe and timely embarkation of the President (or successor) 
would present major problems. It would be extremely difficult to effect 
a timely rendezvous with a SEACP.
—The pre-­attack and early trans-­attack survival of a submarine 
command post is dependent upon its ability to remain undetected 
by the enemy. Its location would be compromised, and its probability 
of survival reduced, if it were to tie into tactical warning and attack 
assessment communications networks.
—It is doubtful that submarine communications technology 
would support the volume of communications traffic which would be 
associated with the President’s functions. Submarines are normally not 
required to effect a great deal of transmissions; their communications 
systems are focused on receiving.
—Dedicated submarine platforms are extremely costly.
It was apparent from the study that the SEACP is not a cost-­
effective platform for Presidential survival. However, submarines do 
offer potential for other key COG functions, such as  the reconstitution 
of C3I systems which are destroyed during the early stages of a nuclear 
conflict.
Surface Vessels
Navy, Coast Guard, and even merchant vessels can be configured 
to carry special communications and support packages for the Presi-
dent. Surface vessels offer advantages in mobility and flexibility. The 
proliferation of ships in different locations would enhance survival 
through dispersion. However, surface vessels have some significant 
shortcomings as well:
—Connectivity with surviving domestic telephone nets would 
be tenuous from the high seas. The volume of radio communications 
which would be necessary to support Presidential functions would 
provide an EM signature which could jeopardize the vessel.
—Dedicated and proliferated platforms would be costly. This was 
the experience with the NORTHAMPTON, a cruiser formerly dedi-
cated to the COG role.
—Surface vessels are vulnerable to submarine attack, especially if 
the ship has been identified prior to the conflict as a high-­value target. 
Under those circumstances, such a vessel would probably have a sub-
marine tail at all times.
