Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 409 Now I would like to make some remarks on the current talks. I understand that we do not want to discuss details at this meeting. But I want to make remarks on three items. I would like to continue discussion and have the military people do it. We must come to grips with problems and see them clearly. (S) First, we must better understand the relationship between the ABM and the START treaty—­taking into account the Shevardnadze proposals to Baker. (S) Second, we believe it is important to get a handle on heavy bombers and ALCMs. If the current U.S. proposal were adopted, the overall aggregate total would be not 6000 but over 8500. We are not seeking an advantage for ourselves—­the actual loads should be equalizing. (S) Third, SLCMs. I already talked about it. If I understand you correctly, it is to resolve the START issues by the time of the Summit by the end of 1990 and have a treaty signed. (S) Another important point too—Scowcroft and Akhromeyev have had some very useful talks. The U.S. and Soviet navies have nuclear weapons such as submarines and SLCMs and tactical nuclear weapons—­nuclear mines, etc. (S) Submarines are strategic weapons and are verifiable and will be in the structure of both arsenals. It is a part of the triad of forces. (S) But the rest—­tactical nuclear forces at sea—­should be eliminated. This was suggested in informal discussions. I hope neither Scowcroft nor Akhromeyev will be offended by my now putting this on the table more formally. (S) We would be ready to do away with all nuclear forces at sea—­that would be the easiest for verification. Well. (S) The problem is reducing not only weapons but people: First, our proposal that overall aggregates should be 1.3 million a reduction of 1 million men by each side. NATO has not agreed. I think that people will find the decision to reduce weapons and not people unacceptable. (S) Second, there is the issue of reducing the numbers of personnel deployed on foreign territory. We are proposing that the numbers of personnel be reduced to 300,000 men per alliance. This is like a proposal suggested first by the Soviet Union but your proposal does not deal with many foreign troops on the soil of the Western alliance (the UK, France, etc.) (S) Third, our proposal is for a ceiling of 4700 front-­line tactical aircraft. I also suggested that there should be a sub-­ceiling on defensive interceptor aircraft. (S) Nothing has been agreed and I want to request that the next Ministerial look at these concerns. (S)
