September 18–December 16, 1978 331 Other principal subjects discussed were (a) problem of ensuring establishment and maintenance of UN or other international force not under UN auspices, possibly including U.S. component among components from other friendly countries, and (b) those issues which are proving particularly difficult in the military talks (Israeli settlement near El- Arish and movement of Egyptian air defense missiles east of Canal). President said he would reflect on all these issues where differences exist and would convey to parties his views on what would constitute a fair way of resolving them with the hope that they would be receptive to his recommendations. 4. Following lunch at the President’s instructions our delegation went over the treaty with a view to preparing a fresh U.S. draft with our recommendation for compromise language on the disputed articles. I reviewed this with him at the end of the day and we now have an approved text5 which I will put forward to the parties tonight or tomorrow morning. 5. We did not deal with the preamble or annexes, the Egyptians have now presented to us and Israelis revised preamble language and proposed exchange of notes on “correlation.”6 We hope to move forward tomorrow with our recommendations on these two drafts as well as on Annex III (normalization and friendly relations), finally, President has asked us to convey to parties that we believe interim withdrawal line should be drawn closer to Al-Arish to include Israeli settlement on Israeli side of line, and that we could not support Egyptian SAM’s east of canal since this would be departure from Camp David understanding. 6. We have clearly reached our first difficult point with both sides digging in until the bidding can be reviewed at the highest levels at home. In these circumstances the President’s intervention today and the submission by us of new compromise proposals is timely. 7. In the military talks the Israeli and Egyptian cartographers encountered some differences in trying to plot on maps the limits-offorces lines agreed to yesterday by Magdoub and Tamir.7 The differences were minor and should have been easily resolved, but neither Magdoub and Tamir will now give any ground, nor are they willing to discuss anything else until they settle the issues at hand. This means that the military discussions have ground to a halt, too. 5 See Document 95. 6 The Egyptian delegation’s proposed drafts of the treaty preamble and a proposed exchange of notes on the framework agreement between the heads of the Egyptian and Israeli delegations, annotated with U.S.-suggested textual changes and dated October 19, are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 55, Middle East: Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel, 10/19–31/78. 7 No other record of this meeting has been found.
