1158 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI be the maximum number of long-range nuclear ALCMs for which a heavy bomber of the same type and variant is actually equipped. (g) Each heavy bomber equipped for nuclear armaments other than long-range nuclear ALCMs shall be attributed with one warhead. All heavy bombers not equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs shall be considered to be heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments other than long-range nuclear ALCMs, with the exception of heavy bombers equipped for non-nuclear armaments, test heavy bombers, and training heavy bombers. 5. Each Party shall have the right to reduce the number of warheads attributed to ICBMs and SLBMs only of existing types, up to an aggregate number of 1250 at any one time. (a) Such aggregate number shall consist of the following: (i) for the United States of America, the reduction in the number of warheads attributed to the type of ICBM designated by the United States of America as, and known to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as, Minuteman III, plus the reduction in the number of warheads attributed to ICBMs and SLBMs of no more than two other existing types; (ii) for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, four multiplied by the number of deployed SLBMs designated by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as RSM–50, which is known to the United States of America as SS–N–18, plus the reduction in the number of warheads attributed to ICBMs and SLBMs of no more than two other existing types. (b) Reductions in the number of warheads attributed to Minuteman III ICBMs shall be carried out subject to the following: (i) Minuteman III ICBMs to which different numbers of warheads are attributed shall not be deployed at the same ICBM base. (ii) Any such reductions shall be carried out no later than seven years after entry into force of this Treaty. (iii) The reentry vehicle platform of each Minuteman III ICBM to which a reduced number of warheads is attributed shall be destroyed and replaced by a new reentry vehicle platform. (c) Reductions in the number of warheads attributed to ICBMs and SLBMs of types other than Minuteman III shall be carried out subject to the following: (i) Such reductions shall not exceed 500 warheads at any one time for each Party. (ii) After a Party has reduced the number of warheads attributed to ICBMs or SLBMs of two existing types, that Party shall not have the right to reduce the number of warheads attributed to ICBMs or SLBMs of any additional type.
