1956  767
prejudice views of either. Discussion of merits of respective claims 
and working out by peaceful means of solutions to those problems 
where our policies confront each other can only be accomplished after 
we have made clear that only peaceful means will be used in finding 
those solutions.
27. I said question Wang had asked this morning was one I could 
only term as prejudging solutions to problems facing our two countries. 
As such, I didn’t believe it proper or constructive question to ask at this 
stage our discussions.
28. I said the US earnestly hopes for and will do everything its 
power to bring about peaceful solution these questions. The US had no 
reservations in its determination that only peaceful means would be 
used in their solution.
29. I said if Wang agreed to issuance of draft we discussing, US 
would have no reservations in its determination that we seek together, 
as set forth in draft, “practical and feasible means realizing this com­
mon desire.” US continues hope we can reach that stage. US continues 
hope we will not be longer delayed in reaching that stage by useless 
attempts get US agree that if its forces attacked they would not defend 
selves.
30. Wang said he noted that I had expressed hope we would be 
able to reach agreement on issuance of announcement quickly so that 
we could enter into discussion other matters. He shared this concern 
that we had spent much time in discussion this announcement without 
reaching an agreement on this up to present moment.
31. Wang said that in his opening statement this morning he had 
pointed out repeated efforts their side to reach agreement by putting 
forth various drafts which embodied points of view common to both 
sides and which acceptable to both sides. If indeed my view that we 
should quickly reach agreement on an announcement, it hard for him 
to see why US still continues not to accept their draft announcement so 
that we can advance to discussion other matters.
32. Wang said he had repeatedly made clear that our draft unaccep­
table to their side because our draft only serves view of US side. Because 
US draft only gives consideration to US interests and prejudices posi­
tion their side, therefore it unacceptable to their side. This view of their 
side had been made clear repeatedly in previous meetings.
33. Wang said it entirely unjustifiable for us to include clause on 
self-­defense of US in Taiwan, which was what their side would not 
accept. Observations I had made this morning, it seemed to him, in 
main continued to defend position of US regarding US self-­defense 
in Taiwan area. That, as he had said, was principal obstacle in way of 
reaching agreement on issuance of announcement. He did not see how
