Afghanistan 613 225. Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Spiers) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, March 4, 1980 SUBJECT Soviet Motives in Afghanistan In choosing to intervene in Afghanistan, the Soviets were primarily motivated by their own security concerns. In their pre-decision deliberations, they apparently underestimated both the strength of the insurgency and the intensity of the international reaction. Despite their miscalculations, however, we believe the Soviets are not now prepared to alter their course. Present efforts seem primarily aimed at stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan, exploiting differences among the western allies, and limiting the damage which Afghanistan has done to overall US-Soviet relations. By late 1979, Moscow was faced with a dire situation in Afghanistan. If it did not act, the best it could hope for was prolonged fighting, further regime coups, and political chaos; the worst, the establishment of an anti-Soviet regime that would develop ties with Iran, Pakistan, the US, and China. From the Soviet perspective, such a turn of events would have overturned a long tradition of Afghan dependence on the USSR and would have meant an unacceptable situation on the USSR’s southern border. Tolerance of such an outcome would have called into question Moscow’s willingness to back its clients elsewhere in the Third World. By early December, the Soviet leadership concluded that the only solution to the problem was military intervention, and that while such action would carry considerable political costs, the benefits of a stable and secure Afghanistan firmly in the Soviet camp were worth the price. Miscalculation In its deliberations, Moscow miscalculated. In terms of the military situation, the Soviets seem to have misjudged the strength and capabilities of the insurgents. While the Soviets probably calculated that their own troops would have to secure the major urban areas and lines of communication in Afghanistan until the Afghan army could be reorganized and equipped to fight the insurgency, it probably underes- 1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensitive File, 1979–1983, Lot 96D262, Box 4, 1980 ES Sensitive, Mar 1–15. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by W. Limberg (INR/RSE). [text not declassified]
