578
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
legislation (and the earlier CVD waiver extension). In the absence of such an
outcome we would get the worst of both worlds—no MTN and a highly re-
strictive textile program. In fact, the textile program should go into effect
only upon successful completion of the MTN legislation.
I therefore recommend:
—That no textile program be accepted until absolutely essential to as-
sure industry support for the MTN legislation.
—That its implementation be conditioned on successful conclusion of the
MTN package including our implementing legislation.
—In the interim, that further efforts be made to improve the specifics of
the program; most notably, its rollbacks of import levels and perhaps
the “global import evaluation” which implies a USG commitment to
global rather than country quotas.
W. Michael Blumenthal2
2 Printed from a copy with the signature “Mike (per copy)” above this typed
signature.
196.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, February 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Proposed Administration Textile Program
This proposal is a significantly restrictive international trade meas-
ure.2 I recommend that you agree to it only on the condition that it goes
into effect after the MTN is signed and in hand.
The industry is finally getting in this program what they have been
seeking from the U.S. Government for years. It includes a very restric-
tive mechanistic “ratchet” effect (Import Control #4) that prevents im-
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 86, Textiles. No classification marking.
2 Attached but not printed is a February 6 paper entitled “Administration Textile
Program—Pursuant to the President’s Statement of November 11, 1978.” On November
11, 1978, Carter vetoed H.R. 9937, which contained a provision that rescinded U.S. au-
thority to participate in textile negotiations in the MTN. For the text of Carter’s veto state-
ment, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp.
2010–2011.
