National Security Policy 571 space equivalent work similar to the US manned balloon experiments. The USSR will expand its intensive research program in the control of human behavior, especially in conditioning techniques. In addition, the Soviets will probably maintain their lead in research on the effects of radiation on the nervous system. It is possible that they will attain the lead in the study of the effects of cosmic radiation on organisms. 97. Biological and agricultural sciences. There has been a notable improvement in the quality of Soviet research in certain areas of the biological and agricultural sciences. Except in a few specific fields, however, the USSR still lags behind most Western countries in these sciences. Although Lysenko retains some limited political support, ideological theories are probably no longer permitted to interfere with sound research in biology and agriculture, and Soviet genetics research should improve markedly. We believe that agricultural research and development will receive increasing support, which should assist the Soviet effort to increase food supplies. 98. Industrial technology. For the immediate future, we estimate that the general level of Soviet industrial technology will remain below that of the US. However, the most modem Soviet plants are already on a par with those in the US, and the average level of heavy industrial tech­ nology will probably improve. Striking progress has been made over the last few years in the theory and practice of automation. Additional semiautomatic and possibly fully automatic production lines will be established during the period of this estimate. There will probably be increased emphasis on engineering process research and on shorten­ ing the lead times necessary to bring developed items into production. However, research and technology in consumer goods fields will con­ tinue to lag far behind that of the US. IV. DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTING THE SOVIET MILITARY POSTURE SOVIET MILITARY THINKING AND POLICY Major Objectives of Military Policy 99. Soviet military thinking and policy since the end of World War II, and particularly since the death of Stalin, have been strongly influ­ enced by a growing appreciation of the devastation inherent in nuclear war and of the threat to the USSR’s objectives and security posed by Western nuclear capabilities. The Soviet leaders have made strong efforts to build a substantial offensive nuclear capability of their own and to improve their air defenses; indeed, to build up a broad range of offensive and defensive capabilities, both nuclear and nonnuclear. At the same time, Soviet political activity has aimed at reducing the
