560
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
political relations and economic benefits. To this end, countries with a
good or substantially improving record of human rights observance are
given special consideration in the allocation of US foreign assistance
just as countries with a poor or deteriorating record receive less favor-
able consideration. Programs for each fiscal year are reviewed in this
light. In the evaluation of the human rights condition of a foreign na-
tion, primary emphasis is placed on longer term trends and on the cu-
mulative effect of specific events.
Except in exceptional circumstances actions are not undertaken
which would result in material or financial support to the police, civil
law enforcement authorities, or others performing internal security
functions of governments engaged in serious violations of human
rights.
US human rights actions within the International Financial Institu-
tions are designed and implemented so as not to undermine the essen-
tial US interest of preserving these institutions as effective economic in-
struments. To this end, US actions seek to: utilize most effectively both
our voice and our vote; understand and attempt to influence the Banks’
actions as early as possible in the loan process; and, engage the support
of other nations and multilateral organizations.
178.
Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to William Butler,
David Hinkley, and Jerome Shestack1
Washington, January 22, 1979
Gentlemen:
It is with great pleasure that I reply to your letter of December 1,
1978 to President Carter concerning ratification by the Senate of the In-
ternational Covenants on Human Rights.2
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P790018–1909. No
classification marking. Drafted by Roberta Cohen. According to a Department of State
Executive Secretariat transmittal form, the Department sent a copy of Derian’s letter to
Brzezinski on January 24. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P790018–1908)
2 In their letter, Butler, Hinkley, and Shestack impressed upon Carter the need to
make the ratification of the human rights covenants and treaties a goal of his first term
and urged the President to sign the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Polit-
ical Rights. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P790018–1914)
