Human Rights
553
175.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, December 6, 1978, 10:32–10:58 a.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting on Human Rights Policy
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ms. Patt Derian, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights
Leslie G. Denend, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Assistant Secretary Derian began the meeting by reviewing imple-
mentation of the policy over the past two years. She stressed the sus-
tained high level of public support for the policy, and the importance of
including an adequate assessment of the human rights situation partic-
ularly in decision papers to the President concerning military exports.
The President indicated that he felt he was receiving this kind of infor-
mation particularly in sensitive cases. Secretary Vance confirmed this
procedure to the President. The President cited Argentina as a clear case
where his approvals are specifically designed to encourage progress in
human rights. He went on to describe the support of the European and
Japanese leaders for human rights.
Ms. Derian indicated that the policy is misunderstood by some and
wondered if it would not be possible to release an unclassified version
of PD–30 which is now classified Confidential. The President thought
the idea had merit and directed Dr. Brzezinski to review PD–30.2
The President then turned to the role of diplomacy in advancing the
cause of human rights. Using the example of the Soviet Union, he indi-
cated that he had learned a great deal about Soviet reactions to U.S.
human rights initiatives and felt that more had been accomplished re-
cently in the emigration of Soviet Jews, for example, through quiet di-
plomacy than through more public measures.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 37, Memcons: President: 12/78–1/79. Secret; Outside the System. Drafted by De-
nend. The meeting took place in the White House Oval Office.
2 Denend sent Brzezinski a copy of the memorandum of conversation under a De-
cember 7 covering note, indicating that he would review PD–30 and coordinate with
Schecter on developing a statement on PD–30 for release to the public. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Mathews Subject File, Box 10,
Human Rights: Policy: 10–12/78)
