Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Gaza, steps. He had sought to explain to President Carter his idea. On the day that the interim withdrawal is completed in Sinai, there should also be full autonomy celebrated in Gaza. This means that one month after signature of a Sinai agreement, Israel and Egypt should sit together to agree on a date for elections, Israeli troop deployment, abolition of military government, etc. President Carter had said the Israelis will not be ready before the end of 1979 for elections. Advance preparations are needed. Sadat reiterated that his response had been that he is not in a hurry to have the first interim withdrawal in Sinai. The linkage issue with West Bank/Gaza should first be settled. If it takes 10 or 11 months instead of the 9 months stipulated in the Sinai framework, this is agreeable. The peace process, he contended, should not be damaged through actions like completing a Sinai agreement without defining what happens when in West Bank/Gaza. President Carter had noted that two years after the establishment of a self-governing authority, the parties will sit down to work out modalities for (as Sadat put it) selfdetermination. Sadat had responded that in two years time, the USG will be in the midst of presidential elections. The Israelis, he charged, are deliberately seeking to stall in order to ease President Carter’s pressure on them. They are playing for time. Begin was in effect forced to sign the Camp David Agreements. It had never been his intention to do so. Begin is now trying to redress what he failed to achieve at Camp David. If Begin succeeds, this may indeed help him in the short run, but in the long run it will be against Israeli interests. F. Sadat also asked that I emphasize to President Carter the concessions that he, Sadat, had made in agreeing to normalization after the first withdrawal. He had done so even though the Egyptian/Israeli framework document says nothing about exchanging ambassadors so soon. He had given President Carter his word regarding ambassadorial exchanges and he will not go back on this. It will be difficult enough to have this happen when part of the Sinai is still occupied by the Israelis, but his people are behind him. However, if this takes place with nothing having happened re West Bank/Gaza, this will be bad. G. Sadat contended that he had been “hurt” when President Carter said that the Israelis claimed that he, Sadat, is now demanding more than the Camp David Agreements. He insisted that he is not doing so. He had always made it clear, including at Camp David, that a firm linkage was an absolute prerequisite to a Sinai agreement. With some show of testiness, he said that he did not like to be compared to the Israelis. H. PriMin Khalil interjected that the Israelis also object to a meaningful Egyptian presence in Gaza. Sadat said the Israelis will accept only a nominal Egyptian presence, but Egypt will not agree to this.
