Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 tion of an integrated commodity program for 18 different raw materials. The idea is to relate international efforts to address the problem of each commodity market through a common financing mechanism—a common fund. This proposal has assumed a strong political significance in the North-South dialogue. The United States and other industrial nations agree with Third World leaders that commodity issues are of central importance to the world economy and to the economic development of many countries. But we are convinced that effective measures can be devised only if each market is addressed as an individual case and that these individual arrangements form the best basis for a common commodity policy and funding arrangement. Negotiations on this question begin November 7.3 We will enter them in the hope that we can advance a positive and realistic position. We face the challenge of supporting what we consider sound economic policies, while working to maintain a constructive negotiating atmosphere. Another such area is debt. Developing countries have been seeking generalized forgiveness of past official debt, which many of them see as a structural impediment to future development. We seek to respond to such financial needs by arranging additional resource transfers, through bilateral and multilateral foreign assistance. But our analysis shows that every debtor is in a different situation. Some have little problem managing their debts. Others face only a temporary difficulty in servicing their loans. Still others may face long-term structural problems characterized by an inadequate net flow of financial resources. In cases of extreme and urgent need, obviously we stand prepared to discuss debt rescheduling. But in the divergent circumstances we face, we believe any generalized debt forgiveness would be inadvisable. First, the benefits to debtors would bear little relationship to their development needs, since some nations with the largest debts are growing fast and can more easily service them. Second, by treating all countries alike, we would, in effect, be discriminating against those countries which have struggled to pursue policies to reduce their indebtedness over time. And third, a general debt moratorium would be seized upon by those who have traditionally cried “giveaway” at any effort to transfer resources to the Third World.
