Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
273
tion of an integrated commodity program for 18 different raw mate-
rials. The idea is to relate international efforts to address the problem of
each commodity market through a common financing mechanism—a
common fund. This proposal has assumed a strong political signifi-
cance in the North-South dialogue.
The United States and other industrial nations agree with Third
World leaders that commodity issues are of central importance to the
world economy and to the economic development of many countries.
But we are convinced that effective measures can be devised only if
each market is addressed as an individual case and that these indi-
vidual arrangements form the best basis for a common commodity
policy and funding arrangement. Negotiations on this question begin
November 7.3 We will enter them in the hope that we can advance a
positive and realistic position. We face the challenge of supporting
what we consider sound economic policies, while working to maintain
a constructive negotiating atmosphere.
Another such area is debt. Developing countries have been seeking
generalized forgiveness of past official debt, which many of them see as
a structural impediment to future development.
We seek to respond to such financial needs by arranging addi-
tional resource transfers, through bilateral and multilateral foreign
assistance. But our analysis shows that every debtor is in a different sit-
uation. Some have little problem managing their debts. Others face
only a temporary difficulty in servicing their loans. Still others may face
long-term structural problems characterized by an inadequate net flow
of financial resources.
In cases of extreme and urgent need, obviously we stand prepared
to discuss debt rescheduling. But in the divergent circumstances we
face, we believe any generalized debt forgiveness would be inadvis-
able. First, the benefits to debtors would bear little relationship to their
development needs, since some nations with the largest debts are
growing fast and can more easily service them. Second, by treating all
countries alike, we would, in effect, be discriminating against those
countries which have struggled to pursue policies to reduce their in-
debtedness over time. And third, a general debt moratorium would be
seized upon by those who have traditionally cried “giveaway” at any
effort to transfer resources to the Third World.
3 Negotiations on the Common Fund (see footnote 7, Document 47) opened in Ge-
neva on November 7. The negotiations were suspended later that month. See Foreign Re-
lations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy, Documents 280, 281, 284–286, and
295. (“Third World’s Hopes for Common Fund Seem Dim as Commodities Parley
Opens,” The Wall Street Journal, November 8, 1977, p. 16)
