644 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I American taxpayer. And fifth, it must be consistent with existing SALT agreements and with our SALT III goal of negotiating for significant mutual reductions in strategic forces.” The President provided additional details as to the configuration of the MX system and then outlined how the configuration met the essential criteria. He concluded his remarks, noting: “Unhappily, we do not yet live in the kind of world that permits us to devote all our resources to the works of peace. And as President, I have no higher duty than to ensure that the security of the United States will be protected beyond doubt. As long as the threat of war persists, we will do what we must to deter that threat to our Nation’s security. If SALT II is ratified and SALT III is successful, then the time may come when no President will have to make this kind of decision again and the MX system will be the last weapon system of such enormous destructive power that we will ever have to build. I fervently pray for that time, but until it comes, we will build what we must, even as we continue to work for mutual restraint in strategic armaments.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pages 1599–1601) At 2:35 that afternoon, the President took part in an interview and question-and-answer session with reporters. The interview took place in the Cabinet Room in the White House. The President began the session by stating: “This is an interesting day for you to be in Washington. We have, as usual, an accumulation of both domestic and foreign issues to be addressed by me and by my associates, with whom you’ve met already. “It is a coincidence that we have already had a major announcement on the deployment of the MX missile in a mobile form this morning, and in just a few minutes, about 4 o’clock, I will make a statement to the Nation concerning Soviet troops in Cuba.” The President highlighted a variety of domestic issues and then answered questions from the assembled reporters. In response to a question about Soviet and American postures regarding defense, the President asserted: “When I assess in my own mind the trends in Soviet influence the last 10 or 15 years, say—just to get out of my own administration and to make it a bipartisan thing—versus the Soviet Union, I’m very encouraged. “The Soviets did win an advantage in Afghanistan. That Sovietendorsed government is in substantial danger, and that’s significant. But when you compare that with our new relationship with India, compared to what it was 5 years ago, or our new relationship with Egypt, the strongest and most powerful Arab country, compared to what it was during the time of the Aswan Dam construction when Egypt was
