National Security Policy 59 magnitude as US defense expenditures, and annual Soviet industrial investment is presently about 85 percent that of the US. 16. Although the Soviet rate of economic growth is slowing down somewhat, we believe that it will continue to be faster than that of the US, and will enable the USSR to achieve along with other economic and mil­ itary programs some modest gains in consumption at home. These gains will be tangible, though they will not satisfy consumer expectations, par­ ticularly in view of the continued housing shortage. While rapid advance on all these fronts at a time of reorganization, experimentation, and labor problems will cause difficulties, the size and shape of the Soviet econ­ omy is such that—­even though less than half that of the US in terms of GNP—­it will be possible for the USSR to utilize it extensively to advance its political and diplomatic objectives. 17. In these circumstances, the USSR has a wide range of policy choices open to it. Because of its increased military strength, it is in an improved position to engage in threats and blackmail, and it can negotiate from a stronger position than in the past. Alternatively—­or even at the same time—­it can soft-­pedal such policies and proceed with the less dramatic business of gaining influence and prestige through diplomacy, cultural exchanges, expansion of foreign trade, grants of economic assistance, propaganda, and subversion. We do not believe that the Soviet leaders have made a decision to follow any particular line to the exclusion of others. Their entire approach has been too prag­ matic and flexible to justify clear prediction. We believe that they will keep open the possibilities of negotiation on virtually every issue in the hope that they will gain something by negotiation that would not be attainable so quickly by other means. We believe they will press vig­ orously their campaign to gain influence in underdeveloped areas by political, economic, and diplomatic means. On the whole, we believe that the Soviet leaders will seek to avoid policies which they believe would clearly lead to serious risk of general war. 18. Nevertheless, the Soviet leaders probably believe that they can pursue bolder policies than in the past without a corresponding increase in risk. As time goes on, they might again utilize war-­by-­proxy to gain local objectives, particularly in situations where they calculated that the US or its allies would be unlikely to use nuclear weapons to defend their position. They almost certainly foresee that crises will develop from time to time as a consequence of Western resistance to the expansion of Soviet influence. In these situations we expect the Soviet leaders to be firm—­and occasionally bellicose. C. Psychological Impact of Soviet and US Policies 19. As a result of Soviet scientific achievements, some of the world’s ideas about the US were shaken. There is now doubt in many quarters
