3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
283
The Secretary reported that the Somalis had been urged to with-
draw from the Ogaden. He expressed his concern that the conflict
could go on, and could spill across the border, creating great complica-
tions. The Secretary urged that the Soviet Union join with us in putting
maximum efforts behind the OAU initiative for a ceasefire and
mediation.
Dobrynin replied that the Soviet Union is prepared to do this, par-
ticularly because it believes that nothing useful can be achieved at the
UN Security Council at the present juncture. He said that the Soviet
Union had learned two days ago from the Nigerian Foreign Minister
that he believed it possible to accomplish something useful, and that
his complaints at this point were directed more against the Somalis
than against the Ethiopians.
Dobrynin referred to a previous inquiry about a report that the
Ethiopians might be contemplating an effort to take the town of Har-
geisa as a hostage against Somali evacuation of the Ogaden. He said he
was personally skeptical about the report, but that he had forwarded
the inquiry to Moscow, without any response so far.
The Secretary observed that he had, in testimony that morning, as-
serted his belief that the Soviet Union had no aspirations against So-
malia. Dobrynin replied that this was a safe statement.
2. ASAT. The Secretary mentioned that he would be presenting a
paper to the Soviet Union,3 probably sometime next week, with specific
suggestions for a meeting on this subject.
3. Israeli Nuclear Weapons. Dobrynin gave the Secretary a non-paper
asking for clarifications of CIA press reports that Israel possessed nu-
clear weapons,4 and urging US influence to gain Israeli accession to the
non-proliferation treaty. The Secretary said that the Israelis had denied
the possession of nuclear weapons; that the CIA had indicated that Is-
rael had the capability of producing them, but was divided on the ques-
tion of whether it had already done so. He said that he would study the
paper and reply.
4. UN Charter Revision. Dobrynin also gave the Secretary a paper, in
Russian, agreeing with the US position on not undertaking a revision of
the UN Charter at the present time.5 (A similar paper is apparently
being presented to other capitals.)
5. Indian Ocean. Dobrynin said conversationally that Mendelevich6
was disappointed at the small progress achieved in the Indian Ocean
3 No record of a paper or its delivery was found.
4 Attached but not printed.
5 Not found attached.
6 Not further identified.
