3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 308 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI its decision-makers our confidence in our defensive potential, and our determination to maintain that confidence in the future. When our public is reassured that our armed forces are sufficiently strong to carry out their responsibilities, it will support further arms control agreements. If it is uncertain, its acceptance of such agreements is put in doubt. President Carter’s speech should thus be interpreted as supporting a SALT II agreement, and further progress beyond that to even more comprehensive arms limitation agreements. We are confident that a careful reading of the entire text of the President’s address, rather than reliance on excerpts which the media may choose to publicize, will make this point clear. End text. Vance 94. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1 Washington, April 9, 1978, 0056Z 91104. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Subject: Meeting With Dobrynin. 1. I met with Dobrynin today following his return from consultations. 2. On the basis of his several hours of discussion with Brezhnev, and lengthy consultations with Gromyko and other authorities, Dobrynin emphasized the crucial importance of my trip to Moscow as a possible turning point in US-Soviet relations. He said that Brezhnev is expecting to meet with me, and urgently hopes that I will be able to bring him evidence of our serious commitment to move forward on SALT. This is in his view the key issue. “He does not ask that the American side make all the concessions,” Dobrynin reported, “but only that it show that it is willing to negotiate seriously to clear away the remaining issues.” There should be no doubt, he said, that Brezhnev would like to meet with the President, if there is a prospect of a successful outcome, following the Moscow talks, and, if necessary, the talks with Gromyko back here in May. 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 3, CV–Dobrynin, 4/9/78. Confidential; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Shulman; cleared by James Thyden (S/S–O); approved by Vance.
