August 8–September 17, 1978 11 to get agreement on a broad framework of principles. We cannot promise success but at least by the time the Camp David meeting ends U.S. position will be clear. I explained that the President intends to make an all-out effort and is ready to continue the talks at Camp David as long as necessary. I also assured Hussein that the Camp David meeting was our own idea and that we had not discussed it with anyone else. Begin and Sadat first learned of it when the Secretary arrived in Jerusalem and Alexandria4 (Suddarth had told me the King might be sensitive about the absence of any advance consultation.) 4. I said I realized that the impression existed in the Arab world that there had been an erosion in our position. The Secretary wanted me to assure His Majesty that is not the case. We continue to believe that a framework of broad principles has to be the starting point, and the ideas and suggestions that we will put forward at Camp David will be consistent with those the Secretary and the President have discussed with Hussein. I pointed out that the Camp David initiative was an act of great courage on the part of the President, just as was Sadat’s acceptance of the invitation, and the President deserves the broadest possible support. I said I hoped Jordan would consider ways it could show its support. 5. Hussein thanked me for coming and said that, speaking as a friend of the U.S. and in spirit of our relations, he had to say that the recent period had been a very confusing one. Hussein said what he had heard not only after the Leeds conference but before that time had caused him to have doubts about the steadfastness of the U.S. In 1967 the U.S. spoke of Israeli withdrawal with minor border modifications. Now we hear of a 5 year period “that would lead to we don’t know what” and the possibility of Israeli forces staying on the West Bank with Jordan providing a “cover” for their activities. Hussein said U.S. ideas did not appear to bring in the Palestinians sufficiently, and he stressed the importance of involving the Palestinians fully in the settlement effort. Hussein said in the post 1967 period the U.S. and Jordan had differences on only two issues, Jerusalem and the need for minor border modifications to be on a reciprocal basis. In recent years, however, differences seemed to have multiplied. 6. In sum, Hussein said, he felt there had been a “very serious erosion in the U.S. position” and that it had damaged the U.S. image in the Middle East. At one point he said the past few months had been “the most distressing of my life.” (Comment: Hussein never alluded to his 4 Vance met with Begin August 5–7 in Jerusalem, and Sadat August 7–9 in Alexandria where he presented both leaders with invitations to meet with President Carter at Camp David. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, Documents 285–288.
