Romania Tito’s visit to Washington helped strengthen U.S.-Yugoslav relations for the post-Tito period. Like Tito, Ceausescu is an independent communist, a regional leader in the Balkans, a partner for the United States and China in Eastern Europe, and a sometimes helpful mediator in international transactions. At 60, Ceausescu has many good years ahead of him. His visit therefore presents an opportunity to reinforce an American role in Eastern Europe for the uncertain years ahead. In so doing, we will be building on a solid base. After a decade of steady effort, our relations with Romania are good. Ceausescu is coming to Washington ready and willing to keep them that way and to move them further forward. He clearly aspires to as much of Tito’s mantle as can be made to fit. The degree of recognition he gets from us will be, for him, an important measure of his prospects. Because recent activities in our relations with Yugoslavia, Poland and Hungary may have led Ceausescu to question whether our attitude toward Romania has cooled, he will be hypersensitive to the warmth and protocol aspects of his reception here. At the same time, Ceausescu is not easy to deal with for the United States. Nurtured in the dangerous politics of the interwar communist movement, he runs a unitary state and a tightly centralized economy with a degree of direct personal control unmatched on the continent. In this respect, his regime differs markedly from Tito’s. Relying heavily on police power, the Romanian regime severely limits civil and political liberties and discourages emigration. To obtain significant movement on humanitarian problems—such as family reunification—normally requires a combination of external pressure and economic inducement. The country’s economic strategy continues to stress heavy industrial development at the expense of the consumer, and to achieve it through annual reinvestment of a third of Romania’s national income. The results, in material terms, have been impressive. Romania has one of the world’s highest growth rates and is an eager international trader. The standard of living remains one of Europe’s lowest, but it continues to rise, if slowly. Nevertheless, there are signs that the limits of this “traditional communist” type of development are being reached. A batch of economic reform principles was announced in February, followed in March by numerous personnel changes at the top. The two main thrusts—more economic “self-management” and greater Party control—point in opposite directions. Ceausescu may begin to realize that the economic efficiency Romania needs to maintain acceptable growth rates and reasonable prospects of economic independence from the USSR will soon require decentralized management and greater flexibility. He may fear, however, that a loosening of central control over the
