National Security Policy 673 in his missiles. It is assumed that these missiles are only 60% reliable with an aiming error—CEP—­of 3-1/3 miles. Thus, five missiles are directed at each SAC base, and up to 30 missiles at each hardened mis­ sile site. Fifty to 100 attacking missiles are allotted to installations other than bases of retaliatory force, e.g., air defense and communication cen­ ters. It is felt that an attack by even half this many missiles could deal us a destructive blow. Using this generous basis of estimate, the chart shows the Soviet needing 200 missiles to attack us in 1959. The figure then increases with time as we activate more SAC bases, add SAGE centers, and later add missile sites to our target system. One cannot, from this chart, draw with certainty the conclusion he would like to draw—­namely that the Soviet force will always be inade­ quate for a decisive attack against our continental forces. This is a rather weak conclusion—­the conclusion that one can’t conclude—­and is not the primary reason for setting up this chart. Rather, we would like to pursue the argument on force requirements beyond this point, in order to illustrate some of the technical possibili­ ties. We would like to discuss here how to get out of the red. In looking at defense against ballistic missiles, our Panel was impressed by the relative simplicity and effectiveness of certain passive means available to our striking forces. For example, using the kind of missile postulated for the construction of this chart, the Soviet attacker needs five missiles to be certain of destroying an array of SAC aircraft on the ground or a cluster of three Atlas missiles of the early type. These are targets which can be destroyed by a one megaton bomb burst, 3-1/2 miles away. If these targets are sheltered to withstand 100 pounds per square inch of blast pressure, a one megaton bomb would need to burst within ¾ of a mile. Correspondingly, the Soviet would need almost 200 of the missiles postulated to be certain of destruction—­in other words, he wouldn’t even attempt direct destruction with such a missile. He would have to await a better missile, or resort to artillery tactics and pin his target down until he can kill it with his aircraft. Even pinning his target down would cost him 20 to 40 missiles, in place of his original five. It has seemed to the Panel that there are no technical reasons why this tactic of hardening cannot be used as a means for greatly increasing the enemy’s force requirements against us. If we could harden effec­ tively overnight, for instance, the Soviets would now, in 1959, need something more than 1000 missiles to neutralize our SAC. In terms of an example more practical than hardening overnight, the overlay shows an estimate of the effect on the Soviets force require­ ments of what appears to be a reasonable series of steps for sheltering of SAC aircraft and further dispersal and hardening of missile sites.
