1180  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
the nation and to pursue the ensuing hostilities to the most favorable 
possible conclusion.
MAJOR POLICY GUIDANCE
Relative Emphasis
6. Predominant emphasis should continue to be placed upon 
measures to strengthen and protect our nuclear retaliatory power as a 
deterrent.
MAJORITY	
BUDGET-­JCS
5 Budget proposal. JCS would substitute 7-­b of the Majority Proposal for this sen­
tence. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
7. As long as the manned 
bomber threat continues to be of 
significant proportions, continue 
measures to maintain our active 
defenses against manned aircraft. 
However, in view of the increas­
ing reliance of the USSR on bal­
listic missiles for inter-­continental 
attack and the present limitations 
of achievable active defense meas­
ures the U.S. should:
a. While pursuing measures to 
achieve adequate active defenses, 
make a particular effort to exploit 
passive measures that will afford 
the requisite degree of protection 
to our retaliatory power and to 
relate elements, including com­
munications and command.
b. Give increased attention to 
measures for the passive defense 
of the U.S. population.
7. Continued reliance will be 
placed on a balance of active and 
passive defense measures con­
sistent with their contribution to 
the over-­all defense posture of 
the United States, the changing 
nature of the Soviet threat, and the 
increasing number of technologi­
cal options open to the USSR.
7–A. The United States should 
place predominant emphasis on 
measures to improve our active 
defenses, as compared with—
but not to the exclusion of—pas­
sive defense measures. [Particular 
emphasis should be accorded 
those active and passive defense 
measures essential to the pro­
tection of the U.S. capability for 
prompt nuclear retaliation.]5
Time Phasing
8. The time phasing of U.S. “continental defense” measures should 
take into account the threat posed by the present nuclear attack capa­
bility of the USSR and by future improvements in Soviet weapons 
and delivery capabilities, particularly the achievement in the early 
1960’s of a major ICBM capability. This will be a period during which 
the United States will largely depend on its U.S.-based air retaliatory 
force. Accordingly, during the early 1960’s special attention should 
continue to be given to measures for minimizing the vulnerability of
