The first proposal stated in the enclosure with your note is that the Paris Conference consider the advisability of the use of high efficiency [speed] apparatus on radiotelegraphic communications having a large business [considerable traffic]12 to dispose of. Apparently this refers to the installation of automatic sending machines, perforators, direct writers, printers and similar equipment in the large radio stations. If this understanding is correct, it would appear that the installation of such apparatus is purely a wireless telegraph matter for consideration at the Washington Conference and having no direct connection, either as a matter of regulation or in its technical aspects, with the revision of the Regulations annexed to the Telegraph Convention. Similarly, with respect to the proposal that the Paris Conference discuss the question of the fixing of radiotelegraph rates between fixed points, I wish to point out that consideration of rates on messages handled between fixed points by radiotelegraph would not fall properly within a conference to consider the revision of the Regulations annexed to the International Telegraph Convention and the Tables of International Telegraph Tariffs established under Article XV of the Convention and Service Regulation XXIV. If consideration of this question is proposed, it is believed that it should be dealt with at the Radiotelegraph Conference at Washington. With regard to the proposal that the Paris Conference shall consider changes to be made in the transmitting regulations to make the rules applicable to wireless and wire communication uniform, it would seem that this proposal should be understood to apply to those articles of the International Telegraph Convention and Regulations which are incorporated in the International Radiotelegraph Convention and Regulations by Article 17 of the Radiotelegraph Convention and Article L of the Regulations annexed to it. These articles read as follows: ARTICLE 17 OF CONVENTION “The provisions of Articles 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12 and 17 of the International Telegraph Convention of St. Petersburg of July 10–22, 1875, shall be applicable to international radiotelegraphy.” ARTICLE L OF REGULATIONS “The provisions of the International Telegraph Regulations shall be applicable analogously to radio correspondence in so far as they are not contrary to the provisions of the present regulations. The following provisions of the Telegraph Regulations, in particular, shall be applicable to radio correspondence: Article XXVII, paragraphs 3 to 6, relating to the collection of charges; Articles XXVI and XLI relating to the indication of the route to be followed; Article LXXV, paragraph 1, LXXVIII, paragraphs 2 to 4, and LXXIX, paragraphs 2 and 4, relating to the preparation of accounts. However:— (1) The period of six months provided by paragraph 2 of Article LXXIX of the Telegraph Regulations for the verification of accounts shall be
