1276  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
provisional arrest of General (retired) Marcos Peréz Jiménez,2 in view 
of the formal request for extradition of General Pérez Jiménez which 
the Venezuelan Government was preparing and planned to present on 
August 24 or 25. Minister Rojas said that his Government had asked 
him to present this note immediately and that he had desired to make 
the presentation to Mr. Rubottom personally in order to ensure that 
his Government’s request would receive prompt consideration with a 
view to eliminating the possibility that Pérez Jiménez might leave the 
United States before extradition proceedings could get under way.
Mr. Rubottom replied that the Department had been informed 
by Embassy Caracas that a request for extradition by the Venezuelan 
Government was imminent and that Embassy Caracas had already 
authenticated the documents connected with this request. Consequently, 
and also in view of Minister Rojas’ earlier telephone call requesting the 
appointment, the Department’s Legal Advisers had already been look-
ing into the matter and if Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges could wait, an 
answer to their note could be drafted and given them within the hour. 
Minister Rojas said that he and his colleague would wait.
Mr. Rubottom then instructed Mr. Neidle of L/ARA to proceed 
with the preparation of the reply, and he gave the original of the 
Venezuelan Embassy note to Mr. Neidle. Mr. Rubottom also instructed 
Mr. Briggs to remain and to give whatever assistance might be nec-
essary to Mr. Neidle and to Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges, inasmuch 
as his presence was required elsewhere because of a previous engage-
ment. Mr. Rubottom departed after an exchange of pleasantries and the 
Venezuelan representatives accompanied Mr. Briggs to his office.
There was some general discussion of the case by the Venezuelan 
Embassy representatives and Mr. Briggs, the gist of which was as 
follows:
1. The Venezuelan Government would proceed rapidly with the 
formal request for extradition of General Pérez Jiménez, and it was 
estimated that the documents necessary to sustain this formal request 
would arrive in Washington the following day.
2. Meanwhile, the Venezuelan Government, in view of the possibil-
ity that General Pérez Jiménez, learning of the Venezuelan Government’s 
plans, might attempt to escape, desired that he be arrested and detained 
pending initiation of the extradition process.
3. The U.S. attorneys for the GOV were prepared, immediately 
upon receiving the Department’s note, to initiate proceedings toward 
this end in the appropriate court in Miami, Florida, where General 
Pérez Jiménez is at present.
2 Not printed, 731.00/ 8–2359.
