Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 —Our policy must be rooted in our people’s basic commitment to human rights. —Our policy must be based on close cooperation with the Western industrial democracies. With them we share basic values; with them also we share a recognition that global problems cannot be solved without close cooperation among us. This was the message the President had me take to Europe and Japan in the first week of the Administration, and this was the spirit which guided the President and his colleagues at the London summit last month.4 —Our policy must seek to improve relations with the Soviet Union and China. It must do so in a balanced and reciprocal way, while we maintain a strong defense. —Our policy must recognize that the cleavage between North and South is as important as between East and West. We must reach out to the world’s developing nations, seeking to narrow the gap between rich and poor. —Finally, our policy must provide incentives for all nations to rise above ideology or narrow conceptions of self-interest and work together to resolve regional conflicts and to meet global problems that confront all people. As an Administration, we are only five months old. However, these months have been a period of intense activity. We are committed to shaping effective policies that truly reflect America’s values and objectives, and we are committed to implementing policies with other nations so as to shape a more peaceful and stable world. One of our first tasks has been to insure that our foreign policy reflects the commitment to basic human rights that we, as Americans, share. That commitment to the inherent dignity of the individual is at the heart of the American tradition. From it flows the democratic liberties that we cherish—such as the right to worship freely; freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, and due process of law. Those are the basic strengths of our nation. We have survived as a free nation because we have remained committed to the defense of fundamental moral values we cherish as a people. And unless our foreign policy reflects those values it will not earn the support of the American people. Without that support, no foreign policy—no matter how brilliantly conceived—can succeed. I believe we have restored that commitment to human rights. I am proud that the United States today stands among those who uphold human rights and human dignity in the world. I am proud that no foreign leader today has any doubt that the United States condemns tor- 4 See Document 38.
