Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
185
—Our policy must be rooted in our people’s basic commitment to
human rights.
—Our policy must be based on close cooperation with the Western
industrial democracies. With them we share basic values; with them
also we share a recognition that global problems cannot be solved
without close cooperation among us. This was the message the Presi-
dent had me take to Europe and Japan in the first week of the Adminis-
tration, and this was the spirit which guided the President and his col-
leagues at the London summit last month.4
—Our policy must seek to improve relations with the Soviet Union
and China. It must do so in a balanced and reciprocal way, while we
maintain a strong defense.
—Our policy must recognize that the cleavage between North and
South is as important as between East and West. We must reach out to
the world’s developing nations, seeking to narrow the gap between
rich and poor.
—Finally, our policy must provide incentives for all nations to rise
above ideology or narrow conceptions of self-interest and work to-
gether to resolve regional conflicts and to meet global problems that
confront all people.
As an Administration, we are only five months old. However,
these months have been a period of intense activity. We are committed
to shaping effective policies that truly reflect America’s values and ob-
jectives, and we are committed to implementing policies with other na-
tions so as to shape a more peaceful and stable world.
One of our first tasks has been to insure that our foreign policy re-
flects the commitment to basic human rights that we, as Americans,
share. That commitment to the inherent dignity of the individual is at
the heart of the American tradition. From it flows the democratic lib-
erties that we cherish—such as the right to worship freely; freedom of
speech, of the press, of assembly, and due process of law. Those are the
basic strengths of our nation.
We have survived as a free nation because we have remained com-
mitted to the defense of fundamental moral values we cherish as a
people. And unless our foreign policy reflects those values it will not
earn the support of the American people. Without that support, no for-
eign policy—no matter how brilliantly conceived—can succeed.
I believe we have restored that commitment to human rights. I am
proud that the United States today stands among those who uphold
human rights and human dignity in the world. I am proud that no for-
eign leader today has any doubt that the United States condemns tor-
4 See Document 38.
