1088 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement bit gently. He said he didn’t see any reason why they couldn’t wait and make a final decision sometime later. 17. I left all of my notes over with Andy Goodpaster and he’s going to send them back. I didn’t quite read them all and he can get them all down in his notes, see some of the points I didn’t make. I didn’t quite get finished. The discussion got so hot I never came back to the paper. 18. Goodpaster never entered into the argument. He never does. Mr. Douglas entered into the argument. Everybody did, all three of them did. I have forgotten what points Douglas especially made, except that SAC has this great capability. Of course Polaris entered into it. Service positions entered into it. 19. The President insisted over and over again we’ve got to have a single plan and people have got to follow it. Don’t you agree with that, Burke? Yes, sir, Mr. President, I do agree with it, but the plan has got to be right. It can’t be detailed and it’s got to be made with the full reali­ zation of the other things that have to be done other than this, and to do these things most efficiently there must be enough leeway left to the commanders so that they do them most efficiently, but certainly you are absolutely correct. There must be a list of targets which must be struck at a certain specific time. 20. The President made the point that all he was looking for was the first strike. He said this is the first strike, the first 24 hours. After that of course the Unified Commanders must use their forces the way they see fit under the direction of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 21. I thought a couple of times that Tom implied that they had to get somebody, if people were objective, they would accept his plan, that’s what he was really saying. People who didn’t accept the plan were not objective, too much Service bias. Nate picked up right after that and talked about the awful Navy. I thought sure “there goes the whipsaw”. I was just about ready to say “if that is your opinion then obviously I shouldn’t be here.” I just started to say it. I counted and I didn’t, but it very nearly came out. Maybe I should have. That was pretty serious. 22. We have got to get the word around somehow that the Air Force is wrecking the hell out of this joint. This is one of them. Either you do it my way or I won’t play. That’s the Air Force, and they got their way completely on this, except for this one thing—the final decision is not made yet. That’s the only thing we got and we’ve got to throw some of our very best people in this because in this decision Tom Gates, Douglas and Twining have all made up their minds absolutely what they will do in January no matter what decision is made. They talked about it. If
