3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
344
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
African nuclear question and of Namibia. A non paper on the Law of
the Sea was transmitted.2
I. Moscow Meeting Follow-Up
1. Tentatively, the following dates were discussed for a possible
Gromyko visit to Washington, prior to his appearance at the SSOD: ar-
rival Sunday night, May 21; meetings May 22 and 23. Dobrynin said he
would check Moscow and confirm. He believed Gromyko was sched-
uled to speak at the SSOD May 25.
2. The Secretary expressed appreciation for the hospitality and
courtesies extended to him and to his party in Moscow.
3. Dobrynin said that Brezhnev’s speech to the Komsomols was in-
tended to register a positive reaction to the Moscow meetings; he said
there was surprise in Moscow that the only comment made by the Pres-
ident at his press conference3 was so sharply negative. The Secretary
explained that the only question asked of the President concerned
Brezhnev’s position on ERW, and he did not have an opportunity to re-
spond to other aspects of the Brezhnev speech. These were covered, he
said, in the response to questions by the State Department spokesman
on April 26,4 the transcript of which was given to Dobrynin.
4. The Secretary reminded Dobrynin that Gromyko had offered to
supply the flight profile of the Backfire. Dobrynin said he would follow
up the matter.
5. The Secretary asked if Dobrynin had further information on
Gromyko’s suggestion that preliminary steps could be taken to make
missiles inoperable prior to complete dismantling, and in particular
whether such steps would be subject to verification. Dobrynin said he
thought the steps could be verifiable, but that he would try to get addi-
tional information.
6. The Secretary said, with reference to New Types, that although
the US preferred position was to have no exceptions, it had made an ef-
fort to take account of the Soviet desire by offering to accept one excep-
tion for each side; if this were to be accepted, he stressed, each side
would have to be free to make the exception MIRVed or SRV, according
to its own preference. Dobrynin indicated some resistance to this point,
on the ground that a MIRVed exception would be more destabilizing,
but did not say that this was a final Soviet position.
2 Not found.
3 Carter stated at his April 25 news conference that the Soviets had spent years
building up their tank forces and as a result, had no need for a neutron bomb. For the text
of the news conference, see Department of State Bulletin, June 1978, pp. 12–13.
4 Not found.
