120
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
48.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury
(Carswell) to the Special Coordination Committee and the
National Security Council1
Washington, November 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Extension of Economic Measures Against the Government of Iran
Background
On November 14, the President blocked all assets of the Govern-
ment of Iran and its controlled entities held by persons subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States.2 This action appears to have blocked
assets with a market value substantially in excess of $8 billion, of which
more than half are dollar deposits in the foreign branches of U.S.
banks. The present estimate of claims of Americans against the Iranian
Government is around $3.5 billion but that is probably low by at least
$1 billion. Since it is unlikely that we will be able to “vest”, that is to
seize, assets outside the United States, at this point it is not certain that
U.S. claimants against Iran would receive full payment from the assets
presently blocked.
Principally because of that uncertainty, Treasury has modified the
blocking regulations so that “setoffs” against blocked deposits in the
foreign branches would not be unlawful under the regulations. A setoff
is an action by a bank whereby it uses deposits of a customer without
the customer’s consent to pay off a loan to that customer. The conditions
under which a setoff may be used by a bank are governed by the law
of the jurisdiction where the setoff is made, and it is by no means clear
that the setoffs described below have been effective. In any event, the
effect of the Treasury action was to permit setoffs where the foreign
law permits and thereby to satisfy U.S. claims against Iranian assets
in foreign countries, thus increasing the chance that the Iranian assets
in the U.S. will satisfy the rest of the claims. (Setoffs have not been
permitted in the U.S. because to do so might result in banks being paid
off 100¢ on the dollar when other claimants receive less.)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 97, Meetings File, 11/23/79 NSC and SCC re Iran. Confidential.
2 See Document 30.
