Chapter 6, June–December 1990  851
European allies would also be alarmed, particularly by the failure to 
complete CFE, which they (and we) have promoted as a cornerstone of 
the new Europe. If we want the benefits of these treaties and (at least as 
important) avoid these costs, we may be in a “now or never” situation.
Shevardnadze will be in the U.S. for about ten days beginning 
around September 23. He will be preceded by Karpov to resume the 
“working group” discussions with Reg Bartholomew. That ten-­day 
period will be critical in determining whether we get one or both trea-
ties this year. The proposed letter to Gorbachev3 is intended to increase 
the chances that Shevardnadze comes prepared and empowered to do 
business.
Baker will meet with Shevardnadze around September 26. They 
agreed in Moscow that arms control will be the major subject. Baker 
will be seeing Shevardnadze again in New York at the CSCE Foreign 
Ministers’ Conference on October 1–2. (A Shevardnadze meeting with 
the President also is likely during that week, but that should not become 
a negotiating session.) A meeting of NATO foreign ministers and/or a 
meeting at the 23 immediately prior to the October 1–2 conference to 
address CFE also is a distinct possibility.
We need to use the coming week to ensure that we too are ready. 
Because the remaining START issues are largely political, the bureau-
cracy cannot solve them and should stop trying. The new Soviet posi-
tions in CFE post fundamental questions about that negotiation that 
likewise should be addressed at your level. Accordingly, you should be 
prepared to have one or perhaps two meetings with your counterparts 
on the major remaining issues and then take them to the President for 
decision. You also will need to address whether we can agree at the 
October 1–2 CSCE Foreign Ministers’ Conference to set a November 19 
date for the CSCE summit and signing the CFE treaty. (Substantively, 
it is very hard to imagine how we could agree. Politically, it will be 
enormously difficult, but probably necessary, not to.) Recognizing the 
risks of leaks, you also may want to have an NSC meeting both to put 
a formal stamp on the process and to signal clearly—­including to the 
Soviets—­that we are fully ready for the end game.
RECOMMENDATION
That you send the memo at Tab I to the President.
3 See Document 156.
