International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 989 tions with other countries needs reexamination and does not appear consistent with actual policy or practice. (See page 300.) Further, the broad characterization of the relationship between international health and human needs while fundamentally correct does not help us go very far in relating international health to other important human needs sectors such as the provision of food, shelter, family planning services, etc. There is no acknowledgement of how these different sectors can interrelate with one another or the emphasis that should be placed on one or another in our actual programming. In the harsh world of governmental decision-making it is just these trade-offs which must be taken into consideration when budgetary decisions are made. Some policy guidance in this area seems useful but certainly is not contained in the present paper. An additional problem with this particular report is the request for additional studies such as those contemplated on pages 298–299. There are a number of other requests for reports to the President, reports to Congress, new studies, etc. It seems to me that this examination was largely meant to raise those issues, pose options and obtain decisions. I can see the usefulness of specific studies, or better specific issue papers with recommendations for action, but general calls for additional broad-gauged studies seems to me to be a waste of bureaucratic resources if they end with the same kinds of generalities and conclusions that this report presently contains. We have to be very careful about how we characterize human rights and the provision of development assistance. In some cases we will want to relate economic and social needs with human rights while in other cases the connection may not be all that evident. For example, there are many countries where political rights and social rights are comparatively upheld by the government but what with the extreme poverty there is little delivery of health and other services. We certainly would not want to get into the position of characterizing these countries for denying basic human needs or rights to their people. In some cases almost every country could be criticized including ourselves about provision of services to our poorer people. In addition, I think we need to examine the recommendations with respect to the role of DOD and specifically the flow [role?] of military programs in the health sector. The report recommends that military programs in the international health area be “significantly expanded”.9 This issue probably needs closer examination and discussion in a some- 9 An unknown hand underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with the word “military” and ending with the word “expanded.”
