1956  1001
620.	 Letter 44 from Clough to Johnson1
Letter No. 44
Washington, May 25, 1956
Dear Alex:
Walter is away for two days in Omaha and Colorado Springs 
where a group of senior Departmental officers are being briefed by the 
­Strategic Air Command and the Continental Defense Command on 
their current capabilities and problems.
We have the preliminary report on your meeting of yesterday. 
Wang’s concentration on the first paragraph of their latest draft and his 
implied threat to make it public reinforces the suspicion that the ­Chinese 
Communists are seeking to build a strong propaganda position. I have 
not yet had a chance to discuss the meeting with anyone. There will prob­
ably be a meeting on Monday to consider tactics for your next meeting.
The behaviour of the Brazilian Parliamentary delegation is very 
puzzling. We certainly understood here that they were scheduled to 
visit Communist China.
Thank you for calling our attention to the “Ta Kung Pao” procla­
mation on registration of families with students abroad. I do not know 
why this was not brought to our attention earlier by Hong Kong or 
DRF. We now have a copy of the text of the Peiping proclamation which 
I am enclosing. There are also enclosed two memoranda showing how 
the drive to gather information on Chinese in this country is devel­
oping. The attempt to utilize the American Red Cross is a particularly 
clever move. The Red Cross may wish to make some gesture toward 
providing information in order to preserve their relationship with the 
Chinese Communist Red Cross which is helpful to our prisoners but it 
would be most unfortunate if they began to supply the very names and 
addresses which we have refused, for good reasons, to give the Chinese 
Communists.
Regarding Bob Ekvall’s situation, Walter called a Mr. Zander, who 
is temporarily in Bill Godel’s place, and he agreed to take the matter 
up with G–2. We will follow up on this and hope that there will be no 
difficulty in obtaining the necessary extension of detail.
There is enclosed a memorandum giving the latest developments 
in arranging deportation of Chinese prisoners in this country. We expect 
today the final report on this from General Swing. We are awaiting with 
interest your suggestions, in response to our last guidance telegram, as 
to how the matter can best be handled to gain the greatest advantage. 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Drafted by Clough.
