586
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
cessive” dollar reserves, but it, too, raises the question of whether cen-
tral bank officials will consider these SDR claims as preferred assets.9
9 In March 1979, de Larosie`re submitted a more detailed version of this proposal to
the Interim Committee, one in which the “account would convert its assets into longer-
term dollar-denominated claims on the U.S. Treasury, which would pay a suitably
long-term interest rate on them. Interest would be paid to depositors at the official SDR
interest rate (which at the time was maintained below the market rate). The intention was
that the account’s exchange risk would be covered by the difference between the
long-term U.S. bond rate and the official SDR interest rate.” The Interim Committee, in
turn, indicated its “broad support” for active consideration of such an account.
(Boughton, Silent Revolution, p. 939)
199.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, February 8, 1979
SUBJECT
The Textile Program in the MTN
Enclosed is the final text of the Administration Textile Program
which we will discuss again this morning.2 Its acceptance on our part
will give us no less than the support of the textile industry and quali-
fied support of the key unions as we seek first the extension of the au-
thority to waive countervailing duties, and second, approval of the
MTN agreements. Support of this bloc will make both tasks signifi-
cantly easier; their opposition would be fatal. The benefits of having
them in a position of support and cooperation will extend beyond these
immediate legislative objectives, I am certain.
This industry, employing almost two and a half million people,
more than half of them women, and a large portion minorities, has been
provided with special programs of various kinds going back to the
1 Source: National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Sub-
ject Files, 1977–1979, Box 8, Textiles Two. No classification marking. An unknown person
wrote at the top of the page: “1) 1st cost—slightly infl; Presentational. 2) Ambiguities; de-
liberate = Haggling.”
2 Attached but not printed is a February 7 paper entitled “Administration Textile
Program—Pursuant to the President’s Statement of November 11, 1978.” Carter met with
Strauss and Eizenstat in the Oval Office on February 8 from 9:45 until 10:30 a.m. (Carter
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversa-
tion was found.
