1448 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. McCone said he had had long talk with Mr. Ralph Bunche. Mr. Bunche said that the Secretary General and the UN Secretariat felt responsible for the Agency and believed that its failure would be a black mark against the UN. Mr. Bunche believed, however, that the organi­ zational structure of the IAEA had the effect of drawing it away from the UN. The Board of Governors was like a little General Assembly. As a result of the political character of the Board of Governors, there was a reluctance on the part of the United Nations and specialized agencies to give the IAEA major responsibilities. For example, Hammarskjold was reluctant to see the IAEA take over responsibility for further con­ ferences on peaceful uses of atomic energy. He said there would be sim­ ilar doubts with regard to work in the field of radiation, where the UN Radiation Committee is now active. Mr. Bunche doubted that the IAEA would be given any responsibility in relation to the verification of test suspension. Mr. McCone added that each specialized agency was carrying out its own role in atomic energy matters. The IAEA did not seem to be serving the UN, whereas it should be a sort of “Atomic Energy Com­ mission” for the UN. The Secretary observed that this was not the original concept for the Agency and that the position of the Agency described by Mr. McCone was not an accident but was designed. What was sought was to create an atomic energy agency with only a tenuous connection to the UN, something like the International Bank. Mr. Breithut observed that the thought was that a direct connection with the UN might inject irrelevant political considerations into the resolution of IAEA problems. Mr. Wilcox said that of course the specialized agencies should not jump in and deprive the IAEA of its proper functions. He noted that the Secretary General had a coordinating role in this respect. Mr. McCone said that he believed that the question he had out­ lined, the relation of the IAEA to other UN bodies and its position in the UN system, would be the subject of debate in Vienna. He said that he would need guidance on this. The Secretary remarked that the IAEA did not get off to a good start. The Soviets had stalled in the establishment of the Agency. He recalled his own negotiations with Molotov, who had been evasive and difficult over a long period. The negotiations had in fact taken from 1953 to 1957. Meanwhile, things had not been standing still. There had been bilateral atomic arrangements. EURATOM was conceived. The Geneva conferences were organized. The question was how the IAEA could get back into its hands various matters that it would have under­ taken if it had been created earlier. The IAEA, for example, should be organizing the peaceful uses conferences held at Geneva. The Secretary
