416 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 123. Memorandum of Conversation1 New York, November 2, 1978, 10 a.m.–12:30 p.m. PARTICIPANTS ISRAELI SIDE Menachem Begin, Prime Minister Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister Ezer Weizman, Defense Minister Aharaon Barak, Justice, Israeli Supreme Court Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Simcha Dinitz, Israeli Ambassador to the United States Yehuda Avner, Secretary to the Prime Minister Reuven Hecht, Advisor to the Prime Minister General Avraham Tamir, Chief of Military Planning General Ephrain Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister Nahil Kadeshai, Advisor to the Prime Minister AMERICAN SIDE Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary, NEA SUBJECT Meeting Between Prime Minister Begin and Secretary Vance: Egyptian-Israeli Negotiations, Bilateral U.S.-Israeli Issues The Prime Minister opened by suggesting that the agenda for the meeting should cover the treaty negotiations including the proposed exchange of letters on what happens with respect to the West Bank and Gaza after the treaty is in force, and U.S.-Israeli bilateral issues. Turning first to the proposed exchange of letters, the Prime Minister said he would have amendments to suggest. First, however, he wanted to make the following point: the situation now was different from Camp David. Then as Prime Minister he was empowered to take decisions. Now everything was ad referendum and must be decided by his Government. As Prime Minister, he had no powers to decide issues. What emerged from this meeting would be referred to the Cabinet Sunday2 and Acting Prime Minister Yadin would conduct the Cabinet meeting in his absence. The Secretary said that he had authority to take decisions on some issues while others would be ad referendum to President Carter. 1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, NEA Front Office Subject File 1978–1984, Lot 85D251, Box 3, 1978 Memcons—Secretary. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took place in Begin’s suite at the Regency Plaza Hotel. 2 November 5.
