58  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
ETA–20.	
Memorandum Prepared for the President1

Washington, March 5, 1959.
FINAL PROPOSAL BY THE UNITED STATES WITH  
RESPECT TO THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT  
BANKING INSTITUTION
A Specialized Committee of Government Representatives has 
been negotiating since January 8, 1959 on a U.S. proposal for an Inter-
American Development Banking Institution. A large part of the draft 
charter has been completed, but a number of major issues are outstand-
ing. It is important from the U.S. viewpoint that the negotiation be com-
pleted during the next two or three weeks.
The key problem in this situation is the position of Brazil regarding 
the size of the capital of the new institution.
The original U.S. proposal called for total initial resources of $850 
million, with the U.S. subscribing $400 million. This consisted of $700 
million for ordinary loans and $150 million for “soft loans.” Three hun-
dred million dollars of the total was not to be paid in but was similar 
to the callable capital of the International Bank, and would in effect 
constitute a guarantee fund against which the Bank could borrow in the 
money market. Provision was made for appropriate installment pay-
ments of paid-­in capital, and for a moderate part of each paid-­in capital 
subscription to be accepted in the form of national currencies, the rest 
being payable in gold and dollars.
The Brazilian representative initially proposed a total capital of $5 
billion and later suggested bilaterally to the U.S. an initial capital of $2 
billion for ordinary loans, plus a special fund for “soft” loans, to which 
contributions in unspecified amounts would be made in national cur-
rencies. He has also called for a review of the capital structure at the end 
of three years to provide for increases to this total.
While most of the other Delegations have been prepared to accept 
the view that it is important to establish the organization rather than 
to insist upon a very large initial capital, it is evident that these other 
Delegations are extremely reluctant to proceed much further until they 
are satisfied that every effort has been made to reconcile the positions 
of the U.S. and Brazil, especially with regard to the capital of the institu-
tion. At the same time, there is a general feeling among the Delegations, 
which the U.S. Delegation shares, that a strenuous effort should be 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Official Use Only. 
The source text bears the following hand-­written notation by President Eisenhower: 
“Approved in principle, 5 Mar 59.”
