First Responses 127 50. Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated THE U.S. STAKE IN IRAN I. Introduction The purpose of this paper is to analyze the U.S. stake in Iran from a broader perspective than that of our present concern with the hostages. In effect, it attempts to leap across the morass of negotiating tactics and turbulent Tehran politics to the situation a year hence, however the hostage situation is resolved. Its approach is: first, to define critical U.S. national interests in Iran as they now appear; second, to identify the range of possible Irans of, say, 1981; and third, to analyze each of these in terms of U.S. interests. II. Assumptions A. Khomeini’s attempt to rule a semi-developed state of the late twentieth century by the standards of a tenth century theocracy will ultimately fail. B. If there were ever any possibility of the U.S. doing business with the present regime, it has been destroyed in the past few weeks. C. The Soviet Union’s primary national goals are to strengthen itself and to weaken the U.S. It will exploit any opportunity open to it in the pursuit of these goals, restrained only by its calculations of risk. It is not in the interest of the United States to become, or to be perceived as becoming, weaker than the USSR. III. U.S. National Interests 1. U.S. national interests in Iran are many and complex, but events of the past two years have served to clarify in the starkest way which 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81M00919R: Executive Registry Subject Files (1976–1979), Box 14, Folder 11: C– 372 Iran. Secret. Drafted by Richard Lehman. Sent under a November 22 covering memorandum from Turner to Carter, Mondale, Vance, Brown, and Brzezinski, and distributed at the November 22 SCC meeting (see Document 47). In a November 23 memorandum, Brzezinski recommended that Carter scan this paper and an attached companion paper prepared by Waller. Brzezinski suggested “we should take advantage of the first opportunity to begin organizing a series of actions which make it less likely that the less attractive alternatives” Lehman outlined would come to pass. He suggested that Carter raise the issue at the next NSC meeting “especially because I have encountered real reluctance (notably from State) to reach any specific recommendations regarding covert activity within the SCC.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brezezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 11/21/79–11/27/79)
