908 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX change Res. 242 and 338 in ways “incompatible with their original purpose.” The Israelis would no doubt claim, in addition to their other criticisms of a Palestinians rights resolution, that a new text treating the Palestinian issue as other than a refugee problem would be incompatible with the original purpose of 242—and therefore “changed”—even though the GOI committed itself to a much broader interpretation at Camp David. 7. The GOI and U.S. commitments on the PLO. The Israelis recognize that the immediate purpose of a new Palestinian rights resolution is to clear the way for the initiation of a direct U.S.–PLO dialogue. The GOI would without doubt view PLO acceptance of a Palestinian rights resolution, even if it included within it references to Res. 242 and 338, as insufficient to meet the U.S. commitment under the 1975 memorandum of understanding.8 The Israelis would call “foul”, assert that these two Resolutions stand on their own, and reject our acceptance of this “package deal” instead of explicit and unencumbered PLO acceptance of Res. 242 and 338 and Israel’s right to exist. 8. A “maximal” resolution. Israeli reaction to failure of the U.S. to veto any Palestinian rights resolution will be strident, but U.S. acceptance (even by abstention in a SC veto) of a “maximal” resolution (one postulating Palestinian national rights) would probably elicit sharp retaliatory measures and touch off a major crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations. There is not a paragraph in either the preambular or operative parts of the present draft text in reftel which does not contain language the Israelis will find unacceptable. The worst in Israeli eyes is, of course, operative para. 1, which “affirms that the Palestinian people should be enabled to exercise its inalienable national rights of self-determination, including the right to establish an independent state in Palestine.” Even if the explicit reference to a Palestinian state were dropped, any text using such euphemisms as “right to political independence” or even “self-determination” would be totally unacceptable. Failure of the U.S. to veto such a resolution would be considered by the Israelis as an outright violation of our 1975 commitment. It would also be seen as a negation of the Camp David Accords, in that it prejudged the outcome of the autonomy and final-status negotiations, and would be cited as proof of the dishonesty of President Carter’s statement that the U.S. did not favor a Palestinian state. 9. The Cabinet, with or without Begin, would react violently and punitively. It is important to remember that there are those in the Cabinet who are seeking to transform current GOI positions in a number of areas into “red lines.” Within the range of possible Israeli responses are the following kinds of retaliatory actions: 8 See footnote 7 above.
