762  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
It is my opinion that there should be no change in our present policy 
of extending financial assistance to the Haitian Government in the hope 
of avoiding the chaos which would inevitably ensue if the Government of 
President Duvalier were violently overthrown. It is believed that none of 
the principal opponents of Dr. Duvalier could either hold office or work 
together for more than a brief period, if at all, following his downfall. 
Furthermore, in such an event, it is believed that there would inevitably fol-
low a period of chaos and widespread disorders before some semblance of 
a stable Government could be installed. It can also be speculated that such 
conditions might lead to some form of intervention from the neighboring 
Dominican Republic, and possibly other countries in the Caribbean area. It 
would be superfluous to point out that any such developments would be 
contrary to our objectives in Haiti and the hemisphere as a whole.
Given this assumption, it is obvious that the only alternative to such 
developments is to continue to extend aid to the present Government of 
Haiti. The first concrete announcement of the recent decision to extend 
budgetary support in the amount of $6 million, which appeared in 
the New York Times of February 28, and was subsequently announced 
by President Duvalier in his speech at Cape Haitian on March 6, has 
already strengthened him both at home and abroad. While I believe 
it is much too early to predict that even if wisely used this aid will 
enable him to last out the remaining 4 ½ years of office, it does appear 
to have confounded his political opponents both within and without 
the country and to have given him a new feeling of confidence. In 
effect, Dr. Duvalier apparently feels that this aid represents the seal of 
approval on his Administration by the American Government. It can 
only be hoped that he will make good the promises contained in his 
March 6 speech of embarking on an era of conciliation. Such efforts on 
his part in many directions will come much too late. It is not believed 
that anything he could do would ever win the collaboration of either 
Déjoie, who has been ruined economically and was for a time under 
sentence of death with a price on his head, or Fignolé, many of whose 
followers have been persecuted, or Clément Jumelle, who is still in hid-
ing and two of whose brothers were shot down by Duvalierist police.
To what extent our aid has discouraged revolutionary plotting by 
his opponents abroad cannot be assessed by the Embassy, but based 
on the reaction internally it is not unlikely that they have at least been 
discouraged.
Conversely, were we now to withhold aid from Duvalier during the 
present period of crisis, it would in a sense constitute negative interven-
tion just as much as if we were to intervene in a positive manner to over-
throw his Government through extending aid and comfort to his enemies.
Still a further consideration of great importance in assessing our 
policy toward the Duvalier Administration is the effect which devel-
opments here involving the relations between the two countries would
