Chile 265 Castro’s arrival, as whatever invitations had been issued to the Cubans had come purely from individuals representing opposition political groups and the Cubans themselves had never even visited the Chilean Embassy in Habana to learn whether the visit would be acceptable to the Government. In sum, the President thought the Cubans had lost a great deal of prestige by the manner in which they had behaved and had only succeeded in making themselves ridiculous. The Secretary again complimented the President on the way in which the Chilean Government had handled this potentially difficult situation, which was strictly in accord with Chilean laws and regulations and to which nobody could have valid objection. The President then continued that his government was grateful for the financial assistance received from the United States through the series of credits which were recently approved and emphasized that the present administration was a responsible one, seriously concerned with putting Chile’s financial house in order and establishing its economy on a firm basis for growth. Here Mr. Rubottom mentioned the general respect in which the present Government of Chile was held in the United States and added that he ventured to feel that Chile was not alone in showing this sense of financial responsibility, mentioning specifically the efforts being made by President Frondizi to improve the situation in Argentina, and the program just now being developed by Sr. Beltrán, the new Prime Minister and Minister of Finance of Peru. The President agreed that these developments were all encouraging and mentioned that Sr. Beltrán had been following closely for the past eight months the development of the program in Chile and had indicated that it would have a strong influence on his own plans for Peru. The President went on to say that he felt that the International Monetary Fund needed to show more flexibility in dealing with the problems of the underdeveloped countries of Latin America. He emphasized that, while Chile was perfectly satisfied with the treatment it had received, in his opinion it was not necessarily sound policy to apply the same type of rules which might be applicable to the highly developed countries of Western Europe to the nations of Latin America, and that, unfortunately, this alleged rigidity of the IMF often resulted in the United States bearing the brunt of the criticism. The Secretary then pointed out that, as the President knew, the United States did not control the IMF but that we felt it was important to work through and in close consultation with it and the other international lending agencies. The President replied that he of course did realize that the IMF was an international and not a United States agency, but, nevertheless, the fact remained that the United States was often blamed for policies which, in his opinion, were frequently too inflexible. He then went on to say
