National Security Policy 517 this respect, though it is likely that material support will be rendered through Egypt rather than directly. 229. Western Europe. Post-Stalin Soviet policy toward Western Europe appears to be strategically defensive in character, aimed more at protecting the USSR’s position in Eastern Europe than at expanding Soviet influence beyond its present frontiers. Though the USSR obvi­ ously does not intend to neglect Western Europe, it probably considers that its opportunities for maneuver are limited at present, and is con­ centrating its efforts on more vulnerable areas. 230. The chief Soviet objective in Western Europe is to weaken and divide the NATO powers, and above all to induce a withdrawal of US military strength. Soviet disarmament policy and its attendant propaganda is directed largely at this target. The USSR will also con­ tinue to promote the concept of a detente in Western Europe, via some form of European security treaty which would replace both NATO and the Warsaw Pact. Indeed the USSR probably expects simply through its policy of “peaceful co-­existence” and relaxed tensions to secure a reduction in NATO unity and arms outlays. Special attention will also be paid to exploiting differences among the NATO powers as well as weaknesses in individual countries. 231. We believe that the USSR will remain adamant on German reunification despite its recognition that its immovable stand on this issue limits its maneuverability in Western Europe. In our view the Soviet leaders are still acutely concerned over the potential threat of a revived and nationalistic Germany, backed by the US in seeking the recovery of its eastern territories. In Soviet eyes the continued division of Germany, with the USSR holding 18,000,000 East Germans as hos­ tages, is the best means of limiting this threat. The Soviets are highly unlikely to believe that any formula for reunification will offer adequate guarantees against a reunified Germany’s tacit or open alliance with the West. In addition, besides East Germany’s military value to them, they are probably fearful of the impact that loss of their East German satellite would have on their position elsewhere in Eastern Europe. 232. Latin America. This area has also been the target of Bloc diplo­ matic, economic, and cultural activity in an attempt to promote trade and other contacts and encourage friction with the US. Further efforts in this direction are likely, as well as continued local Communist Party and front group activity to promote anti-US sentiments and to obstruct Latin American cooperation with the US.
