Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
297
• We must protect American investment overseas and insure con-
tinuing access to vital raw materials.
• We must be strongly competitive economically so that American
families can continue to enjoy their standard of living.
• We must maintain our close relations with our allies, while we
seek at the same time improved contacts with our main competitor, the
Soviet Union, and with the nonaligned nations.
All of this, and more, can be pursued—as we pursue our national
interest—while still expressing the deeper ideals and aspirations that
have led us to our remarkable economic and social progress here at
home.
Our strength lies not only in our ideals but in the practical way we
identify problems and work systematically toward their solution. We
do the best when we are true to ourselves.
That is why America was at her best in the Marshall plan, why we
have felt at home with Food for Peace and the Peace Corps. That is why
I find such broad public support for President Carter’s emphasis upon
human rights—including not only rights to the integrity of the person
and political rights but the rights to food, clothing, shelter, housing,
health, and education.
That is why, with all its difficulties, we have embarked on a course
of diplomacy in the Middle East which may help bring peace to the
people of that region.
That is why we are trying to help bring solutions—not our solu-
tions but solutions through free elections—in Rhodesia and in Nambia
so that people there will have their chance for human emancipation
and development.
That is why we seek arms control arrangements through negotia-
tions and have adopted a conscious policy of restraint on conventional
arms transfers.
That is why we took tangible first steps in 1977 toward other goals,
as well: to stop further nuclear proliferation; to reach agreements on the
control of strategic weapons, agreements that will enhance the security
of our nation and all the world; to reach agreement with our Western
industrial partners on policies leading to economic revival and growth;
to reaffirm our commitment to normalization of relations with the
People’s Republic of China; to reduce military competition in the In-
dian Ocean; to emphasize our support for racial equality and full polit-
ical participation of all the people of South Africa.
The Carter Administration in 1977 made a conscious and delib-
erate effort to construct a foreign policy based upon American interests
and upon American values and ideals.
