First Responses 81 would entail having people in the city providing hard intelligence, developing safe havens in advance, arranging for guides, transportation, communications, and general support. Some progress is being made in developing this capability and personnel involved believe much can be done but some time will be required to reach the desired level of effectiveness. Insertion concept is to have two MC–130 “Combat Talon” aircraft (specially equipped C–130 aircraft and crews trained for blackout night operations at low altitude over hostile territory) take off from a country in area (planning now from Aswan, Egypt) and airdrop or assault land Delta personnel in outskirts of Tehran to be met by personnel in-country, transported to safe havens, and spend approximately 24 hours reconnoitering and preparing for assault the following night.2 If successful in freeing hostages, force will then move to transportation (such as garbage trucks which are reportedly a common sight during the night). Departure would be to the north and west (into area of city with best roads and fewest people) to designated departure airstrip (e.g., blocked off road or flat open field) for MC– 130 aircraft pick up. Aircraft will make an assault landing, quickly load passengers and depart for third country. Personnel and Aircraft Preparatory Movements: Air refuelable MC–130s are required, and because of their limited number would have to be drawn from Florida and Okinawa. The aircraft from Florida would go through Europe to Egypt and aircraft from Okinawa through Diego Garcia. Personnel from Delta would be transported to Europe via C–141 aircraft and transferred to MC–130s in forward area for onward movement to Aswan. Actions Required for Implementation: —Delta personnel must assemble in isolation, plan, rehearse and make final preparation. Thirty-six Delta personnel have been isolated and are in training, preparation and rehearsal. A scale model of the compound has been provided to assist with familiarization and planning. The number of Delta personnel in isolation is being increased gradually and carefully to reduce potential for compromise. —Detailed planning will continue by Delta personnel [less than 1 line not declassified] until departure. Planning with limited, essential interagency interface will continue in Washington. MC–130 crews will have to be alerted to begin their specific planning and rehearsal for the mission. Some limited face-to-face coordination and planning 2 In the left margin, Jones wrote: “May be possible to do operation in one night if we can get some Delta people in a day or two in advance—time consuming to arrange. We are working on it. DJ.”
