556 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII —continued freeze on scientific and cultural exchanges except for routine academic exchanges and other low-level exchanges on a caseby-case basis; —stop further moves with China, especially in military-related fields; —informal explorations on getting the Soviets out of Afghanistan and also on starting up arms control talks, using me and Dobrynin for smoking out the possibilities and possibly by sending an unofficial interlocutor such as Averell Harriman. End summary. 3. I am deeply conscious of the seriousness of the present crisis in U.S.-Soviet relations. My staff and I are continuing to review our assessments and recommendations to be sure that we give you our best advice, both as to Soviet motivations and tactics and as to U.S. actions. 4. We continue to think that Moscow miscalculated the consequences when it went into Afghanistan, but are now inclined to think the miscalculation was more acute with regard to the rest of the world than to the U.S. They probably expected, and possibly intended, a worsening of relations with the U.S., though not of the breadth and depth that materialized. Perhaps the operation in Kabul was botched, and they had expected a smoother change of regime followed by a call for Soviet support, under circumstances in which world reaction would have been narrower and the U.S. could have been more easily depicted as an excitable anti-Soviet warmonger. The line now being purveyed, both privately (including by Gromyko) and publicly—that even before Afghanistan the U.S. had deliberately worsened relations with the USSR—indicates an intent to blacken us before the rest of the world and to undermine our policy at home. 5. The Soviet leaders may actually have convinced themselves that the Carter administration is out to do them in. Their restraint at Vienna—their refusal to go much beyond the signature of SALT, to resolve the Jackson-Vanik problem,3 or to take other steps—signalled their reservations. Their paranoia about China may have been one reason for their mulish attitude throughout 1979. (I have recently read Brezhnev’s letter to the President in December 1978 warning against the arming by the West “of a neighboring country which pursues an openly hostile policy toward us . . . we must do what we consider necessary . . . due attention to our defense,” and asserting we were at a crossroads, one turning of which threatened “confrontation and increased threat of war.”) The standard litany of charges against us 3 The Jackson-Vanik amendment to the Trade Act of 1974 required the relaxation of Soviet emigration restrictions before most-favored-nation status for the Soviet Union would be considered.
