723.2515/1585: Telegram
[Document 215]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, August 14, 1925—11 a.m.
[Received 12:20 a.m.]
From Pershing: Referring to Department’s cable of August 11, 3 p.m., to American
consul.
1. The restrictions to which the Department referred are embodied in two decrees, one
of July 31, the other of August 4. The first decree (1) regulates travel between the cities
of Arica and Tacna, restricting it to the railway and the main highway; (2) regulates
travel within the Department of Nini, confining it to specified roads; (3) regulates
travel to Arica harbor, and [from?] Bolivia, and access to vessels in the harbor; and (4)
provides for further regulations by the Government of Arica. The second decree
regulates in greater detail travel within the Province of Arica; in substance, it requires
inhabitants of rural districts to travel to Arica along the main public road after having
obtained permits which are visaed by the police at certain points en route and are taken
up at the end of the journey, thus suspending direct transit from one rural community to
another. The regulations apply to everyone, but members of delegations are provided
with universal circulation cards. The confidential explanation of the Chilean
Commissioner is that the restrictions embodied in the decrees are necessary to protect
persons and rural property in view of the floating population which the coming
plebiscite will bring into the province, but he denies any attempt to control the
plebiscite. In my opinion the restrictions are unnecessary and are calculated to make a
free and fair election impossible. I have taken up the restrictions informally with the
Chilean Commissioner, and unless the matter is adjusted satisfactorily it will be
brought before the Commission for action.
The Ordoñez incident was regrettable but not important. Señor Ordoñez,49 after having
landed once and proceeded to Tacna, returned to the Peruvian transport and then
attempted to land again without the circulation card which had been furnished him, and
at the pier he was turned back by the police. As soon as the matter came to the attention
of the Chilean Commissioner full written apologies were made. Señor Ordoñez has
since returned to Tacna, and I regard incident as closed.
