Venezuela  1209
for the well being and the interests of its trading partners as has the 
United States; (6) the United States, in its dealings with Venezuela, has 
shown just as much consideration for the Venezuelan oil industry as it 
has shown for its own; (7) he hoped that the Government of Venezuela 
would recognize the extent to which the United States has defended 
the Venezuelan oil industry, in the face of very strong efforts to restrict 
imports to a far greater degree than they are presently being restricted 
under the voluntary plan, and that it would interpret and explain this 
action on our part to the Venezuelan people; (8) only 25 years ago the 
world saw the United States enact the Smoot-Hawley Tariff, and later 
withdraw from the London Economic Conference, to its own detri-
ment and that of the rest of the world; (9) this government is now scru-
pulously avoiding that kind of action and is, in fact, doing everything 
possible to consider the economic interests of its allies, although obvi-
ously, in a time of economic recession, all nations must share a part 
of the burden. The Secretary told the Minister that the actions taken 
by this Government on March 25 were designed simply to equalize 
the burden between the foreign producers of oil and that imposed on 
United States producers.
The Secretary declared that he simply could not approve any state-
ment that would suggest that the United States would take no further 
steps to restrict petroleum imports. He underlined his hope that this 
would be the case, and stressed that all of the American people were 
working hard to bring an end to the economic recession and that we 
now hoped that the upturn was about here. Nevertheless, he was in no 
position to make the kind of commitment for the future requested by 
Dr. Perez de la Cova.
The Secretary said that he was not acquainted with the techni-
cal question raised by the Minister in regard to the U.S.-Venezuelan 
Trade Agreement, but was sure that there were officials in the 
Department who could take up this matter with him. Dr. Perez 
de la Cova recalled that Mr. Rubottom had been head of the U.S. 
negotiating team in 1952 when the Treaty had been consummated. 
It was agreed that the Minister would discuss this question with 
Mr. Rubottom and those officers in the Department responsible for 
economic affairs.3
3 The points made here by Dr. Perez de la Cova regarding the petroleum issue were 
reported in a conversation he had with Douglas Dillon, the Deputy Under Secretary of 
State for Economic Affairs, on June 6. That conversation was recorded in a memorandum 
drafted by Bernbaum on June 9, not printed. (411.316/6–658)
