316  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
attribution approach, especially the high discount we have attached. 
Instead, they have proposed assigning ALCM-­carriers the number of 
ALCMs for which they are physically equipped to carry and not allow-
ing them to carry any more.
Originally, the Soviet “as equipped” rule would have counted 
bombers at the maximum number of ALCMs they were designed to 
carry. Last round the Soviets said they would count only the number 
for which a bomber was currently configured, even if it was less than 
maximum capacity. Under this “actually equipped” approach a B–52 
G now equipped to carry 12 ALCMs on its wings could be physically 
modified to carry fewer and would then be counted with the lower 
number (with inspections to ensure that the bomber was not equipped 
to carry more than that number).
We have opposed the Soviet “as equipped” approach, both because 
it provides no discount for U.S. ALCMS and because it would involve 
the difficult verification task of determining the number of ALCMs for 
which various types of Soviet bombers were actually equipped—­a task 
that would be difficult even with intrusive inspections.
Finding a solution. A primary consideration in finding a solution 
will be to maximize the number of ALCMs and ALCM bombers we 
would be able to deploy. We will thus presumably favor some form 
of discounting. Indeed, discounting ALCMs could become even more 
important if the B–2 program were reduced. Given uncertainties over 
the B–2, OSD may not wish to deal with ALCMs at all in Wyoming, 
or may wish to propose an even greater discount than in our current 
position (e.g., move back to attributing all bombers with 6 rather than 
10). Somewhat ironically, the Air Force has been interested in an “as 
equipped” approach similar to that proposed by the Soviets even 
though it would mean fewer ALCMs. (The motive is unclear, but 
many speculate that having fewer ALCMs would put pressure on the 
Congress to fund the penetrating B–2).
The Range Issue
U.S. position. The U.S. has called for limiting nuclear-­armed 
ALCMs over 1500 km in range. This position protects conventionally-­
armed ALCMs from limitations in START, and allows the U.S. to deploy 
nuclear-­armed ALCMs with ranges below 1500 km without counting 
them in the 6000 warhead limit.
At the Moscow Summit, the Soviets agreed that future 
conventionally-­armed ALCMs would be exempt from START limits if 
they were distinguishable from nuclear ALCMs. Although we still dis-
agree over the specific criteria for distinguishability, the agreement at 
Moscow has basically eliminated part of the justification for sticking to 
a high range threshold.
