928
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
3. Situation:
This project was originally approved at a time when Iran was
facing a severe economic crisis, was plagued by pressure from foreign
nations, and was evidencing to an increasing degree alarming symp-
toms of insecurity and instability.
At this time CIA was presented with the opportunity of under-
taking a large-scale propaganda warfare/political action program, [2½
lines not declassified]. From the approval date of the project on 11 August
1951 until August 1953, the major portion of the PP work in Iran was
carried out [1½ lines not declassified] in the following general fields:
a) subsidizing publication media; b) producing and distributing propa-
ganda material; and c) influencing religious leaders, Majlis deputies,
Senators, and other government officials. Their primary target was the
Tudeh Party, the Communist party of Iran.
Although the immediacy of the threat of a communist takeover in
Iran has been reduced since the inception of this project, the task of de-
feating Communism within Iran is by no means accomplished. The
membership of the Tudeh Party may have declined slightly in the past
year, and the party is no longer free to operate openly and without re-
straint. However, the hard core of the party remains intact, and despite
its losses the Tudeh Party must still be considered the best organized
and most effective communist force in the Near East. Tudeh control of
the Iranian government would greatly strengthen communist capabil-
ities in neighboring countries and threaten the position of the western
powers throughout the area.
In contrast with the opportunities of 1951, CIA is now in a much
better strategic position, has gained the services of many additional
agents and assets, and most important, has established a close relation-
ship with the Shah and the present government. The fall of the Mos-
sadeq government in August 1953 and the installation of the Zahedi re-
gime created a situation containing greatly broadened potentialities for
effective action against the Tudeh Party and in the interest of political
stability. The Shah and the Prime Minister, cognizant of the need for
assistance in their effort to capitalize on the present situation, have be-
come willing collaborators with CIA.
[1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified]
In addition to support for the Department of Press and Propa-
ganda the [5 lines not declassified].
[1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]
The problem facing the Iranian government and CIA is the sup-
pression of the Tudeh Party and the establishment of a strong, popular,
progressive government, one that is in harmony with the throne, which
serves as the strongest factor of stability in the political scene.
