858 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII of the border. (See [less than 1 line not declassified] for a previous report on the Soviet attack.)4 4. ACQ: [1 line not declassified] 5. [less than 1 line not declassified] Dissem: [6 lines not declassified] 4 Not found. An article in the National Intelligence Daily, September 27, characterized the incident as the “most serious” on the Pakistan-Afghanistan border since the Soviet intervention. The article also included information from [text not declassified] who claimed the attack was undertaken by six Soviet-built MI–24 helicopters, which inflicted “several casualties.” Anti-aircraft fire downed one of the helicopters, which landed in Afghan territory. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, NIDs) In telegram 9982 from Islamabad, September 28, the Embassy relayed comments from a senior official in Pakistan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs casting doubt on the possibility that Afghanistan had a sufficient number of pilots to carry out the attack and indicating that, whether the pilots were Soviet or Afghan, the official had “no doubt” the attack was intentional. (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 1, Cross-Border Operations— Pakistan) A report, September 29, noted that evidence based on sensitive communications intelligence “strongly suggested” that the attack was undertaken by Soviet pilots. (Ibid.) A CIA intelligence information cable, September 27, was attached to a memorandum from Thornton to Brzezinski, September 30, which responded to a tasking order to determine the Pakistani reaction to the helicopter attack. Thornton noted that Pakistan was taking the incident “in stride” and was “pleased that they shot down a Soviet gunship.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meetings File, Box 86, Sensitive XX: 9/80)
