893.01/132: Telegram
[Document 390]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 11, 1924—9 a.m.
[Received 9:55 a.m.]
439. 1. Your 272, November 6, 6 p.m. At diplomatic body meeting
November 5th French in concert Belgian Chargé d’Affaires proposed that,
first, all Chiefs of Mission should at their initial call upon new Minister for
Foreign Affairs make reserves in respect of new regime, bringing to Dr.
Wang’s notice that despite solemn promises the recent administrations in
China had not kept faith or carried out treaties, agreements, etc.; and that,
secondly, the powers concerned should obtain some form of guarantee that
China would observe her treaties and agreements before recognizing the
new President when elected.
2. Italian Minister concurred but several others dissented especially
regarding any making of reserves at first call on Dr. Wang. I stated I would
not feel authorized to do so without instructions from my Government and
British Minister spoke to same effect. Matter of reserves dropped but agreed
that representatives should communicate with respective Governments in
regard to advisability of demanding guarantees in the event of election of
new President. Several ministers stated that they considered present
situation merely as a Cabinet change and not therefore raising the question
of recognition, etc. This has been exactly my opinion. I have not believed
that entering into relations with Dr. Wang amounted to anything more than
carrying on with a new Minister for Foreign Affairs. I felt that this demand
by French and Belgian Chargés in which Italian Minister concurred was
possibly primarily a bid for the diplomatic body’s support in gold franc
case.40 I have reason to believe several other ministers of same opinion.
3. The present administration is of course not strictly constitutional since it
fails to fulfill the requirements that a new Premier be nominated by
President and approved by Parliament. The appointment of an Acting
