Articles 6 to 8 of these regulations set forth the committee method of
handling the business of the conference. The business of the last conference
was greatly facilitated by a steering committee made up of the President of
the Conference and the Chairman of each delegation with special powers
over the calling of plenary sessions, program and general supervisory
control. It is hoped a similar procedure may be followed in this conference.
ARTICLE I
PAN AMERICAN UNION
Topic 1. Organization of the Pan American Union on the basis of a
Convention prepared by the Governing Board of the Pan American Union,
in accordance with the Resolution adopted by the Fifth International
Conference of American States on May 1, 1923.
The Fifth Conference resolved to recommend to the Governments of the
Republics of America the study of a project for the organization of the Pan
American Union, in order that the Governing Board of the Pan American
Union might present a draft of a Resolution or Convention to the Sixth
Conference. In accordance with this resolution the Governing Board of the
Pan American Union has prepared (consult pages 27 to 31 of the Special
Handbook) a Project of Convention organizing the Pan American Union,
which will be submitted to the Sixth Conference.
In general it may be said that the United States Government approves of
this Convention. However, certain of its provisions show a tendency to
accord very broad powers to the Pan American Union and to invest it with a
political character which might be considered beyond the scope of such an
organization, or are otherwise undesirable. In this connection, your attention
is directed to Articles III, VI, XIV, XV, and XVI.
It is desired that you shall suggest the modification of the second clause of
Article III of the project of the Convention for the organization of the Pan
American Union to read as follows:
“A Director General, who shall have charge of the administration
of the Pan American Union, with power to promote its most
ample development, in accordance with the terms of this
