Eastern Europe Region
11
5.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
RP 77–10060
Washington, April 1, 1977
DISSIDENT ACTIVITY IN EAST EUROPE: AN OVERVIEW2
To those who think history unfolds in cyclical patterns, the recent events
in Eastern Europe have an ineluctable logic. Twenty years ago or so it was
the street upheavals in East Germany, the Poznan riots in Poland, and the
Hungarian revolution. A decade later it was the “Prague Spring” and then
the food riots in Polish coastal cities. And now, there is again very serious
trouble in Poland and a recrudescence of unrest and dissident activity in
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Yugoslavia and, to a lesser extent, Hungary
and Romania.
The underlying causes remain essentially unchanged:
—All of the regimes in Eastern Europe are, to varying degrees, repressive
and do not command the loyalty of their people.
—The geopolitical ties to the USSR are at war with strong nationalist
sentiment and the emotional and cultural pull of the West.
—The economic performance of the regimes is deficient.
But there are new elements contributing to the current problems in
Eastern Europe. Foremost among them is the USSR’s detente policy. It has:
—Promoted and therefore made legitimate the idea of increased inter-
changes with the West.
—Resulted in a series of agreements, notably those involving increased
contacts between the two Germanies and the Helsinki accord that reduced
the isolation of the East European people (particularly its elites) and raised
expectations of more to come.
—Fostered an atmosphere that has made it more difficult for the regimes
to deal with their internal control problems in authoritarian ways abhorrent
to Western sensibilities.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job
78T02549A, PPG Production Case Files, Box 3, Folder 15, RP–77–10060: Dissident Activity
in East Europe: An Overview. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. The report was
prepared in the Office of Regional and Political Analysis.
2 In a June 16 memorandum, Brzezinski forwarded parts of the report to President
Carter. Brzezinski noted that, “given the timeliness of this topic” he thought Carter
would be interested in excerpts from the report. He underlined the paragraphs referring
to each Eastern European country in part and noted the country in the margin. Carter
initialed the covering memorandum indicating he saw it. (Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 22, Europe: 1/77–12/78)
