980 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement in spite of the advantages such opposition might confer on a Bloc aggressor.12,13 86. US Economic Policy. Finally, US economic policy should be singled out as a second crucial area affecting US prestige and influ­ ence. In international trade and aid, US response to its balance of pay­ ments problem will be closely watched. Any drastic US reduction of aid without some compensating action would weaken US influence in the underdeveloped areas, while extensive US protectionist measures would certainly set off a wave of countermeasures. Basically, however much the capacity of other Western nations grows, the Free World will still look to the US for leadership in the problem of channeling Western aid to the “have-­not” nations and in the freeing and encouraging of international trade, and will be intensely concerned with the economic policies, both domestic and foreign, adopted by the US. 12 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not concur in the judgments voiced in the latter portions of this paragraph. He would end the paragraph at the word “consequence” in the second sentence and delete all that follows. Such deletion would eliminate several broad judgments which do not lend themselves to precise interpre­ tation. In particular, the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, disagrees with the judgment that “world opinion” would necessarily be against the use, or threat of use, of US nuclear weapons. The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, holds the view that our major allies, at least, will formulate their opinions and make their decisions at the time of aggression and on the basis of the issues then involved. Moreover, there appears to be no present evidence to support the implication that the Free World in general, or the major US allies in particular, would capitulate to the Bloc rather than indorse the use of nuclear weapons. [Footnote is in the original.] 13 The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, does not concur with this paragraph as written. He believes the paragraph should be rewritten as follows: “At the same time, despite the acceptance of reliance on nuclear weapons for basic deterrent purposes, the world is generally in ignorance of the spectrum of weapon yields and delivery accuracies available. As a result, no mental image other than that of a high-­yield bomb detonating over a city is commonly evoked by the word ‘nuclear.’ This factor, intensified by Com­ munist propaganda, has created worldwide sentiment against the use of nuclear weapons, particularly in limited conflicts. We believe that our major allies will almost certainly con­ tinue to support the use of Western (essentially US) nuclear weapons in situations of clearly major consequence. But in situations not clearly of major consequence, US use or threat of nuclear weapons would probably result in a wide variation of public and official reac­ tions among the non-Communist nations. Thus there would probably be: a. Strong protests from peoples and governments with no significant issues at stake. b. Considerable and vociferous unofficial public opposition from those nations with signif­ icant issues at stake. c. Some opposition and only reluctant acceptance by the governments—including major US allies—of those nations with significant issues at stake. The degree of concern of these govern­ ments would depend or the seriousness of the issue to them, their understanding of the military requirement for use of nuclear weapons, their confidence in US ability for discrete usage of nuclear weapons, and their view of the feasibility of alternate solutions.” [Footnote is in the original.]
