3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
446
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
our own delegation, however, differed on whether we gave too much
emphasis to Basket III at the expense of the others.
Dr. Shulman stated that we wanted to encourage the Soviets to
keep the numbers of Soviet Jews being allowed to emigrate going up.
What, he asked, could the U.S. Jewish Community do or suggest to
keep those numbers rising? Gold responded that he did not think there
was much more the U.S. Jewish community could do than it was al-
ready doing. The Secretary agreed with Gold that little more could be
expected from the U.S. Jewish community by way of action on this
issue.
Hellman asked whether we might not be able to use trade as a
better carrot in our attempts at influencing the Soviets. The Secretary
replied that the problem was that other countries had the same carrot.
In the case of the Dresser license, for example, some thought that
Dresser was the sole source of (drill bit) technology, but that was
simply not true. Others could sell this (drill bit) technology to the So-
viets as well.
Hellman then raised the subject of credits. He noted that they were
perhaps a useful avenue for applying leverage on the Soviets.
Mr. Levine (Conservative Movement) said that he saw a contradic-
tion in what was being said on the subject of “carrots.” Clearly, in his
view, we had none. He questioned whether we should try to buy the
Soviets with concessions, anyway. Would it not be more effective and
true to our principles to strive to become a bastion of human liberty? It
seemed to him that that would be the simplest and best approach. He
also wondered why we had lumped the dissidents in with the “refuse-
niks.” Did not that needlessly complicate matters, especially since we
were dealing with two different approaches to the problems of Soviet
Jews?
Ambassador Shulman replied that Shcharanskiy was both a dissi-
dent and a “refusenik” and thus a connection between the two groups.
We even had difficulty differentiating between Jews and non-Jews in
many instances. In any case, the problem we faced was much more
than a Jewish question alone. The Secretary said he agreed with Dr.
Shulman. The Secretary said that we ought to act on behalf of, defend
and argue for each group and sub-group which was having trouble ei-
ther living in or leaving the Soviet Union. The Secretary wondered
what one gained by making clear demarcations between these groups.
To this Mr. Gold replied that the Germans had apparently done very
well at it. Gold conceded that by making a clear demarcation between
groups we risked doing less well overall, but perhaps certain
sub-groups would do even better than they otherwise might were they
lumped in to the whole. Gold thought that it was important to speak
out toughly for each group.
