National Security Policy 1155 The primary objectives of the U.S. military programs, in support of the basic national objective and in light of the primary threat, are: To develop and maintain forces of all Services for general war, with sufficient strength to deter general war or to prevail if it should occur. To develop and maintain as part of its military forces its effective nuclear retaliatory power, and to keep that power secure from neutral­ ization or from a Soviet knockout blow, even by surprise. To develop and maintain an adequate military capability for defense of the United States and other vital areas of the western hemisphere. To provide within the total U.S. military forces, highly mobile and suitably deployed ready forces which, in concert with other forces, are adequate to deter or defeat local aggression or fight a limited war in a manner and on a scale best calculated to prevent hostilities from broad­ ening into general war, using all weapons (including nuclear weapons) as required. To reinforce and support, in appropriate ways, overt and covert political, economic, psychological, technological, and cultural meas­ ures in order to achieve national objectives. II. SUMMARY EVALUATION OF OUR ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL CAPABILITIES TO FULFILL CURRENT MILITARY COMMITMENTS AND BASIC OBJECTIVES AS OUTLINED IN NSC 5906/1. Overall Evaluation. Between June 1959 and June 1960, there was lit­ tle change in either the magnitude or character of major U.S. combat forces. Newer weapon systems will be more evident during FY 1961. All Services find it necessary to maintain adequate forces equipped with weapon systems of proven capability to satisfy security require­ ments and, at the same time, to provide for the development of new systems of yet unproven operational capability. There are two main aspects of this problem. The complexity of modern weapon systems has resulted in extraor­ dinarily long procurement lead times, and greatly lengthened technical training programs. Development and procurement of these new weapon systems become more costly each year, and so it has become increasingly diffi­ cult to accomplish modernization within available resources. General War. In evaluating our general war capabilities, the JCS note the requirement for forces capable of both nuclear and conven­ tional operations. While these forces now have a greater capability for delivery of nuclear weapons than ever before, this may not in itself rep­ resent a net gain in relative military strength vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union. Our deployed forces are subject, with little or no warning, to attack by significant communist forces. Within the near future, the Soviet Union may bring into operational readiness intercontinental ballistic missiles with the capability of attacking our base complex in the United States. The security of our long-­range, land-­based nuclear retaliatory forces
