1978  501
those organs be made survivable? Trained and exercised? Does evolu-
tion in strategy require change in the peacetime structure of defense 
and national security decisionmaking? (S)
As a first step into this thicket I plan to examine the Steadman and 
Ignatius reports10 to determine how their findings jibe with the impli-
cations of the two studies on strategy, if at all. From this, issues ripe for 
near term decision could emerge; issues for further study certainly will. 
It will be appropriate to task DOD with specific study of organizational 
implications of doctrinal change and increased reliance on C3I after the 
targeting and SRF studies have been reviewed by the NSC. (C)
C3I and Military Assessment (U)
So far, there has been no comprehensive attempt to examine 
in any operational detail how US and Soviet strategic C3I resources 
would perform in a major nuclear conflict involving attacks on those 
resources. Most strategic exchange analyses over the years have delib-
erately ignored the implications of C3 targeting.11 JCS’s RISOP–SIOP 
exchanges have typically included such targeting, but have not in the 
judgment of many critics, translated that phenomenon into a realistic 
degradation of the respective sides’ force performance. In short, the go-­
code still gets out and the forces still perform in this highly preplanned, 
massive exchange. (S)
Important new insights into the vulnerability of Soviet strategic 
C3I will result from further study of discrete targeting packages, as rec-
ommended by Harold Brown in his transmittal of the targeting study.12 
C3 targets will represent one or more of the packages. Ultimately opera-
tional net assessment of C3I in war cannot be separated from the totality 
of military and even political interactions in a given scenario. Our stra-
tegic interaction analysis is deficient across the board because it lacks 
attention to operational detail, uncertainty, scenario variations, the role 
of non-­strategic and civil capabilities, and C3I. (S)
A number of people in OSD, the Services, and the JCS are con-
cerned about this and are seeking ways to improve official analysis of 
strategic exchanges and balances. They are moved in part by the need 
to counter highly simplified quantitative analyses which, depending on 
the prejudices of the analyst, either minimize our deficiencies (as did a 
10 Reference is to Richard C. Steadman, The National Military Command Structure: 
Report of a Study Requested by the President and Conducted in the Department of Defense 
(Washington, Government Printing Office, July 1978) and Paul R. Ignatius, Department 
Headquarters Study: A Report to the Secretary of Defense. (Washington, Government Printing 
Office, June 1978)
11 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this portion of the para-
graph and wrote: “we need this.”
12 See Document 105.
