3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 731 10. Reduce U.S. participation in selected exchanges. 11. Establish a permanent military presence in the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf. 12. Let MFN lie. 13. Postpone commercial and civil aviation talks—limit commercial expansion. 14. Substantially tighten export controls—a significant move. 15. Tighten rules on Soviet fishing 16. The moves that we’re making before the UN Security Council and hopefully thereafter the General Assembly. 17. Tightening COCOM rules 18. Substantially expanding the types of technical and defensive assistance available to the People’s Republic of China. 19. Ending all international aid to Afghanistan. 20. Substantial aid to Pakistan. 21. Broadened resources for the CIA and for Foreign Aid. 22. Add to that the steps we’ve already taken to increase the Defense budget and the decision taken in LRT–NF It seems to me that all these steps make a most significant response to the outrageous invasion of Afghanistan. I realize that you have to make this decision without regard to politics. But if corn were to drop 10 cents or more a bushel—and the estimates are that it would drop more at first and then slowly stabilize— and wheat were to drop 20 cents a bushel—and the farmers were to realize, as they will, that the chances of a future market in the Soviet Union had been basically and fundamentally damaged and that a lot of this market would be picked up by the other wheat and bean producers around the world, that the reaction would be very, very tough politically in Iowa, in Minnesota and in Ohio and throughout the grainproducing areas of our country. Because of that, this decision could undermine your ability to persevere in a strong and unified assault upon the Soviet Union with a unified nation behind you. To me, there is something particularly grubby about using food as a weapon and the use of it could damage us in the international community as well. I might also point out that we did not use the food weapon in the case of the holding of American hostages and I believe to do so now would also raise questions as to how the differences in policy might be justified. I try very hard not to be a hair shirt for you, but I feel very strongly about this matter and have therefore written this memo.
