500.A14/167c
[Document 32]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, April 16, 1925.
No. 2
SIRS: With reference to the Department’s general instruction to you of even date with
respect to the forthcoming international conference to be held at Geneva on May 4th, to
consider the conclusion of a convention with respect to arms traffic, there is given
herewith for your information and guidance a statement of the views of the Department
with respect to the attitude of the American Delegation in the event of the participation
in the conference of representatives of the régime now functioning in Russia or the
signature of, or adherence to, the proposed convention by Russia through that régime.
It is assumed that no action by the American Delegation or by this Government should
be construed or open to a fair construction as constituting recognition of the regime
now functioning in Russia.
The bare participation of the United States through an American Delegation in a
conference to deal with traffic in arms called by the League of Nations in which
delegates representing the Soviet régime are also participants would signify nothing.
Again, the bare signature of a multi-lateral Convention by American delegates which
was signed also by Soviet delegates would not in itself constitute recognition of the
Soviet Government as the Government of Russia, although possibly the formal
ratification of the Convention without explanation might be subject to divergent
constructions. It may be observed in this connection that the Allied Powers in
permitting Russia to sign with them the so-called Straits Convention53 at Rome on
August 14, 1923, did not regard their action as constituting recognition of the Soviet
regime. No reservations were made by them. It has been pointed out, however, by a
recent commentator, Ernest LaGarde, that it is difficult to reconcile with non-
recognition what took place. Nevertheless, he points out that the Soviet Government
made no effort to claim that its participation and signature constituted recognition of
their régime as the Government of Russia.
In the present case, however, Article 32 of the proposed Convention declares that it
shall not come into force until it shall have been ratified by twelve Powers, among
whom are specified both the United States and Russia. While the Russian state as such
may be said in a strict sense to be the party contemplated, that state nevertheless is now
