286 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II therefore, not be inconsistent with this general Congressional concern for the needy to require an accounting in all countries. To single out only certain countries for application of Section 112 would signal to all that these are countries with serious human rights problems and thus create a “hit list” which would have repercussions in other policy areas and limit the Administration’s overall flexibility in pursuing its human rights strategies. Using a Section 112 provision only for governments whose records are known to be troublesome at the time of negotiations could make it difficult to adjust to subsequent changes in the other countries. We might find ourselves in a position of not having required reports from a government where the situation has deteriorated, and we might have to explain this failure to Congress. Imposition of a detailed reporting requirement in all agreements would place a heavy burden on AID missions and purchasing governments. It is, therefore, suggested that AID place a clause in all agreements requiring that the food and/or proceeds derived from the sale thereof be used to directly benefit needy people. To implement this provision, AID would tell most governments that only general statements are required. Our missions could be asked to evaluate these statements based on their general observation and knowledge of the programs. In the case of governments with serious human rights problems, however, it could be decided in Washington at any time in the year that their human rights situation is sufficiently serious to demand a more detailed accounting. This could be done not only in the legislated area, relating to countries engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights, but also with regard to other countries where serious human rights problems exist. Determinations on whether demands should be levied for these more detailed reports could be made through the mechanism of the Interagency Group, and eventually through the country evaluation plans. Allocation Decisions The Interagency Group reached a consensus that PL 480 Title I allocations should be reviewed by that group before the quarterly submissions to Congress.5 In addition, as agreements with human rights 5 According to the October 14 minutes of the Interagency Group meeting: “With regard to the review procedure to be followed in the case of PL 480, Title I, it was suggested that the working group should review allocation lists on a regular basis prior to their submission to the Congress. At the time of review, the working group would be asked to identify potential problem cases. It would then be agreed that a subsequent review by the Inter-Agency Group must take place before agreements to these problems countries could be signed.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 17, Human Rights—II)
