546  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
—Seek to acquire through Soviet advisers sufficient control of the 
military and internal security forces to prevent the leaders of the client 
state from taking actions inimical to Soviet interests.
—Garrison Soviet troops in the client state, at its invitation, osten-
sibly to protect the state against some external threat but in reality to 
preserve in power a government that is friendly and beholden to Mos-
cow and that will enforce policies in line with Soviet interests.
33. The last alternative would have unforeseeable ramifications 
for Soviet foreign relations, but it is nonetheless an option that con-
ceivably could attract serious consideration by Soviet decisionmakers. 
The deployment of Soviet forces for this purpose, however, would be 
a drastic departure from the policy Moscow has followed in the Third 
World.
34. Despite Soviet difficulties in preserving political influence in 
most Third World countries, Moscow will have ample opportunities 
to play a major role. Soviet policy in the Third World feeds on political 
turbulence, military conflict, and civil strife. During the next 10 years 
these disruptions are likely to recur, especially in Africa and the Middle 
East, and the major role the Soviets have effectively played—­a source 
of arms and military assistance and a protector of clients—­will remain 
relevant to the needs of many countries.
[Omitted here is the body of the NIE and six annexes.]
116.	 Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the 
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom) 
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs 
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 27, 1979
SUBJECT
The Targeting Study: Desired Outcomes
I want to make a few points for you to keep in mind at the SCC on 
the Targeting Study. There is a real danger that the mix of antithetical 
theologies will paralyze our efforts to move our defense establishment 
from a “1914” posture (i.e., one big war plan which cannot support any 
conceivable war aims, an irreversible war plan, no plans for economic 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Utgoff, Box 202, Targeting: Strategic Nuclear Forces: 1–6/79. Top Secret.
