National Security Policy  231
consequences for our general position in the world of inaction or action, 
and the nature of our action, that will govern United States decisions.
c. Selective nuclear strikes deep into Communist China, as con­
templated in the Quemoy and Matsu, Taiwan and Korea hypothetical 
situations, could elicit a Sino-Soviet nuclear response. Serious consid­
eration would, therefore, have to be given to the proclamation of at 
least a limited national emergency if the United States were to under­
take limited military operations of this nature.
d. The increased possibility of general war inherent in most limited 
military operations requires precautionary and alerting steps. Even one 
limited military operation requiring heavy logistic support and deploy­
ment of major forces from the United States might necessitate partial 
mobilization.
e. Additional comments which should be taken into consideration 
in any possible further use of this study are contained in the Annex 
immediately hereunder.
5. We make the following recommendations.
a. The Director of Central Intelligence should be asked to initiate 
the preparation of National Intelligence Estimates on (i) world reactions 
and (ii) Sino-Soviet military reactions to United States use of nuclear 
weapons in limited military operations against Communist (non-So­
viet) forces in the Far East.
b. The findings of the present study with respect to the availability 
of allied forces for employment outside their national territory should 
be taken into account among other factors in the review of 1962 force 
goals for nations receiving United States military assistance directed by 
NSC Action No. 1908.
c. Greater efforts should be made to clarify to the free world United 
States intentions with respect to the use of nuclear weapons and to 
inform the free world of the radiation effects of low yield weapons and 
their relative efficiency in certain limited military operations.
/s/ Neil McElroy
/s/ John Foster Dulles
Annex
SUPPLEMENTAL POINTS TO BE CONSIDERED 
ALONG WITH THE STUDY
1. The studies do not in all instances give sufficient emphasis to 
the difficult command and communications problems which would be 
encountered in operations in areas remote from the U.S.
2. The studies give no specific recognition of future modernization 
or buildup of military forces hostile to the U.S. by Soviet Bloc military
