1978 417 among foreign publics, as well as the drastic decline in Soviet popularity, were principally the result of the Administration’s new explicit emphasis on human rights. Similarly, the improvement in the trend in the ­economic interaction balance reflected the Administration’s new willingness, stemming from PD–18, to attempt to capitalize on U.S. economic advantages. The significant change in the role of the PRC was primarily the result of the decisions of Hua-Teng leadership to which the U.S. and other Western powers responded favorably. Overall, the U.S. thus played a central role in effecting changes in the global balance during the last 18 months. The predominance of U.S. initiatives in its competition with the Soviets parallels the predominance of U.S. initiatives in the conduct of ongoing arms control negotiations (SALT II) and in proposing new arms control negotiations (CAT, ASAT). Contrary to some views, the tides of history clearly do not condemn the U.S. to simply a defensive and responsive role. This pattern of the past 18 months, however, may reflect in large part the fact that the Carter Administration was new to office while the Brezhnev regime was well along in its second decade. Five or six years from now, the roles could be reversed, with a new Soviet leadership attempting to seize the initiative and a second Carter Administration remaining committed to its earlier policies. IV. Implications for U.S. Strategy PD/NSC–18 set forth three broad purposes of national strategy: 1. to maintain an overall military balance vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union at least as favorable as that which currently existed, the achievement of this goal, in the light of the continuing Soviet build-­up, requiring three percent annual increases in real defense spending; 2. to take advantage of U.S. non-­military advantages to encourage Soviet cooperation in securing balanced and verifiable arms control agreements, resolving regional conflicts, expanding contacts between societies, and promoting cooperative solutions to global problems; and 3. to use U.S. non-­military advantages and, if necessary, U.S. military forces to prevent the expansion of Soviet influence adverse to the U.S. in critical areas of the world. The favorable changes which have occurred in the trends in the global balance in the last 18 months testify to the general validity of this strategy. Certain elements in that strategy have, however, received greater emphasis than others. The developments of the last 18 months also highlight problems and opportunities in some specific areas which could suggest the desirability of certain changes in emphasis within the overall framework of the PD–18 strategy. A. Military Strategy. In the military area, the PRM–10 assessment indicated that while there was an overall asymmetrical equivalence in
