Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 243 The Sino-Soviet dispute is now a fact of life. No one should doubt that the United States will remain a major power in the western Pacific and East Asia. Our capability for the rapid deployment of U.S. forces has been enhanced and will be strengthened still further. Elements of our tactical Air Force will remain in South Korea, and other units—ground, naval, and air—will be in the theater. The Republic of Korea, for its part, now has twice the population and five times the GNP of North Korea. Above all, we will continue to work with our Korean ally to assure that any attack from the North can be defeated even after the 4–5-year period during which the U.S. ground forces will be withdrawn from the peninsula. Surely those are powerful conditions of deterrence and stability. Make no mistake about it; we are determined to maintain and modernize our collective security system. We are equally determined, to the extent that the arms competition cannot be brought under control, to strengthen the competitive position of the United States. Where our allies have developed the necessary strengths, we will adjust the collective burdens to assure that our long-term security arrangements remain commensurate with the capabilities and stakes of the partners. Otherwise those arrangements cannot endure. Where technology has produced total or partial substitutes for more traditional weapons systems, and has done the job efficiently, we will—with all due caution—begin the substitution. That, in fact, is the main basis for planning to turn over some of the functions of the penetrating manned bomber to long-range cruise missiles and canceling production of the B–1. Where inefficiencies exist, as in our use of scarce personnel and our maintenance of an excessive base structure—and other overhead—we will attack them as vigorously as our other problems. Furthermore, we will not be deterred from that attack—although we may on occasion be delayed—by domestic political obstacles. Most important of all, where increases in hostile foreign forces threaten our ability to maintain the conditions of collective security, we will insure the restoration of our position. Nothing in history suggests that we can reach our goals from a position of weakness. We are not in a position of weakness in those functions and regions we consider vital to our security. The strategic nuclear balance, despite the Soviet buildup, remains in equilibrium. The balance of tactical power in Europe is more precarious, but it has not yet tilted against NATO to the point where deterrence of the Warsaw Pact is threatened. If another war begins in the Middle East, it will not be because of a lack of Israeli strength. The situation in Korea, in our judgment, is and can be kept militarily stable, despite increases in North Korean offensive
