National Security Policy 537 MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES AND POLICIES, 1958–1963 THE PROBLEM To review significant developments affecting the USSR’s internal political situation, economic developments, military programs, rela­ tions with other Bloc states, and foreign policy, and to estimate proba­ ble Soviet courses of action through about 1963.2 SUMMARY ESTIMATE 1. New tendencies have appeared on the Soviet political scene during the past year. Externally, the lines of conflict with the West have been drawn more sharply once again, and “reduction of tensions” no longer is the major theme of Soviet foreign policy. Internally there has been both in the USSR and in the Bloc an attempt to consolidate and stabilize, to check the pace of change, to curb the expectations and discipline the unruly tendencies aroused among the people by the milder policies of the post-Stalin years. There has been a return to a certain rigor in policy and in ideology. Nevertheless, the changes which affected almost every aspect of Soviet internal and external policy in the years after Stalin’s death have for the most part not been reversed. The flexibility and pragmatism of the current leadership continues; innova­ tions in policy may still be forthcoming, particularly in internal affairs. Trends in Foreign Policy 2. During the course of the last year there has been a distinctly hardening tone in Soviet foreign policy. It is true that many of the new features introduced after the death of Stalin remain in force. The claim to be pursuing policies in the interest of establishing “peaceful coexist­ ence” is still made; programs of cultural exchange and generally freer contact with the outside world have been continued. Nevertheless, a new militancy and assertiveness in Soviet policy has emerged more and more clearly. This has been most strikingly manifest in the Quemoy and Middle East crises, and in the developing crisis over Berlin. 3. The Soviet leaders probably decided that the special emphasis they had given to “peaceful coexistence” and easing of tensions had out-­lived its usefulness. It had not had the anticipated effect of weak­ ening Western alliances. Some features of the relaxation line—­the new approach to Yugoslavia, the repudiation of Stalin, and the leeway given for some national autonomy in the Satellites—­proved dangerous to 2 “The reference to a five-­year period is approximate. The economic calculations carry through 1965, to conform to the Soviet Seven-Year Plan; some of the political judg­ ments, on the other hand, pertain to periods of less than five years. [Footnote is in the original.]
