1955  115
Wang denied this could be regarded as returning us to status 
quo ante. He repeated he only wanted indicate that both sides do not 
restrict return of civilians and that persons involved in civil or criminal 
cases could return as soon as cases completed. This applied both sides 
equally and he hoped I would agree.
I replied I couldn’t agree since it left practical situation of detained 
Americans in exactly same situation as when talks began.
Wang then proposed I study his proposed amendment to see if we 
could agree on text at next meeting.
I replied I would gladly study it but could not see how it solved 
question my nationals his country. How were we to resolve practical 
problem of return American nationals? I said Wang had mentioned 
the eleven fliers. We had our own opinion concerning that and I didn’t 
want to engage in controversy. However I understood although all 
were sentenced to different terms that all released together. It seemed 
to me would not be impossible find solution to rest of American cases. 
Said I would be glad to hear Wang’s ideas next meeting on problem I 
was here to discuss, namely return of Americans. Added I had made 
my best effort find formula to meet his viewpoint.
Wang commented he hoped I would note that comments he had 
made were not only of benefit to one side but both. He hoped hear at 
next meeting results my consideration his comments.
Wang then said would like to raise another point. He had noted 
lately propaganda campaign had been launched regarding release of 
11 airmen in order slander Chinese people. This propaganda provoked 
feelings of Chinese people. Since talks began Chinese Government had 
repeatedly made clear conciliatory attitude. Chinese public opinion 
always cautious regarding progress these talks. If one were to draw on 
question of mistreatment there would be no end to his recounting mis­
erable treatment of Chinese People’s Volunteers captured in Korea. He 
had avoided raising this sort of question since it would not be in inter­
est present talks. He only wanted express feeling on their part which he 
hoped I would note.
I replied I didn’t know Wang’s motive in rising this matter. First, I 
didn’t know what he meant by “propaganda campaign”. All I had seen 
were factual interviews and accounts of the men released. I told Wang 
he was perfectly aware American press practice and our free press. 
Also perfectly aware US Government could not, even if it would, pre­
vent publication such accounts. Furthermore these men’s accounts not 
unique. Almost every person released from prison his country has given 
similar accounts. Fault does not lie with these accounts but in treatment 
that gave rise to them. Accounts of eleven fliers had tremendously 
increased anxiety of American people over those Americans remaining
