650 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Mr. Cutler said the problem would solve itself if it turned out that the Embassy was closed today. Secretary Vance said that would not take care of the Consulates. Dr. Brzezinski wondered how we know they are armed. The Attorney General said Secret Service observations had seen armed individuals inside. Of the Consulates at Houston, San Francisco, Chicago, and New York, the highest risk appeared to be in Houston because of the substantial student population and in Chicago where the head of the office was a rabble rouser and very nearly a fanatic. Weapons have been seen only in Washington. The President said we would come back to the timing question. He noted that the sanctions should go ahead. The question was whether they should include food and medicine. Secretary Vance said we have taken the position all along that food would not be used as a weapon. We would not get our Allies to go along with us on a food boycott. The closer we stick to the sanctions voted in the UN the better will be our chances to get others to come along. Mr. Cutler agreed. Most food was already effectively blocked. Our position would have more moral force if we observed the sanctions voted at the UN. An embargo would accomplish nothing except publicly making us look tougher. Mr. Powell wondered if the Allies will help. The President said only if they think we will interrupt commerce. Mr. Claytor said a blockade would also interrupt food and medicine. Mr. Aaron said that our present announcement must have an “except” clause which requires us to explain. Secretary Vance said the answer is simply that we are imposing the sanctions voted by the UN. Mr. Aaron said that will attract attention to the fact that no one else is imposing these sanctions. The President said we will call on the Allies to institute these sanctions. We will first ask privately, later publicly. He preferred that we go for now with the UN sanctions. We should call on the Allies forcefully to join with us. Then . . .(?)5 We need to get others involved even if it aggravates them. The situation is intolerable. 5 As on the original. Apparently Sick did not hear Carter’s full comment.
