926 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The President went on to say that President Ford and President Nixon had signed many more NSDMs than he has signed PDs. Many of the NSDMs carried over into this administration’s policy. We did not rescind them without a considerable review. Therefore, a Presidential Directive might well have a significant policy impact on the next administration. (S) Dr. Brzezinski further explained that the process of reviewing the NSDMs led to retention of many NSDMs and considerable parts of others. (C) The President said that he has a responsibility to look at the larger economic requirements above and beyond those mentioned in Brown’s paper. He said he has come to believe that the Defense appetite for a larger budget is insatiable. Reagan will be constrained by economic limits when he tries to increase defense spending. The President went on to explain his disapproval of the tendency of our military leaders to castigate ourselves for military weakness. When the Secretaries of the Services and the Chiefs of the Services denigrate our military strength, it creates a generally persuasive conviction by the public, domestic and foreign, that we are weak. The President said that he is not convinced, but the average American certainly believes our defense is weak. When the Chief of Staff of the Army says in testimony to the Congress that the Army is hollow, that has a devastating impact. It hurts us with our allies as well as with the American public. Why should our allies do more if we insist that we are so weak? I know from a closer look at some of these statements that there is balance to them which was not pointed out by the press, but the press won’t emphasize the balance, only what is said about our weakness. In town meetings again and again I ran into this belief among the public. (S) Dr. Brzezinski suggested that the discussion should address two points. First, the threat that we will face in the 1980s, and second, how we will defend the three strategic zones to which we are now committed. (S) Harold Brown began his summary, noting that resources are limited, that we have not only traditionally prioritized them in the budget but also prioritized them geographically. The paper assumes that we recognize our interests lie beyond the continental United States—­in Europe, the Middle East, and East Asia. There is a natural tendency to prepare to meet military contingencies in all three areas simultaneously. The Soviets, of course, probably will not initiate actions in all zones at once, but the question is left for us to decide where to put the priority. (S) We have been shifting towards Southwest Asia. A Soviet attack in Europe risks nuclear war. That is well known and generally understood. A Soviet attack in Southwest Asia would less likely risk nuclear
