December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
767
concerns. A small country, we here on these hills have the longest
ceasefire line with Israel. Frankly, in recent time we have felt that we
were both weak and strong. Strong because experience pulled us to-
gether as a nation. We have to face it the best we can. We are attached to
the past of our nation. None of us can see ourselves being a weakling or
giving up the fight for the rights of millions of people in East Jerusalem.
We may cease to exist. But what interests us is the judgment of future
will respect. I wish the weather were clearer today so that you could
have seen Jerusalem from the window. The security question could be
answered by how close we are. What makes the difference is the
feelings on both sides. I agree this is a turbulent and dangerous period.
Many things have shocked us in the recent past. The whole approach is
involved in asking us to keep quiet. In the past, you did not ask, for at
that time we were your only friend in the Arab world.
How does one draw the line between the extremist and the mod-
erates? I know that our U.S. friends were upset by the Baghdad Confer-
ence.7 From my perspective and responsibility, this was the best that
could be done. In light of Afghanistan, Iran, the Horn of Africa, all of
these things were seen as threats to our very existence. That, plus the
Palestinians, comprised the worst of all possible circumstances. South
Yemen posed a serious threat; fortunately collective action was taken,
successfully.
In 1950 Egypt took the initiative of ensuring that any country
which signed a unilateral peace with Israel would be expelled from the
Arab League, as well as certain other things. At the time this was prob-
ably aimed at Jordan. How can you have the Arab League at Cairo or
the Chief of Staff of the Arab forces an Egyptian, when Egypt has
signed a unilateral peace treaty? (At this point, Dr. Brzezinski passed a
note across the table pointing out that the time was 4:15 which was
when the American delegation was due to depart.) King Hussein con-
tinued, the last time Jordan broke diplomatic relations with Egypt was
over the possibility of establishing a United Arab Kingdom8 to ensure
the exercise of self-determination.
Unfortunately, this is not an inter-Arab dispute only. It involves
the U.S. and we are very sad when this occurs. It is difficult to see how
7 See footnote 7, Document 91.
8 On March 15, 1972, Hussein announced a proposal calling for the Israeli-occupied
West Bank to be joined with Jordan in a unified kingdom under his rule. In protest, Sadat
broke diplomatic relations with Jordan on April 6, 1972. (William Dullforce, “Egypt Cuts
Relations with Jordan,” The Washington Post, April 7, 1972, p. A1) Following a joint con-
ference between Sadat, Assad, and Hussein in Cairo, the Egyptian Government an-
nounced the re-establishment of Egyptian-Jordanian relations on September 12, 1973.
(Jim Hoagland, “Egypt, Syria Renew Jordan Ties; Palestinians Silent,” The Washington
Post, September 13, 1973, p. A27)
