826
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
what, conceding that possibly the United States Government’s explana-
tion of its action had not been given proper publicity in Iran, but reiter-
ated his contention that in his country and particularly in the case of the
oil question considerable psychological preparation of the people was
necessary.
Further detailing his position, Baqai stated that his party served as
a screen between the Communist Party and Iranians dissatisfied with
their country’s present situation. This was because the Worker’s Party
advocates many of the reforms demanded by the Tudeh without in-
sisting that they be carried out within the framework of Communism.
Many Iranian intellectuals, however, stood somewhere between the
Worker’s Party and the Communists, and in order to attract these indi-
viduals towards him and away from the Tudeh, Baqai had found it nec-
essary to profess on occasions a neutralism which he did not feel.11
Pointing out that these intellectuals, if forced to chose between Britain
and Russia, would invariably turn toward the Soviet Union, and that
American policy in recent years had led them to suspect the United
States of collusion with British interests, Baqai stated that he was forced
to oppose the United States in print from time to time in order to avoid
the accusation of pro-Americanism and to preserve his hold over
the intellectual element, which he considered to be of the highest
importance.
The Ambassador commented that he would have no grounds to
complain if Baqai out of honest conviction would criticize the United
States or United States policies. He thought, however, it would be un-
worthy of a statesman to criticize a country trying to help Iran merely
for the purpose of trying to strengthen his political party.12 At this crit-
ical period of Iran’s history, it behooved such leaders of public opinion
as Dr. Baqai to assert their leadership to the fullest on behalf of Iran’s
interests and to explain the situation fully and frankly to their sup-
porters and constituents. By professing for reasons of political conven-
ience opinions which he did not hold, Dr. Baqai made it impossible for
the members of his party and their sympathizers to know precisely
where he stood; furthermore, he deprived them of the benefit of his in-
formed judgment and leadership.
To these remarks Baqai merely reiterated his opinion that the Ira-
nian people could not be dragooned into supporting an oil settlement
and must be prepared psychologically over a period of time for any
11 Richards underlined the phrase “a neutralism which he did not feel.” In the
margin is the handwritten word “Nuts!”
12 Richards underlined the phrase “unworthy of a statesman to criticize a country
trying to help Iran merely for the purpose of trying to strengthen his political party” and
wrote in the margin “a thrust that hurt Baqai!”
