170  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
adopted and will further adopt measures so that they can in fact return 
as soon as possible.
(2) The USA agrees that the Government of the Republic of India 
will be entrusted to assist the return to the PRC of those Chinese who 
desire to do so as follows:
A. If any Chinese believes that contrary to the declared policy of 
the USA he is encountering obstruction in departure he may so inform 
the Embassy of the Republic of India in the USA and request it to make 
representations on his behalf to the Government of the USA. If desired 
by the PRC the Government of the Republic of India may also investi­
gate the facts;
B. If any Chinese in the USA who desires to return to the PRC has 
difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of the Republic 
of India may, on behalf of the Government of the PRC, render him finan­
cial assistance needed to permit his return.
(3) The Government of the USA will give wide publicity to the 
foregoing arrangements and the Embassy of the Republic of India in 
the USA may also do so.”
Gowen
Note: Mr. Waddell’s office (FE) notified 11:35 a.m. 8/25/55 DES
136.	 Telegram 623 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 25, 1955, 6 p.m.
623. From Johnson.
My summary tel 616 on today’s meeting may not have made it as 
clear as I might have that Wang and I both came much closer than any time 
previously to taking “final positions” from which we could not retreat and 
logical results of which could only be willingness lead up to point of break. 
I repeatedly used terms “vital”, “essential”, “far as we can go”, et cetera 
but avoided going to next and logical point of saying unless he met my 
position on this nothing further talk about. He spoke with some emotion 
and probably even greater finality than I, but also avoided going next step.
At today’s meeting thinking underlying CHICOM position clearly 
emerged as follows: US proposed these talks thereby “improving 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2555. Secret; Priority.
