882 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement to approximately $360 million. Mr. McCone believed the present pro­ gram could adequately meet present military requirements for ura­ nium, but was uncertain about the new requirements which had just been presented by Defense. Again displaying a chart, Mr. McCone indicated that plutonium production was slightly in excess of requirements now, but that in 1962 we would be short by an insignificant factor in the amount necessary to meet military requirements. He concluded, however, that our pluto­ nium production program was satisfactory and that through improved processes we could produce more plutonium if necessary. Mr. McCone remarked that our nuclear weapons program had been discussed in detail a few months ago with the President and accordingly would not be covered in detail in his briefing. Mr. McCone next turned to naval nuclear propulsion. He indi­ cated that by December 31, 1959 we would have one POLARIS and eight other nuclear submarines; by December 31, 1960 we would have five POLARIS and thirteen other nuclear submarines. The GEORGE WASHINGTON, the first POLARIS submarine, will be undergoing sea trials in the near future. The nuclear-­powered cruiser LONG BEACH should be operating by the end of 1960, after launching this spring and sea trials in July. The nuclear-­powered aircraft carrier ENTERPRISE and the nuclear-­powered destroyer BAINBRIDGE should be operating by the latter part of 1961. The naval nuclear propulsion program was summarized as consisting of six land-­based prototype reactors, 37 sub­ marines, and 3 surface vessels. Mr. McCone concluded his remarks on maritime nuclear propulsion by indicating that minor modifications in design were being made in the N.S. (Nuclear Ship) SAVANNAH. In passing, Mr. McCone remarked that we have eight or nine mili­ tary package power plants in various sizes and types and indicated that they were particularly important in view of their significant contribu­ tion to technology. Mr. McCone then briefly described the PLUTO, ROVER and SNAP devices and the air nuclear propulsion program. He recalled to the President the thermo-­couple principle which was embodied in one of the SNAP devices shown to the President, and indicated we were devel­ oping more of this type. All of the SNAP devices are being utilized for auxiliary power in space vehicles. A careful review is being made of the SNAP program, which will run to $300–$400 million from the point of view of cost and effectiveness as compared to other power sources such as solar heat. PLUTO involved the development of a ram jet to propel low-­level unmanned supersonic missiles. Three to four years would be required for the development of this ram jet, but the program offers good prospects. ROVER is a nuclear propulsion system for a space vehi­ cle; again three to four years of development will be required before
