Chapter 2, January–June 1989 157 — Rejecting any limits on nondeployed ALCMS or on total ALCM inventory. — Providing for a limited number of former heavy bombers (i.e. conventional bombers) which would not count against either the 1600 or 6000 limits. — Providing separate basing for the three classes of bombers (ALCM-­carrying heavy bombers, non-ALCM carrying heavy bombers, former heavy bombers), with a limited on-­site inspection right for non- ALCM carrying heavy bombers of a type tested with treaty accountable ALCMs. In establishing this position, the United States recognized that the Soviets would have an equal right to exploit the rules. The United States judged, however, that protecting our ability to cover and damage targets was more important than constraining similar Soviet capabilities. Discussion—General. Because of the importance of this area and the close interrelationship of all heavy bomber/ALCM positions, a comprehensive review is required. There is consensus that the United States should not alter its current rejection of Soviet attempts to place sublimits on bomber weapons or to constrain ALCMs, e.g., to limit nondeployed ALCMs. Discussion—Counting Rules. For many years the United States rejected placing any limits on ALCMs. The U.S. approach to ALCM counting rules discounts ALCMs and heavily discounts non-ALCM nuclear weapons on bombers. Some have raised the question of whether discounting bomber weapons would in fact favor the Soviets in the long run, given the asymmetries in air defenses. Others believe that, while the Soviets appear to be well positioned to exploit these counting rules, encouraging greater Soviet reliance on air-­breathing systems is a central goal of the U.S. START position. Moreover, the U.S. requires these systems for target coverage, while the Soviets do not. The most common alternative counting rule is the so-­called “asequipped” approach, in which ALCM bombers are counted against the 6000 limit based on the maximum number of ALCMs they are capable of carrying. This position, favored by the Soviets, would either (a) require substantial modifications to U.S. bombers to limit the number of ALCMs they could carry or (b) lead to unrealistically high attributions which would severely inhibit U.S. flexibility. The Soviets claim that the U.S. attribution rule provides the U.S. with an unfair advantage since future widebodied aircraft could carry dozens of cruise missiles but would only be attributed with ten. Some favor attempting to meet this stated Soviet concern by placing some upper limit on the ALCMcarrying capacity of individual aircraft. Others believe the loss of flexibility and verification problems make it imprudent to attempt to placate what they see as a spurious Soviet concern.
