International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
967
certainly do not have control over significant relevant resources. A
main USG issue is likely to be whether the domestic concerned
agencies should “go global” or whether there is a leadership, policy
and coordinating role for State in these areas. Only radical surgery will
do the job, not “quick fixes” or placebos.
291.
Action Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, July 22, 1977
SUBJECT
United Nations General Assembly Address
Issue for Decision
Which theme would be most appropriate for the US statement to
the 32nd General Assembly, to be delivered by you or the President.2
Discussion
We have two general themes in mind. Whichever is chosen, how-
ever, an important part of the statement should be a discussion of this
Administration’s attitude and intentions toward the UN, both the
major organs and the agencies comprising the whole system. We
should probably be in a position to state a judgment on the various pro-
posals for restructuring the UN, now in preparatory discussion; this
will also provide us with an authoritative occasion to state our argu-
ments about our decision on the ILO3 and its relationship to our overall
attitude toward UN agencies. Our continuing human rights efforts will
also be featured, whichever way the rest of the speech turns.
Building on this basis, we could then focus the address on interna-
tional and US peacemaking efforts, the resolution of regional conflicts,
conveying the foreign policy activism of the Carter Administration.
The Middle East and southern Africa will be major items on the GA
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 7/16–31/77. Limited
Official Use. Drafted by Grose; concurred in by Frank and Helman (IO). Grose initialed
for both Frank and Helman. Wisner also initialed the memorandum.
2 See Document 79.
3 See footnote 4, Document 63.
