1626 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement to change your present position on the veto, on procedures for on-­ site inspection, and on early discussion of concrete measures for high altitude detection, we can of course proceed promptly to conclude negotiation of a comprehensive agreement for suspension of nuclear weapons tests.” Mr. Herter said that if the USSR were to change its position on the points cited, the U.S. would be willing to negotiate an agreement on the cessation of all tests. We had never thought a fool­ proof agreement possible. What we were seeking to create was a level of risk for the potential violator sufficient to deter him from violat­ ing. He pointed out that we were now, under the terms of the Annex we had proposed in Geneva, prepared to accept inspection of 20 per cent of the underground tests below 5 kilotons. This was a concrete example of the approach of deterrence. Mr. Lloyd said that he consid­ ered this a quite adequate level for deterrence. Mr. William Penney and Amb. Caccia thought the general approach presented in the letter to Macmillan was excellent. Mr. Herter then handed Mr. Lloyd copies of a draft statement to be made by Amb. Wadsworth at the opening meeting. He explained that this statement had not been fully cleared within the U.S. Government, but that it would be useful to the British in understanding the approach we suggest. Sir William Penney said that in his view the basic question to be answered if this approach were taken was whether we would resume underground testing. If this was the case the position might be difficult to put across, since it would be pictured as a stratagem intended to permit continued weapons testing. Mr. Herter said that we would cer­ tainly not resume underground testing before October 31. Sir William suggested that the Soviets would also claim that there needed to be no further controls than those already in existence if the agreement were limited to atmospheric tests. A final technical question which would need to be resolved would be the definition of the upper limit of the atmosphere. He was satisfied with the American position of using the 50 kilometer figure set forth in the Genova experts’ report, but felt it would be necessary also to state that we would do no extra-­atmospheric testing while we were working out the control schemes. Mr. Lloyd stated that the British would give careful study to the American suggestions and respond promptly.
