1955  621
25. Wang said he believed this state of affairs will surely disappoint 
world public opinion and also American opinion. What American peo­
ple want is friendly relations between Chinese and American people 
advantageous both people.
26. Wang said proposal for renunciation of force statement origi­
nated with US side. New draft put forward by PRC side December 1 
fully meets points of view and requirements both sides. It seemed to 
him issuance of such announcement would be first step for relaxing 
tension between our two countries. He is surprised to find we have 
been delayed such a protracted time over this question. Although his 
side has plenty of patience, such waiting would naturally have a limit.
27. Wang said he noted my statement that I would be able present 
concrete views at next meeting on this question. He also noted that 
I had expressed hope that it would be possible for us make progress at 
that meeting.
28. Wang said “I should say that that would be the last opportunity 
for us to reach an agreement on basis our new draft. We can permit no 
further delay. Otherwise we will be compelled to make public the pro­
ceedings of our discussions on the second item of our agenda and leave 
it to public opinion for judgment. We cannot afford to endure indefinite 
delay in this respect.”
[29.] Wang said I had expressed hope that discussion between us 
would not be made public but would be confined to conference room. 
Since beginning of series of talks, PRC side has maintained that spirit. 
However, two points must be taken into consideration. First, neither 
side should be allowed to make public statements outside of meetings. 
Second, unreserved and frank exchange of opinion at meetings should 
be directed toward resolving questions and making progress rather 
than dragging on indefinitely.
30. Wang said as far as last public statement his side concerned, he 
had pointed out at last meeting it was necessitated by fact US official 
quarters, including Secretary of State Dulles, openly made charges alleg­
ing PRC side not implementing agreed announcement. These charges 
and accusations had no factual basis, hence his side compelled set forth 
truth of matter to public in formal statement. From this truth world pub­
lic can see which side is carrying out agreement and which is purposely 
violating it. All this has been set forth clearly in last public statement PRC 
side and again in his statement this morning. He had already set forth 
explicitly views his side in this regard and had nothing further to add.
31. Wang said in regard to my proposal to hold next meeting 
­January 12, he wondered if I would be agreeable to make it January 6.
32. I replied I was disturbed at his use of such phrases as “last 
chance” and “last opportunity” concerning our talks here. I could only 
interpret his remarks as a threat and was certain that negotiations were
