January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1143 Assistant Secretary Saunders said that it would affect the principle of unanimity on the Continuing Committee. The President said he sees. As he understands it, Egypt has no objection to U.S. membership. If Begin objects to there being a U.S. role with a veto, then it is up to us and the Israelis to agree. Ambassador Linowitz said that if we can agree on “full partner” with Egypt, then the U.S. has flexibility. President Sadat said that Egypt insists that the U.S. continue to be a full partner. The President said that at Camp David, the U.S. was not included in the Continuing Committee. There was an argument at Camp David on refugees that related to this point, and it was decided that Israel and the SGA had to agree on refugees. A separate part of Camp David lists the major role the Palestinians can play. The Continuing Committee is powerful. It can continue what we are doing now, with the Palestinians and Jordanians involved. President Sadat said right. The President said it would be new if we were in the Continuing Committee, since that hadn’t been agreed at Camp David. President Sadat said yes. If there is no U.S. presence as a full partner, he would do nothing. The President joked that he would turn over the whole problem to President Sadat (laughter). President Sadat said he had said at Camp David that 90% of the cards are in the U.S.’ hands. The President joked that he would turn it over to President Sadat and King Hussein. (laughter) President Sadat said he wants Hussein to take over responsibility for the West Bank (the President agreed). If we succeed here, then Hussein will come in. The President said that the Continuing Committee should have some full powers—e.g. on deciding when to start the negotiations on the final status of the West Bank and Gaza. They have to start by the third year, but can start earlier. If there are differences between Israel and the SGA, or between Israel and Egypt, the Continuing Committee would be the forum, sort of like a supreme court. It can also coordinate, and keep things moving forward. President Sadat said that Israel tries to exclude the U.S.—as it tried to do with the treaty negotiating. The President said they tried it at Camp David, as well! President Sadat said that he believes Begin will not insist on this now. The U.S. has proved itself as an arbiter between the two sides. It is very vital that the U.S. be in.
