Comprehensive Test Ban
579
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. A.M. Vavilov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
Further, the President said we would like to proceed with a com-
prehensive nuclear test ban agreement, either with or without the par-
ticipation of Great Britain. We will do everything possible to induce
other nations, France, Great Britain and China, to join in substantial re-
ductions in nuclear weapons development and deployment. Obviously
he could not speak for them and would think that the Chinese would
be difficult to persuade. But it is obvious that for several years now the
United States and the Soviet Union had such massive nuclear inven-
tories that their predominance over the other nuclear powers is ade-
quate. Moreover, the Soviet SS–20 missiles and other medium-range
systems constituted a formidable means for dealing with these nations.
But the absence of nuclear cooperation from other countries should not
be allowed to interfere with progress on a bilateral basis toward the
SALT III agreement.
Turning to another subject, Brezhnev said it would be very impor-
tant promptly to complete and sign a treaty on the general and com-
plete prohibition of nuclear weapon testing. The Soviet Union had
done a great deal in that direction, having met Western positions on a
number of important matters. Speaking frankly, he would have to say
that the CTB negotiations were being slowed and delayed, and by no
means through any fault of the Soviet Union. Brezhnev expressed the
hope that the United States and England will change their inflexible ap-
proach, in particular, to questions of verification. If that were done, all
three partners could jointly and without further delay finalize their
agreement on this important and necessary measure.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
The President wanted to make one more comment. He had out-
lined to Brezhnev several very specific and important thoughts and
suggestions regarding future arms negotiations leading to SALT III.
Brezhnev had not responded, but the President saw an area of agree-
ment in Soviet willingness to halt the production of nuclear weapons
and to reduce stockpiles, taking into account current stockpiles and the
security interests of the sides. Secondly, he believed it very important
that we agree and publicly say that we will not deliver nuclear fuel to
any nation that is not under the NPT or under IAEA control. We
needed to move forward on the comprehensive test ban. Personally,
the President thought that a requirement for ten stations in a small na-
tion such as Great Britain was excessive. Great Britain shared this view.
