124
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tions toward the conclusion of an initial agreement which could be
signed at the Summit or closely thereafter.
The remaining issues have been described in an inter-agency
status report forwarded to you separately.2 The Soviets have agreed to
the approach the US suggested—an initial agreement prohibiting cer-
tain actions against satellites and a temporary test suspension. The re-
maining problem is how to deal with a number of additional issues
which the Soviets have raised. There is no need to reconsider our posi-
tion on many of these issues, such as the scope of coverage of the pro-
hibited acts agreement, and the Soviet proposals to ban non-destructive
interference with satellites, to limit Shuttle operations, and to permit at-
tacks on “illegal” satellites. The Delegation is pursuing solutions which
are face-saving for the Soviets but retain the substance of the US ap-
proach. Cy has discussed the most troublesome of these, the proposed
exemption for “illegal” satellites, with Dobrynin,3 and plans to take this
issue up again.
The one area where we recommend reconsideration of our posi-
tion is the scope of the test suspension. Although the US goal is a com-
prehensive ban on all ASAT systems, we proposed an initial test sus-
pension only on ASAT interceptors [2½ lines not declassified] and we
should pursue this.) The Soviets have countered with a proposal to sus-
pend testing to January 1981, of not only interceptors but any means of
damaging or destroying satellites.4 They point out, correctly, that a sus-
pension of interceptor testing would appear one-sided and aimed only
at their interceptor program. A broader suspension would appear more
evenhanded (and allay their suspicions that we plan other forms of
ASAT tests).
Since we plan no tests of any ASAT system before 1981, and the So-
viets may be in a position to test lasers as well as interceptors during
this period, we believe it would be in our interest to broaden our ap-
proach on the suspension. There are two ways we could do this:
We could replace our proposal for a ban on interceptor tests with
an offer to exchange statements that neither side plans to test in space
any means of damaging or destroying satellites before 1981, with notifi-
cation to the other side if plans should change. This would not repre-
sent an obligation not to test, so the verification problem would be re-
duced. Some SALT issues were resolved with such exchanges of
statements of plans.
The Delegation recommends a second approach—to retain a
formal test suspension and broaden it to include all ASAT means. They
2 Not found.
3 See Document 49.
4 Not found.
