Hungary expectations, and a careful, case-by-case approach to issues was and is useful. Regarding larger international issues, use of measured language to describe differences is helpful and is noted. Ridgway noted that she retains the same favorable impression of U.S.-Hungarian relations as during her visit to Budapest last June,3 and that she had been particularly favorably impressed by the quality and content of her talks with Janos Nagy and other Hungarian officials in Washington last May and in Budapest. 4. Ridgway continued that we should keep it this way regarding items on the bilateral agenda. Esztergalyos responded that the U.S. and Hungary have molded a good businesslike relationship in which candor is also important. Each side realizes that problems should not be left for time to heal since, instead, they can grow worse. Ridgway acknowledged that smaller problems, left unresolved, can grow into bigger ones. She noted favorably both governments’ conscientious handling of the chemical patents disputes, and recent resolution of the old question of Embassy personnel ceilings. She expressed hope that another old question of USG properties in Budapest would be taken care of, and said she thought we have now found a way constructively to discuss that issue. Esztergaylos replied he thinks a solution can be found. 4. The President’s statement. Esztergalyos said he had been surprised to see President Carter’s reference to human rights in Hungary during his nomination acceptance speech (“...ask the Hungarian-Americans.”). He volunteered that he had not called Budapest’s attention to the comment lest it precipitate a sharp reaction there. Likening the comment to “thunder from a blue sky,” Esztergalyos said it could raise questions in certain circles both in Hungary and the U.S. that Hungary has bowed to pressure from the United States in its human rights practices. Esztergalyos denied that this had been the case. He said he personally could accept the remark as an election-year comment, but hoped that the President does not truly believe that progress with Hungary has been made because of U.S. pressure. “I know the whole story back 10–15 years, and I know our people—that’s a most sensitive point.” Pressure leads to a negative reaction. Esztergalyos worried
