Hungary
513
expectations, and a careful, case-by-case approach to issues was and
is useful. Regarding larger international issues, use of measured lan-
guage to describe differences is helpful and is noted. Ridgway noted
that she retains the same favorable impression of U.S.-Hungarian
relations as during her visit to Budapest last June,3 and that she had
been particularly favorably impressed by the quality and content of
her talks with Janos Nagy and other Hungarian officials in Washington
last May and in Budapest.
4. Ridgway continued that we should keep it this way regarding
items on the bilateral agenda. Esztergalyos responded that the U.S.
and Hungary have molded a good businesslike relationship in which
candor is also important. Each side realizes that problems should not
be left for time to heal since, instead, they can grow worse. Ridgway
acknowledged that smaller problems, left unresolved, can grow into
bigger ones. She noted favorably both governments’ conscientious han-
dling of the chemical patents disputes, and recent resolution of the
old question of Embassy personnel ceilings. She expressed hope that
another old question of USG properties in Budapest would be taken
care of, and said she thought we have now found a way constructively
to discuss that issue. Esztergaylos replied he thinks a solution can
be found.
4. The President’s statement. Esztergalyos said he had been sur-
prised to see President Carter’s reference to human rights in Hungary
during his nomination acceptance speech (“...ask the Hungarian-Amer-
icans.”). He volunteered that he had not called Budapest’s attention to
the comment lest it precipitate a sharp reaction there. Likening the
comment to “thunder from a blue sky,” Esztergalyos said it could raise
questions in certain circles both in Hungary and the U.S. that Hungary
has bowed to pressure from the United States in its human rights
practices. Esztergalyos denied that this had been the case. He said he
personally could accept the remark as an election-year comment, but
hoped that the President does not truly believe that progress with
Hungary has been made because of U.S. pressure. “I know the whole
story back 10–15 years, and I know our people—that’s a most sensitive
point.” Pressure leads to a negative reaction. Esztergalyos worried
3 Ridgway traveled to Budapest June 15–17. In telegram 3374 from Budapest, June
19, the Embassy reported Ridgway’s conversation with Ministry of Foreign Affairs State
Secretary Nagy on June 16. Nagy, the Embassy reported, “stated that the long term
continuation of tension between the U.S. and USSR will cause Hungary problems. If
Hungary is forced to withdraw into ‘its own world again,’ it will not be helpful to either
Hungary or the U.S.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800301–
1122) In telegram 3350 from Budapest, June 19, the Embassy reported Ridgway’s meeting
with Puja. The discussion with the Foreign Minister, the Embassy reported, focused on
the Iranian hostage crisis, NATO-Warsaw Pact relations, and Afghanistan. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800301–1026)
