Yugoslavia 807 this week at the IAEA the Yugoslavs called our proposals unacceptable and said Tito would ask you for a “waiver.”9 —If Tito raises the issue in a general way, I suggest you applaud the Yugoslav record on non-proliferation; explain our concerns and legislation, thus making clear that we are not discriminating against Yugoslavia; express appreciation for their willingness to negotiate and that you look forward to a successful conclusion. —If Tito asks for a waiver, this is the situation: the Non-Proliferation Act contains no “waiver” permitting you to authorize shipments of fuel to a country that does not meet the immediate conditions of the Act. There is, however, a theoretical loophole which gives EURA- TOM and the IAEA two years to meet the immediate conditions of the Act. Since Yugoslavia’s agreement is with the IAEA, that might be made to apply. But to use that loophole for Yugoslavia would create an impression that the Act is being dismantled as soon as it was signed. And it would put you in confrontation with the NRC, which is strongly opposed and feels that Yugoslavia supply agreement with us should not be through the IAEA in the first place. If Tito asks for a waiver, I suggest you explain that there is no waiver provision in the act that would apply, point out the effect on our entire non-proliferation program, and suggest that Vance discuss the question with Foreign Minister Minic. Science and Technology Cooperation. During the past five years, we have had a science and technology cooperation program with the Yugoslavs, to which each side committed $7 million over that period. Our part has been financed out of our dinar holdings, which will not continue to be large enough to finance this program, in addition to the usual expenses of our Embassy in Belgrade. The Yugoslavs have proposed, therefore, that we begin paying Yugoslav annuitants (from Social Security, etc.) in dollars instead of dinars, in order to free up extra dinars for the science and technology program. Treasury objects, on the grounds that that will swell the pool of dinars to excess, and that the proposal falls outside the intent of Congress, if not the law itself governing U.S.-owned foreign currencies. I have asked State-Treasury-OMB to propose an alternative—such as a direct appropriation of approximately $1.5 million a year to this 9 As reported in telegram 2025 from Vienna, March 2, the Yugoslav negotiating team at the IAEA held that the United States should reacquire the spent fuel from Yugoslavia’s Krsko reactor. The Yugoslavs, the Embassy reported, told the IAEA that Tito would raise the matter with Carter. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780095–1047)
