Arms Control and Disarmament 1565 war. The government’s concern that disarmament be tackled as a prior­ ity world problem has been intensified by the advent of ICBMs. While recognizing that practical security problems are involved in the disar­ mament issue, the Indian Government exerts every effort to encourage both the US and USSR to make gestures and concessions that might lead in time to substantial disarmament agreements. 40. The Japanese Government continues to rely on US deterrent power for security. Developments in Soviet nuclear capabilities have not weakened its determination to remain allied with the US. At the same time, the strong popular revulsion to nuclear weapons and awareness of Japan’s vulnerability to nuclear attack have impelled the government to take measures to minimize the risks of Japan’s involve­ ment in nuclear warfare. In pursuit of this objective the government opposes the introduction of nuclear weapons into Japan and seeks revi­ sion of the US-­Japanese Security Treaty to give Japan a veto over the operational use of US bases. We believe that the Japanese Government would consent to the use of US bases in Japan for the launching of air attacks, nuclear or otherwise, against targets on the mainland of Asia only if Japanese leaders were convinced that Japan itself were directly threatened.3 B. The Sino-­Soviet Bloc 41. Soviet thinking and foreign and military policy have been strongly influenced by a growing appreciation of the power of nuclear weapons. The Soviet leaders have made strong efforts to build a sub­ stantial nuclear capability of their own, but they have continued to maintain and strengthen a broad range of nonnuclear capabilities.4 42. They have also tried to reduce the military and political use­ fulness of US nuclear capabilities by attempting to make US overseas bases untenable and by increasing the inhibitions attached to any use of nuclear weapons. Recognizing the world-­wide fear of nuclear war, the USSR has sought to garb itself with slogans of “peace,” to adopt attractive and simplified positions on disarmament, and to emphasize the dangers that go with any association with the US defense effort. 43. The development of nuclear weapons and their potential for devastation in war probably played a major role in the 1956 revision in Communist doctrine, which now holds that military conflict with the capitalist states is no longer “fatally inevitable.” This revision was
