128  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
— Option 1—Modify the existing United States position by seeking 
the negotiated elimination of all heavy ICBMs. Variants could include (a) 
eliminating all 308 missiles over the seven year START phase in period, 
(b) eliminating the second 154 missiles over some longer period, and/
or (c) allowing flight testing (but not modernization of heavy ICBMs 
during their elimination period. This option is favored by OSD and 
Ambassador Rowny, although Ambassador Rowny would not pay a high 
negotiating price for it.
— Option 2—Retain the existing formal U.S, position, rescinding the 
contingency guidance developed in the last Administration. This approach 
requires a decision (which need not be made now) on whether a base-
line can be negotiated which would preclude SS–18 Mod 5 deploy-
ment. If SS–18 Mod 5’s were allowed, the U.S. throwweight approach 
would count all SS–18’s at the throwweight of the Mod 5. This option 
would ban heavy ICBM flight testing and would ultimately lead to 
the “withering away” of the heavy ICBM force. This option is favored 
by the DCI’s representative and is acceptable to Ambassador Rowny as a 
fallback.
— Option 3—Retain the existing formal U.S, position, rescinding the 
contingency guidance developed in the last Administration. Relax the flight 
test ban in the future only in return for further reduction (perhaps by one 
half) in the 154 heavy ICBMs. This approach also requires a decision on 
whether a baseline can be negotiated which would preclude SS–18 Mod 
5 deployment. It rejects formal equality as a right the United States is 
unlikely to exercise. This option is favored by ACDA.
— Option 4—Retain the existing contingency guidance, modifying the 
U.S. position and allowing testing and modernization of heavy ICBMs in 
return for comparable formal U.S. rights, but do not table it at this time. 
Under this approach the United States would wait until an appro-
priate time and then would make this concession only in return for 
significant Soviet movement in other areas. This option is favored by 
State, DOE, and the JCS, and is acceptable as a fallback to the DCI’s 
representative.
