Yugoslavia 925 the inevitability. Yet the odds favor liberalization; what we and our Western Allies do, beginning now, will have a great deal to do with whether that present hope can be turned into future reality. Eagleburger 284. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, March 3, 1980 Yugoslavia: US Politico-Military Strategy Executive Summary This paper examines four major post-Tito scenarios in Yugoslavia, and Soviet policies for each. It then sets forth the politico-military steps the US should take over the near term to prepare for these scenarios, and the policies we should pursue when one or more of them develops. The issue of direct US military action in Yugoslavia in response to steps the Soviets might take is beyond the scope of this paper. The US and NATO have important interests in a stable, independent, and nonaligned Yugoslavia. Were it allied or more cooperative with the Warsaw Pact, Yugoslavia could support expanded Soviet naval and air operations in the Mediterranean. The occupation of Yugoslavia by Warsaw Pact forces would present a threat to Greece, Italy, and Austria. In addition, a Soviet takeover of Yugoslavia would deal a profound psychological blow to NATO. At the same time, Yugoslavia remains a communist state, albeit nonaligned with extensive but still limited ties to the West. The US and its NATO Allies have no military commitment to Yugoslavia’s security. The Yugoslavs now expect to rely mainly on their own resources to blunt any Soviet attack, but they would want some Western support, e.g., logistic. In the face of an actual attack, they might change 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 69, Yugoslavia: Military: 4–9/80. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. Sent under a March 6 covering memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski. Tarnoff explained the paper was “developed by an interagency group chaired by State. A mini- SCC on January 18, 1980, requested such a study. We recommend that another mini- SCC be held to consider the post-Tito security framework and scenarios which the paper sets forth and the adequacy of present policies in the politico-military field to prepare for them.”
