Afghanistan the GOP to drop its opposition to Soviet policy and to accept the “irreversibility” of events in Afghanistan; —(C) Large numbers of Afghan refugees (which could approach two million) will remain in Pakistan for the foreseeable future becoming an increasingly serious domestic political issue in Baluchistan and the Northwest Frontier particularly, and —(D) The Afghan resistance will continue to obstruct Soviet efforts to pacify the Afghan countryside, but at present levels of outside support it may begin to lose effectiveness as the war of attrition drags on in Afghanistan. 5. There may be some debate among Americans about the validity or force of these assumptions, but there is substantial evidence that they form the current mind-set of most key Pakistanis who will be responsible for influencing Pakistan’s own policy toward Afghanistan. For the Pakistanis, therefore, these are very real factors which we must take into account in determining our own approach to the issues involved, including the nature of our bilateral relationship with Islamabad. 6. We would hope that someone in transition Washington is looking down the road six months or a year trying to ascertain where would we prefer to be then. —Are we prepared, for example, to simply let the situation drift, somehow hoping that the resistance will remain strong and that Pakistan will maintain a firm stance against the Soviets? —Or are we prepared to take some positive initiatives either to help defuse the tensions boiling in the area or to bolster Pakistani resolve in standing up in the face of intense pressures? These are difficult questions to which we do not have the answers. We suggest only that someone should be giving them serious thought. 7. If we assume that the Soviets will negotiate over Afghanistan only on their own terms (essentially the May 14 proposals), we do not see much likelihood of a solution which would meet our stated requirements including complete Soviet troop withdrawal, restoration of Afghanistan’s nonaligned and independent status, self-determination for the Afghan people, and guarantees of keeping up our own firm opposition to the invasion and recognition of the Karmal regime. On the other hand, we ourselves may have extended an aspect of formal recognition to Karmal by granting an A–1 visa to one of his diplomats.2 Is it not at least conceivable that Pakistan could find a way
