3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
594
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
cept to those nations that were under the terms of the NPT or agreed-to
IAEA safeguards.
The President said we were ready to sign a partial agreement with
the Soviet Union on anti-satellite systems, an agreement to bar any
damage or destruction of satellites and announce publicly that neither
side has plans to test anti-satellite missiles or systems.
Finally, in his opening statement, the President wanted to mention
the talks here in Vienna on mutual and balanced force reductions, ne-
gotiations which have now been carried on for more than five years.
With consultation with our allies, the United States was ready to make
progress in this effort. We would be willing to consider a first phase
step limited to just the Soviet Union and the United States, if the Soviets
agreed. This can be discussed between Secretary Brown and Marshal
Ustinov, but it would be necessary to overcome the need for agreed
data, based on a common definition of what a soldier is and who
should be included. These obstacles should be overcome if the leaders
are willing to make progress. The President added that we would have
to agree on associated measures to verify an MBFR agreement. (Mar-
shal Ustinov missed part of the translation so the President repeated his
statement on the definition of armed forces to be included in MBFR so
as to resolve the data question.) The President said that this concluded
his presentation.
Brezhnev said that both he and President Carter had given a high
assessment of the importance of the SALT II Treaty, and quite rightly
so. But it must be admitted that on the whole, very little—in fact, almost
nothing—had been done in terms of curbing the arms race. It was true
that there had never been so many ongoing negotiations on arms con-
trol measures as today. But, in most cases, these talks have been
marking time for years and going around in circles. In the meanwhile,
the arms race continues. To Brezhnev, this appeared to be a disquieting
situation. He believed it especially important to halt and reverse this
tendency. In this respect, our two countries can do a great deal and
there is every reason to take advantage of the success in SALT in order
to provide an impetus to progress on other arms limitations.
Brezhnev wanted to draw the President’s particular attention to the
Soviet Union’s proposal to halt the production of nuclear weapons and
to gradually reduce nuclear stockpiles up to and including their com-
plete elimination. In this process, the Soviet side proposed to take into
consideration the difference in levels of stockpiles so that the balance is
preserved and no harm done to the security of this or that state. He
would repeat further that it was necessary to avoid a situation in which
our two countries would be reducing their nuclear arsenals while other
countries could continue to build up theirs.
