500  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
and notified him that if they did so I reserved my right promptly reply 
by public statement. There ensued one hour’s discussion on this subject 
with charges and counter-charges during which I referred to leaks by 
NCNA correspondent as source many press stories. Believe net result 
was reaffirmation agreement on privacy talks and do not believe he is 
going to issue any statement, but some indication decision is not entirely 
his.
2. He then made long prepared statement on their draft renunciation 
of force repeating usual arguments but somewhat stronger in tone, par­
ticularly as to their unwillingness ever to recognize “US encroachment in 
Taiwan”, status quo, or that Taiwan was not domestic matter. Somewhat 
more emphasis upon withdrawal of US forces from Taiwan area.
3. I then made short statement on implementation to effect by 
no stretch of imagination or interpretation can their performance be 
considered expeditious, and that this situation closely related to other 
aspects our talks and my government’s view of reliance which can be 
placed on commitments by his government.
4. I then made statement introducing our draft agreed announce­
ment on renunciation of force, giving him copy. Meeting adjourned 
after few “preliminary comments” by him along expected lines.
5. He made no statement on trade embargo except for passing 
reference in his opening general statement to effect unacceptable that 
discussion of trade be conditioned upon issuance renunciation of force 
statement.
6. Next meeting Thursday, November 17.
Gowen
363.	 Telegram 1125 from Geneva1
Geneva, November 10, 1955, 4 p.m.
1125. From Johnson.
Haguiwara (Japanese Ambassador in Bern) called on me yesterday 
evidently under instructions to obtain information concerning progress 
in my talks with Wang particularly with respect to trade and to sound 
me out on our views on relaxing CHINCOM controls.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–1055. Confidential. Repeated 
to Tokyo as telegram 6.
