302
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
regular Afghan armies to pursue the rebels in the field, and that might
be more effective.
The President said he supported the Finding.6
The Vice President said that the new group installed by the Soviets
may be as unpopular or even more so than the former one. The Secretary
of Defense noted, however, that if only isolated pockets of resistance
remain, they may be successful.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that the Soviet Union had been reasonably
successful at counter-insurgency efforts. They had had success in Lat-
via, Lithuania and the Ukraine, with their strategy being primarily the
holding of the cities.
Admiral Turner noted in this connection that the more elite Afghan
army units now guarding the cities may be released to fight the insur-
gents. This would provide forces with better morale which are less
likely to desert and turn over their weapons to the insurgents. This,
in turn, makes our aid all the more important.
On the question of the Presidential Finding, the President said that
he hoped that these Findings would be drawn with an eye toward the
greatest possible flexibility and generality emphasizing the positive
goals we hope to achieve in the most constructive terms.
Dr. Brzezinski then indicated that we should discuss the question
of U.S. approaches to the Soviet Union directly. The President indicated
that he wishes a very strong message, with no holds barred, sent from
him to Brezhnev and an equally tough public statement made.
The President said that this issue transcends SALT. He would not
acquiesce to the Soviet action just because it might give comfort and
assistance to SALT opponents in the Congress. He said that the message
to Brezhnev should point out that their action was a “threat to the
peace” which casts “grave doubts upon our relationship” and which
was “a direct violation of the principles agreed to in 1972.”7
Mr. Powell asked what our ultimate aim was in the Afghan situa-
tion. The President replied to get the Soviets to withdraw. The Secre-
taries of State and Defense and Dr. Brzezinski said it was to make it
as costly as possible for the Soviets. Secretary Brown added that we
want to use the issue as a rallying point for our policies in the area.
6 The Presidential Finding, signed by Carter on December 28, listed Afghanistan
as the scope, with the description: “Provide lethal military equipment either directly or
through third countries to the Afghan opponents of the Soviet intervention in Afghani-
stan. Provide selective training, conducted outside of Afghanistan, in the use of such
equipment either directly or via third country intermediaries.” (National Security Coun-
cil, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 11 Sep 1979–22
Jul 1980)
7 See Document 113.
