Chile 299 America. He emphasized again that there was a critical need for more capital from abroad that could be converted into local currency for public works, both to finance the urgently needed public works themselves and to take up slack in the employment without which it would be increasingly difficult to hold the Communists in check and for governments such as his to succeed in their program. He mentioned also that such foreign credits, that could be converted into local currency, would also be of great assistance to the United States in making available more dollars to Chile and, by implication, her neighbors, which could be used for imports from the United States, and thus help to relieve our own current export problem. When the President ended his comments on this topic I remarked that from recent conversations with Pablo Pérez, Minister of Public Works, and Roberto Vergara, Minister of Finance, I understood that the government was currently working on a program of public works, particularly in the fields of roads and irrigation. I said that I had expressed to both Ministers the hope that when they had their programs sufficiently developed they would make them available to us so that both the Embassy and our technical assistance people would have an opportunity to study them prior to any actual application being made to one of the international or U.S. lending agencies. The President then returned to the international situation, repeating that he felt that the current crisis would be fully exploited by Communists in Latin America as well as other parts of the world. He expressed the view that Khrushchev’s belligerent attitude was determined at least in part by growing differences between Russia and Communist China. Indicating that as between the two he felt that Russia constituted the greater threat to the free world, he expressed the wish that the United States could find it possible to follow a more flexible policy with relation to Communist China, both in order to relax tension with Communist China and with the idea of increasing the tension between Russia and China. He said that information coming to him from non-Communist visitors to China suggested that Chinese Communism was different from Russian Communism in that many Communist enterprises were apparently conducted through a mixed form of public and private ownership. (Comment: While the sources of President Alessandri on this subject are not fully known, it is quite possible that he may have been influenced by conversations with recent non-Communist Chilean visitors to China, including Liberal Deputy Jorge Errázuriz, Juan Gómez Millas, Director of the University of Chile, Francis Walker Linares, Director of Cultural Exchange activities.) I expressed some surprise at this, saying that while I certainly did not claim to be a student of that area, my understanding was that, if anything, Russia showed some signs of emerging from the primitive
