Summaries of Compilations  LXV
The United States, as it consistently had, stressed its desire for a mutu-
ally acceptable settlement. (EC–17) At the same time, Ecuador needed 
help quickly in terms of highway construction, electric power, housing, 
and medium industries. The United States stressed the need for careful 
planning, but noted it was anxious to assist. (EC–18)
Shortly thereafter, in September 1960, the Embassy in Quito 
reported that students, demonstrating over the boundary dispute, 
stoned the Consulate General in Guayaquil. (EC–19) The Guarantors of 
the 1942 Rio Protocol, the United States, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, 
meeting informally, cautioned against unilateral action by Ecuador to 
denounce the Protocol, stating that most of the provisions of that agree-
ment had already been implemented and unilateral denunciation was 
unacceptable. (EC–20, 21)
On October 23, however, Ecuador announced its repudiation of 
the 1942 Protocol. The United States, responding as a Guarantor on 
December 7, stated that such unilateral action was not allowable. The 
Guarantors stood ready to assist in a mutual resolution by Peru and 
Ecuador of a satisfactory demarcation of the remaining areas of the 
boundary line still at issue. At the same time, the United States assured 
Ecuador that aggression by the other party would raise the security 
guarantees of the inter-American system against any armed attack. 
(EC–22)
An Intelligence Note to Secretary of State Christian Herter on 
December 16 informed him that the December 7 statement had pro-
voked attacks resulting in considerable damage to the Embassy and 
other U.S. buildings in Quito and Guayaquil. (EC–23) Since taking 
office, Velasco, rather than concentrating on economic problems, had 
focused on the boundary question. Ecuadorean overtures toward Cuba 
and the Soviet Union appeared designed to gain support on this issue. 
Meanwhile, leftist agitation was undoubtedly a factor in the assaults on 
U.S. property.
Within a few days, however, relations took a turn for the better, 
according to the Embassy in Quito. (EC–24) Velasco dismissed his 
Minister of Government, Manuel Araujo, characterized as rabidly left-
ist and pro-Castro in his views. This dismissal brought to a close an 
unprecedented period of leftist agitation in the country. Just before the 
end of the year, Foreign Minister Chiriboga visited Washington. A joint 
statement issued on the occasion concentrated on economic develop-
ment and indicated U.S. desire to provide loans for projects such as 
the establishment of savings and loan institutions, and construction of 
highways, municipal water systems, and electric power installations. 
The boundary dispute was not mentioned. (EC–25)
