474 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX under consideration for a specific Gaza date would, in my view, be impossible and would look like a new demand on your part which was not included in the Camp David Accords. We will be a full partner in the next phase of negotiations and, as in the past, we can produce positive results by working together with you. We can let the world see that Egypt has not made a separate peace. By pressing forward, with our support, in the negotiations for the West Bank and Gaza these tangible, on-the-ground steps will be more convincing than any language we can agree upon today. We now have the components of a peace treaty package which is fair to both sides, and I am urging both you and Prime Minister Begin, with whom I also spoke on the telephone,10 to move as quickly as possible to give your final approval to these documents. It would help me, Mr. President, if you could give me your response as soon as possible. We are at a decisive moment which we must seize. Further negotiation will not yield significant gains for either side but could, on the contrary, place in jeopardy what has been accomplished thus far. Conclusion of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel will be a major achievement. It will be so recognized throughout the world and will strengthen our hands to forge ahead without delay toward the objective of a comprehensive peace which we set for ourselves at Camp David. With my best wishes. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter. End text. 3. You should make certain Sadat understands that his delegation here has not signed on to those elements of the treaty package which their instructions do not permit them to agree to. In particular, the letter on the West Bank and Gaza and the new language on phasing of withdrawal to the interim line were shown to them for the first time Sunday. What we are doing in effect is asking Sadat to approve a package which his delegation’s instructions do not permit them to agree to in a number of respects. 4. One of the changes we anticipate making in the above text would be to add a new second sentence which would indicate that the President has read your report of your Monday conversation with Sadat. Vance 10 See Document 133.
