398
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Prime Minister Fukuda: Thank you very much. Thank you for
your kind words and for your hospitality. You are the President not
only of the United States but of the whole world.
(As the meeting broke up Prime Minister Fukuda told the Presi-
dent that he hoped to see him in Japan.)
131.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) and the Special Representative
for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, May 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Economic Issues at Your Tuesday Breakfast with Chancellor Schmidt2
This is a joint memorandum, since we are both interested in the
Summit—Owen as your representative on the International Summit
Preparatory Committee, and Schultze as chairman of a group of eco-
nomic experts that met last weekend to prepare a report on macro-
economic policy for that Committee. This memo also reflects the views
of your advisers in State and Treasury. A report on the Schultze group’s
meeting is attached at Tab A.3 The Summit Preparatory Group will
meet this coming weekend; if anything develops during this meeting
that you should know, Owen will send you a supplementary note be-
fore you see Schmidt.4
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 6, [Bonn Economic] Summit 1978 [1]. Confidential. Sent for
information.
2 Carter and Schmidt held a breakfast meeting in the Oval Office on Tuesday, May
30, from 8:04 until 9 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
No memorandum of conversation was found.
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a May 25 memorandum from Schultze to Carter
entitled “Economic Policy and the Summit.”
4 In a May 28 memorandum to Carter, Owen reported that “nothing emerged” from
the May 27–28 meeting of the Summit Preparatory Group that would “change the
briefing memo that Charlie Schultze and I sent you” on the breakfast meeting with
Schmidt. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
Box 24, German Federal Republic: 4–6/78) Owen’s May 31 report on the Summit Prepa-
ratory Group meeting is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Special Projects, Henry Owen, Box 25, Summit: Bonn: 6/1–23/78.
