December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 579 Summary: Conveyed to PriMin Khalil this morning our ideas on how to proceed. He was generally agreeable, but asked that Atherton/ Hansell come to Cairo January 17–183 since he is scheduled make second trip to Khartoum January 19 and will stay there for two days. He wants to conduct Article IV and VI talks with Atherton/Hansell and does not want Boutros Ghali to do so. Khalil emphasized that it is not only para 5 of Article VI that needs to be covered by interpretative note, but also para 2. Latter, he stressed, is of great importance to GOE in connection with linkage letter. Whole exercise, Khalil said, must be in context of Camp David Accords, not as Dayan had just put it, “stand on its own feet.” He understands that Israelis have not yet been approached and that our concept should for time being be kept in strict confidence. In subsequent telecom with VP Mubarak it developed that Khalil had informed him. VP was also agreeable to our proposed procedure. End Summary. (S-entire text) 1. I was able contact PriMin Khalil this morning in order to tell him of our tentative thinking on how to proceed. After telling him that Israelis share his preference for moving directly to Ministerial-level talks, I also gave our view on importance of first laying careful groundwork. He agreed. I then told him that we would first like to try to resolve the Articles IV and VI problems. Of these, Article VI is the more difficult and, as we see it, requires in first instance further discussions between ourselves and Israelis in order to ascertain if we can clairfy for them the kinds of questions about our legal interpretative note that I understood Dayan had raised with Khalil in Brussels.4 Khalil recalled that the subject had been discussed there. 2. I then told him about proposed Atherton/Hansell visit to Tel Aviv and Cairo next week. Their mission will be to explore possibility of resolving Articles IV and VI problems and thereafter returning to Washington to report to the Secretary. Depending upon results, the Secretary would then be in better position to make a judgment on 3 Telegram 9775 to Cairo and Tel Aviv, January 13, confirmed Atherton and Hansell’s proposed visit to Tel Aviv and Cairo, beginning January 16, in order to explore ways of resolving outstanding issues related to Articles IV and VI of the peace treaty. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840156–1866) On the eve of the arrival of the Atherton/Hansell Mission, Atherton observed that in addition to their work on Articles IV and VI, they might also “be able to do some useful work on the oil problem. With Israel now very likely cut off from Iranian supply, it is already clear that the Gulf of Suez oil issue is going to assume a substantially more important place in the peace negotiations.” Atherton noted that their objective should not be to achieve a final resolution on oil, but rather to build on the “considerable work that has already been done in this area.” (Telegram 11571 to Cairo and Tel Aviv, January 16; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State Department Out, Box 115, 1/15–24/79) 4 See footnote 2, Document 162.
