North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
851
tempting to meet basic needs in middle-income as well as low-income
countries, giving less attention to political considerations, and less em-
phasis to macroeconomic performance criteria relative to Option (2).
(5) Multiple objectives.
Under this option the main emphasis would be on assisting the de-
velopment of poor countries, with allowance for programs based on
economic, political or security objectives where development assist-
ance was judged to be an appropriate tool.4
Country allocations would be based on multiple criteria (e.g.,
human rights performance, economic importance) rather than on de-
velopment policies and performance alone. It would be possible under
this option to launch global campaigns against particular development
problems.
4 Brzezinski wrote several comments at the bottom of this page (page 3) of the mem-
orandum: “US [illegible]: growth, development; US Bilateral Policy: [illegible]; and BHN:
1) poor (people + countries), 2) selective global problems, 3) key countries (if not covered by
above).”
278.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 10, 1977
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting on Foreign Assistance, October 11, 3:30 p.m., Situation Room
The PRC meets on October 11 to consider the foreign assistance
issues presented by PRM 8-Track III (the section on basic human
needs), the DCC study, and the Brookings Institution report. An Issues
Paper (Tab III)2 contains the main policy options which emerge from
the reports and summarizes the DCC and Brookings studies.
Our objectives for this meeting are two-fold:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Deputy, Meetings
File, Box 5, PRC Meeting: 10/11/77: [Brzezinski Copy] [I]. Confidential. Sent for informa-
tion. Copies were sent to Aaron, Owen, the North-South Cluster of the NSC Staff, and
Tuchman.
2 Printed as Document 277.
