893.5045/127: Telegram
[Document 529]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 10, 1925—6 p.m.
[Received 10:47 p.m.]
268. My 267, July 9, 7 p.m. Diplomatic representatives received yesterday through
consular channels communication dated July 8th in which Shanghai Municipal Council
declined to accede to conclusions of the diplomatic representatives. No reply has been
received to the communication sent in behalf of diplomatic representatives to the
American, British, and Japanese consuls on the 8th.
2. Diplomatic representatives met this morning to consider situation. British Chargé
d’Affaires has received copy of instructions telegraphed by his Government to its
consul general at Shanghai directing him to use every effort to obtain the agreement of
the Municipal Council to the conclusions of the diplomatic representatives. Telegram
from senior consul furthermore contained slight intimation that the Council might
reconsider its position. In view of the possibility of such reconsideration diplomatic
representatives decided to await further word from Shanghai consular body before
taking action on the Council’s letter; but because of the strong probability that the
Council would remain obdurate in the hope that the present crisis would enable it
advantageously to force the long-standing issue as to its claim to practical autonomy on
the part of the Shanghai administration, they felt it advisable to seek without delay such
instructions as would enable them to meet that issue with full authorization to
undertake if necessary negotiations for the modification of the existing land
regulations. They therefore agreed to send their respective Governments the following
identic telegram the substance of which was suggested by MacMurray instead of the
telegram proposed by the French Minister at the previous meeting:
“The Shanghai Municipal Council, having received on July 6th the
conclusions adopted by the diplomatic representatives as a result of the
sending of the diplomatic commission, has now replied with an absolute
refusal to agree to them, claiming that it is ‘primarily responsible only to the
electorate of the International Settlement of Shanghai’, the interested
diplomatic representatives apprehend that it will prove impossible to induce
the Council to modify its position.
In view of the anomalous situation arising from a denial by the Settlement
administration of the authority and responsibility of the diplomatic
