Arms Control and Disarmament 1229 C. Upon termination of the twelve months period, the parties will be free to conduct tests unless they have agreed to continue the suspen­ sion for a further period under effective international inspection. D. If the inspection system referred to in paragraph V–­A is oper­ ating to the satisfaction of each party concerned and if progress satis­ factory to each party concerned is being achieved in the preparation of an inspection system for the cessation of the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes agreed to under paragraph IV–A–1 above, all parties to the convention undertake to refrain from conduct­ ing nuclear test explosions for a further period of twelve months. Such an extension will be made only with the understanding that testing may at the discretion of each party be conducted twenty-­four months after the entry into force of the convention if the inspection system for the cessation of production for weapons purposes has not been installed to the satisfaction of each party concerned before the end of the twenty-­ four months and if the cessation of production for weapons purposes has not been put into effect. E. If tests are resumed, each party undertakes to announce and regis­ ter in advance the dates of each series and the range of total energy to be released therein; to provide for limited observation of them; and to limit the amount of radioactive material to be released into the atmosphere. VI. The Control of Objects Entering Outer Space All parties to the convention agree that within three months after the entry into effect of the convention they will co-­operate in the estab­ lishment of a technical committee to study the design of an inspection system which would make it possible to assure that the sending of objects through outer space will be exclusively for peaceful and scien­ tific purposes. VII. Safeguards Against the Possibility of Surprise Attack A. From the entry into force of the convention the parties concerned will co-­operate in the establishment and maintenance of systems of inspection to safeguard against the possibility of surprise attack. B. The establishment of such systems will be subject to agreement on the details of its installation, maintenance and operation. It is pro­ posed as a matter of urgency that a working group of experts appointed by the five Governments represented on the Sub-­Committee be set up at once to examine the technical problems and to report their conclu­ sions which could form the basis for an annex to the agreement. C. With regard to inspection in the Western Hemisphere and in the Soviet Union, the Governments of Canada, France, the United King­ dom and the United States propose the following:
