Arms Control and DisarmamentвҖғ 1229
C. Upon termination of the twelve months period, the parties will 
be free to conduct tests unless they have agreed to continue the suspenВӯ
sion for a further period under effective international inspection.
D. If the inspection system referred to in paragraph VвҖ“ВӯA is operВӯ
ating to the satisfaction of each party concerned and if progress satisВӯ
factory to each party concerned is being achieved in the preparation of 
an inspection system for the cessation of the production of fissionable 
material for weapons purposes agreed to under paragraph IVвҖ“AвҖ“1 
above, all parties to the convention undertake to refrain from conductВӯ
ing nuclear test explosions for a further period of twelve months. Such 
an extension will be made only with the understanding that testing may 
at the discretion of each party be conducted twenty-Вӯfour months after 
the entry into force of the convention if the inspection system for the 
cessation of production for weapons purposes has not been installed to 
the satisfaction of each party concerned before the end of the twenty-Вӯ
four months and if the cessation of production for weapons purposes 
has not been put into effect.
E. If tests are resumed, each party undertakes to announce and regisВӯ
ter in advance the dates of each series and the range of total energy to be 
released therein; to provide for limited observation of them; and to limit 
the amount of radioactive material to be released into the atmosphere.
VI. The Control of Objects Entering Outer Space
All parties to the convention agree that within three months after 
the entry into effect of the convention they will co-Вӯoperate in the estabВӯ
lishment of a technical committee to study the design of an inspection 
system which would make it possible to assure that the sending of 
objects through outer space will be exclusively for peaceful and scienВӯ
tific purposes.
VII. Safeguards Against the Possibility of Surprise Attack
A. From the entry into force of the convention the parties concerned 
will co-Вӯoperate in the establishment and maintenance of systems of 
inspection to safeguard against the possibility of surprise attack.
B. The establishment of such systems will be subject to agreement 
on the details of its installation, maintenance and operation. It is proВӯ
posed as a matter of urgency that a working group of experts appointed 
by the five Governments represented on the Sub-ВӯCommittee be set up 
at once to examine the technical problems and to report their concluВӯ
sions which could form the basis for an annex to the agreement.
C. With regard to inspection in the Western Hemisphere and in the 
Soviet Union, the Governments of Canada, France, the United KingВӯ
dom and the United States propose the following:
