International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
655
There is a widespread misinterpretation of the oral resignations in
other countries, where the public wrongly associates it with the fall of a
government under a parliamentary system. But there is a general im-
pression of disarray even among those who understand our system of
government.
On specific individuals: apart from you and Harold Brown, the
only Cabinet member of great importance to foreign policy is Mike. As
you know he had a rocky start (he was charged in 1977 with trying to
“talk down the dollar”), but since then he has built a very strong and
deserved reputation abroad as being solid, substantive and a useful
check on some of the more radical ideas that arise in various parts of
the Administration. I do not doubt that his resignation will be taken
badly (except perhaps by the Russians, who were not highly enamored
of him). Tony Solomon’s reputation is limited largely to official and fi-
nancial circles, but his departure would also be lamented. He is
strongly attached to Mike, but he is willing to stay on under a new boss
if that is necessary to smooth the transition.5
Juanita Kreps and Jim Schlesinger are both widely known and re-
spected abroad but I do not believe that there would be strong foreign
reactions either to their retention or to their departure. Abroad, as at
home, Schlesinger gets blamed for an inadequate energy policy, so his
departure might be a visual plus for the Carter Administration in for-
eign eyes; but that of course is merely cosmetics.6
tional address, and his July 16 remarks in Kansas City, see Public Papers of the Presidents of
the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 1226–1228, 1235–1247.
4 On July 17, Powell gave the following statement to the press: “The President had a
serious and lengthy discussion with his Cabinet and senior White House staff today
about the priorities of his Administration. He reviewed with them the progress of the
past few years and the problems which remain. All members of the senior staff and Cab-
inet have offered their resignations during this period of evaluation. The President will
review these offers of resignation carefully and expeditiously.” (Terence Smith, “Carter
Offered Resignations by Cabinet and Senior Staff; Some Going in Days, Aides Say,” The
New York Times, July 18, 1979, p. A1)
5 On July 19, Powell announced Blumenthal’s resignation and Carter’s nomination
of G. William Miller as his replacement; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 1273–1275. On July 24, Brzezinski assured Schmidt
that the Cabinet shuffle “did not imply any foreign policy shift. This was particularly true
in the financial field where Bill Miller would continue implementing the policies which
Mike Blumenthal had tried to carry out.” He also noted Carter’s “firm commitment
toward meaningful long-range energy program.” Schmidt replied “that he did not expect
any major changes in U.S. policy” and asserted his “full faith in Bill Miller,” stressing that
“Miller’s rapid confirmation was particularly important for the international monetary
situation.” (Memorandum of conversation, July 24; Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 14, Germany
F R: 6–7/79)
6 Carter accepted Schlesinger’s resignation on July 20 and Kreps’ on October 4; see
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 1290–1291
and 1818.
