164 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 very interested in IBRD proposal.6 While obstacles pointed out in Deptel 2713 still appear great to us, we are encouraged by attitude shown by both parties. Shld Mosadeq learn as is inevitable of any Brit attempt to have Shah dismiss him, he certainly will not rpt not be amenable to any suggestions for solution put forward by Bank or anyone else, and will see to it that any successor govt cld not rpt not accept any overtures of this nature. Accordingly we believe you shld discuss matter frankly with Fon- Off pointing out while we sympathize with Brit position, our analysis is that contemplated Brit course of action not only unlikely to produce any basic improvement in US–UK position in Iran but in present atmosphere prevailing there, it contains serious dangers. We firmly believe Mosadeq’s fall and replacement by suitable alternative must come about primarily as result internal polit and econ forces. Iran crisis has arisen in large part out of years of bitter resentment on part Irans against exactly sort of tactics Middleton is proposing. While we agree change of govt or change attitude present govt essential if long-range solution is to be found, we cannot escape conclusion Iran people are solidly behind Mosadeq and any attempt by Brit to have him dismissed wld in all probability result in further removal Brit from Iran picture. It might also precipitate situation in Iran leading to assumption of power by Commies or by extremists of Maki–Kashani type who will not hesitate make deal with Communists. If, despite above, Brit feel they must proceed with this course of action, we will of course not rpt [not] stand in their way. If asked by Shah for statement US position following Brit representations, we wld take line suggested by Henderson and tell Shah while we felt Mosadeq leading his country to disaster and change seems necessary, it is decision he himself must make and US wld not feel we cld press him one way or the other. You shld urge Brit not to press Shah take any action which he in his own judgment thinks inadvisable. In view Tehran injunction not discuss with Brit Tehran’s 1984, wld apprec Henderson indicating to London Dept and Rome his views re Gifford informing FonOff source our info. If London Emb representations wld involve serious breach confidence, Henderson shld take above line with Middleton and request him convey our views London FonOff. Webb7 6 See ibid., pp. 288–291 (Document 135). 7 Deputy Under Secretary Matthews initialed for Under Secretary Webb, who was Acting Secretary.
