National Security Policy 457 are spreading among a small but increasing circle of readers a climate of dis­satisfaction and of impatience with the pace of official reforms. 40. This consequence of de-Stalinization, stemming from many of the same causes which produced direct challenges to Soviet rule in Poland and Hungary, has led the regime to define more sharply the limits of its liberalization program. Just as the Polish and Hungarian events led to renewed stress on Soviet leadership of the Bloc, so the unorthodox views of writers and students have been countered with a reassertion of Party infallibility. As part of the effort to stifle negative criticism, the propaganda line on Stalin has shifted: none of the crimes charged to him by Khrushchev has been whitewashed, but emphasis is now laid upon his “positive achievements” and on those of his ideo­ logical formulations still regarded as valid. The publication in August 1957 of Khrushchev’s vigorous attack on dissident authors, like his recent endorsements of hard-­line leaders in Czechoslovakia and East Germany, served notice that the June purge, with its condemnation of dogmatism, was not to be taken as a license for continued liberties. Probable Developments in Domestic Policy 41. We do not believe that the foregoing measures indicate a change in the regime’s basic intentions. Rather they appear to be an attempt to correct extreme interpretations of approved policies. Over the next several years, the regime is likely to continue its cautious experiments, especially in the economic field, constantly readjusting its policies in search of a better balance between freedom and coercion. We do not believe that the trend towards reform is as yet irreversible, and under circumstances of political crisis reversal may occur. Khrushchev’s increasing ascendancy, by freeing him from the need to defend his past policies against the criticism of his colleagues, might facilitate such a reversal in response to difficulties or changed conditions. But the longer the period of relaxation is maintained, the higher the price the regime must pay, in terms of forfeited popular support and new disruption of the machinery of control, if it chooses to return to wholesale harshness in its dealing with the population. 42. Barring such a return, we estimate that, over the next several years, the fear and apathy which Stalinism produced will slowly dimin­ ish. Among the majority, this process will probably lead to a somewhat closer identification with the regime, which is being given credit for ending fears of the police and improving living standards. But the regime’s own liberalizing policies, as well as Khrushchev’s extravagant promises, raise the possibility that popular expectations will outrun actual gains and generate more disappointment than gratitude. A small minority, made up chiefly of students and intellectuals in cultural fields, appears already to have become so independent in its thinking that it
