Costa Rica 407 provisions, there would be an agreed-­upon distribution of profits between the other signatory countries and the United States. Such a convention would have the advantage of producing a definitive solution to the problem and would presumably establish other desirable conditions with respect to international trade and investment between the signatory countries and the United States. Accordingly, it is suggested that this approach be suggested in the course of the forthcoming discussions between Costa Rica and the United States on the occasion of Mr. Milton Eisenhower’s trip there. If we can be of any further assistance in this matter, please let me know. Sincerely yours, Dan Troop Smith CR–9. Summary of Discussions in Costa Rica during Milton Eisenhower’s Visit1 July 18–21, 1958. Discussions in Costa Rica were held with the President,2 members of his Cabinet, representatives of other political groups, and Dr. Eisenhower also spoke before the National Assembly. Likewise other members of Dr. Eisenhower’s party met with various Costa Rican officials. The President, Dr. Echandi, spoke with emotion of the national unity achieved by the United States in times of crisis. He mentioned the support given by Mr. Truman and Mr. Stevenson to the President’s recent action in the Middle East. He mentioned also that Costa Rica was a free country in which the full exercise of all democratic freedoms was guaranteed to all citizens and said that he had arranged for the 1 Source: Department of State, ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot 60 D 513, “Eisenhower, Milton; Costa Rica, 1958.” President Milton S. Eisenhower of Johns Hopkins University made a three-­week factfinding trip, July 12–August 1, 1959, as Personal Representative of the President, to Panama, Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Guatemala. He was accompanied by Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs; Tom B. Coughran, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury; Dempster McIntosh, Manager, Development Loan Fund; and Samuel C. Waugh, President, Export-Import Bank. A report on his visit to Costa Rica is in despatch 35 from San José, July 28, 1958. (120.1520/7–2858) For further documentation on the visit, see Document CR–6, footnote 4 in this chapter. 2 A memorandum of Eisenhower’s conversation with Echandi, July 18, 1958, is in Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 533, “Dr. Eisenhower’s Central American Trip.”
