International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 169 have not yet followed the lead of U.S. Steel and Bethlehem under antitrust and shareholder pressure not to do so—they will be hard put to explain why they are following the prices of the Big Two if they are foregoing increased government business in the process. If this action is to be taken, it should be done very quickly before other steel companies join U.S. Steel and Bethlehem.5 4. You could meet personally with the chief executive officers of U.S. Steel and Bethlehem. We agree with Charlie that this action is not warranted for the reasons he mentions.6 5. Antitrust Investigations. Although this is not mentioned in Charlie’s memo, you might call for an antitrust investigation of these price increases. We would not recommend this, however, because it would appear punitive and because the Justice Department is already investigating the last round of price increases in the steel industry. 6. Schultze’s Recommendations: Charlie recommends that you (a) direct the Council on Wage and Price Stability (CWPS) to initiate a study of the increases7 and (b) have CWPS call in the automobile manufacturers and urge them to exercise restraint in pricing on the 1978 models.8 For the longer term, Charlie recommends that we (i) continue our efforts in the Meany–Jones Labor-Management Committee9 to develop mechanisms for dealing with private wage and price decisions 5 Carter wrote “ok—Proceed” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. 6 In discussing this option in his July 27 memorandum to Carter (see footnote 3 above), Schultze noted: “The steel companies have acted already, and they are unlikely to respond positively to requests to rescind or reduce their increases. A direct request from you would create an atmosphere of confrontation that would leave the companies no graceful way to back down. Even if you did not directly urge a rollback, the press would interpret the meeting as though it were pressure for a rollback, and play up the confrontation.” Carter wrote “no” in the margin adjacent to this section of Schultze’s memorandum. 7 In discussing this option in his July 27 memorandum to Carter (see footnote 3 above), Schultze noted that “CWPS could, using existing authority, obtain data from the steel companies on production costs, order backlogs and available capacity in specific product lines. CWPS could supply you with a report on the conditions in the industry that could provide the basis for further comments about the industry’s pricing policies. (If you approve, we will immediately draft a directive to CWPS from you.)” Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this section of Schultze’s memorandum. No directive from Carter to CWPS was found. 8 In discussing this option in his July 27 memorandum to Carter (see footnote 3 above), Schultze suggested that meetings with the automobile industry “could be initiated by Barry Bosworth at CWPS. If necessary, the meetings could later be escalated to higher levels. Auto prices are the next big area of action, and, in any event we should do this.” Carter wrote “ok for Bosworth, no for me” in the margin adjacent to this section of Schultze’s memorandum. 9 On April 15, Carter proposed a series of measures to fight inflation, including the encouragement of labor-management cooperation; this effort was to be led by AFL–CIO President George Meany and General Electric Company Chairman Reginald Jones. For the text of Carter’s statement on his anti-inflation program, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 622–629.
