August 8–September 17, 1978
143
we took our cue from the three points that the Egyptians had given us
at Leeds. Only when the Palestinians are involved can one get a treaty
for termination. One must have a peace treaty before anyone can sign.
Hence, we had gone back to the El-Araby paper.
El-Araby asked whether the five-year transitional period will not
simply be renewed. The Secretary commented that this depends upon
the Palestinians. The decision on sovereignty at the end of the five-year
period will be one for the Palestinians to decide. The Egyptians imme-
diately demurred.
El-Baz argued that what is being discussed is different from sover-
eignty. Israel will be allowed to maintain its claims to sovereignty
under our arrangement. If agreement is reached, sovereignty should
rest with the Palestinian people. This is their inherent right. If we defer
the issue, it is left unresolved. To say decide nor or self-determination is
different from deciding sovereignty. The Secretary commented that the
Aswan8 language speaks of Palestinian participation in the future. It
says nothing about sovereignty.
El-Baz said the Egyptians need our thoughts on sovereignty. The
Secretary responded that we cannot decide this matter now. There is
no single claim to sovereignty. Both Jordan and Israel have claims.
El-Araby argued that the Aswan language implicitly says sovereignty
rests with the Palestinians. El-Reedy continued this point by noting that
the Aswan language has three component elements: (a) resolving the
Palestine problem—in all its aspects (the Secretary agreed, but noted
that it does not say when); (b) recognizing the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people (the Secretary noted this means the right to a home-
land). Self-determination, El-Reedy contended, is one of their rights
and a universally recognized one; and (c) the Palestinians should par-
ticipate in determining their future status. The Egyptians had inferred
from this that the Palestinians are a party to the peace process.
The Secretary said there are different ways of exercising self-
determination. It may be unfettered or it may be a choice among alter-
natives. The Egyptian paper suggests affiliation with Jordan; hence,
self-determination is not an unqualified matter. El-Reedy observed that
the Egyptian paper had indicated the GOE will recommend such a link.
Ghorbal asked whether the American idea is that there should be an in-
dependent Palestinian state or a confederation. Secretary Vance said
we are against an independent Palestinian state. We prefer confedera-
tion, federation or something of this sort. El-Araby thought that the
principal people to decide this issue will be the Palestinians them-
selves. Only the Palestinians will be asked and be a party to the exer-
8 See footnote 5, Document 3.
