Eastern Europe Region 5 to any form of dissent, this struggle—whether over freedom of religion or freedom to emigrate—is inevitably a political one. The program promotes the free movement of information and ideas through the publication and internal distribution of books and periodicals containing information denied Soviet and East European Bloc citizens by their regimes. During 1976 some 170,000 books and periodicals were infiltrated into the USSR or handed to Soviet citizens abroad. An additional 145,000 books and periodicals reached Eastern Europe. These items range from samizdat (writings which could not be published in the USSR which are smuggled to the West, published and clandestinely re-infiltrated into the Soviet Union) to translations of Western authors. They deal with a wide range of politically important subjects such as recent history (including the historical ‘fiction’ of Alexandr Solzhenitsyn), non-Marxist economics and sociology, as well as literary works. The program also seeks to support the dissidents fighting for human rights in the USSR and Eastern Europe by generating publicity for their cause, and by exposing and protesting human rights violations in these countries. The dissidents themselves are unanimous that such publicity is essential to their survival. Examples of such activity in 1976 include publicity efforts conducted in support of Soviet dissenters Vladimir Bukovskiy, Yuriy Orlov (chairman of a small committee organized to monitor Soviet compliance with the CSCE accords) and Andrey Tverdokhlebov, the imprisoned secretary of the Moscow chapter of Amnesty International. The eight activities which comprise the program are mutually supporting and inter-related. These are: 1. A book and periodical distribution activity which distributes proscribed literature (primarily in Russian and the Eastern European languages) to Soviet and Eastern European citizens, either in the West (to visiting diplomats, trade delegations, cultural groups, tourists, etc.) or in the East (where they are smuggled in by tourists or sent to exchange students and other resident Westerners who then pass them along to target personalities). (FY 77 $1,200,000) 2. A literary advisory activity which uses specialists in Russian literature to select materials meriting publication for subsequent distribution in the Soviet Union, and publish them through one of several proprietary outlets. Some 10–12 books in Russian and Polish are published annually. (FY 77 $250,000) 3. A Russian language newspaper published in Paris which seeks to support and stimulate dissidence among Soviet intellectuals. (FY 77 $350,000) 4. A human rights activity which uses a small number of activists in Western Europe to publicize Soviet and Eastern European abuses of human rights. (FY 77 $105,000) 5. A Russian emigre organization (National Alliance of Solidarists—NTS) which engages in procurement, publication and clandestine
