National Security Policy  775
Attachment
Paper Prepared by the JCS
Washington, undated
VIEWS OF CHAIRMAN, JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF ON BASIC 
NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY (THESE VIEWS WERE PRO­
VIDED TO THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE ON 8 MAY 1959)
1. I would like to dispense with the philosophy which accompa­
nies the arguments that are being advanced for changing our present 
Basic National Security Policy and deal directly with the consequences 
and major implications of such changes if they were to be made.
TACTICAL FORCES
2. The first major implication is with respect to limited war situa­
tions. We would no longer consider atomic weapons as an integral part 
of our military establishment, to be used when militarily advantageous 
to us. Regardless of the military disadvantages, we would attempt to 
fight on land, at sea, and in the air with conventional forces, and we 
would use nuclear weapons only as a last resort. This change of policy 
could have the following consequences:
a. Decision to use nuclear weapons could come too late (in a situa­
tion such as an invasion of Formosa).
b. Unacceptably heavy attrition of our limited forces could occur 
in an attempt to conduct a conventional campaign under conditions 
which, from a military standpoint, clearly call for the early use of 
nuclear weapons.
c. The change in policy would leak to the world, and our pos­
ture for deterrence of Soviet-­inspired local aggression, the world over, 
would suffer greatly.
3. With respect to watering down our present policy for the use of 
nuclear weapons when militarily advantageous to us, I would point 
out that over a period of years we have progressively reduced the size 
of our military establishment and the number of major combat units in 
our land, sea and air forces. Every reduction has been justified by the 
President, by the Secretary of Defense and by the Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff on the basis of increased firepower inherent in modern 
weapons. Concurrent with these reductions, and facing a numerically 
superior enemy on all fronts, we have integrated atomic firepower into 
our land, sea and air forces under the assumption that this firepower, 
while not to be used initially in a limited engagement, would be immedi­
ately responsive to the military situation if required.
4. In fact, all of our forces, strategic and tactical, land, sea and 
air, are reliant on atomic firepower if they meet serious, sustained
