National Security Policy 1029 and other ballistic missiles, Soviet programs for submarine-­launched ballistic missiles, the USSR’s approach to the problem of defense against ballistic missiles, and Soviet space programs. The Soviet ICBM Program (See paragraphs 69–84, NIE 11–5–59) 2. Recent test firing activities indicate that the ICBM development program continues in an orderly fashion rather than on a “crash” basis. Since early November 1959, there have been seven generally successful ICBM firings, including two 6,500 n.m. shots to the Johnson Island area in the Pacific. This brings to 25 the total number of firings to ranges of 3,500 n.m. or more. 3. IOC Date. Evidence derived from flight tests is considered ade­ quate to gauge the general progress of the program, but we cannot state with certainty the precise timing of the USSR’s initial operational capa­ bility (IOC); that is, the date at which a few—say 10—series produced ICBMs could have been placed in the hands of one or more trained units at existing launching facilities. We also consider the IOC as marking the beginning of the planned buildup in operational capabilities. [text not declassified] We believe, however, that this does not preclude an earlier Soviet decision that the system was satisfactory for initial deployment. Limited number of operational personnel could have received training in conjunction with the test firings. We believe that for planning pur­ poses it should be considered that the IOC had occurred by 1 January 1960.2 3 4. Production and Deployment. An exhaustive re-­examination has failed to establish Soviet ICBM production rates or to provide positive identification of any operational ICBM unit or launching facility other than the test range. Our belief that series production of ICBMs is under way is based on the time elapsed since the start of test firings in 1957, the generally successful results of the test program, and particularly the increased rate of firings since early 1959, all of which lend credibility to Khrushchev’s claim of early 1959 that series production was then beginning. Final assembly of ICBMs may be taking place at more than 2 The Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of the Navy, believes there is insufficient information to judge that the conditions for IOC as described in paragraph 3 have been met. He believes therefore that an IOC date of not earlier than mid-­1960 should be used for planning purposes. [Footnote is in the original.] 3 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence. Department of the Army, wishes to clarify his position with respect to the Soviet ICBM IOC date. He believes that as of 1 January 1960 the Soviets had an emergency capability to launch a few series-­produced ICBMs against North America, but that these ICBMs probably would have had to have been launched from R&D facilities, rather than from a separate operational facility. How­ ever, he agrees that for planning purposes, it is prudent to assume that the IOC had occurred by 1 January 1960. [Footnote is in the original.]
