3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
Soviet Union
January–May 1977
1.
Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary
Brezhnev1
Washington, January 26, 1977
To General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev
As I take up my duties as President of the United States, I want to
share with you my view on relations between our two countries.
I want to express my appreciation for the informal messages I have
received from you2 and in this connection I want to affirm that it is my
goal to improve relations with the Soviet Union on the basis of reci-
procity, mutual respect and benefit. That goal will have my close per-
sonal attention, as well as that of Secretary of State Vance.
I have read your public remarks with great interest, and they en-
courage me to believe that we share a common desire to enhance and
preserve the prospect of lasting peace.
As I understood your very important speech at Tula,3 the Soviet
Union will not seek superiority in arms, will oppose the concept, and
will require only a defense sufficient to deter any potential adversary.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 69, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR): Brezhnev–Carter
Correspondence: 1–2/77. Confidential. Brzezinski recalled in his memoirs: “Carter
would be the first to admit that he came to the White House without a detailed plan for
managing U.S.-Soviet relations. He was, however, determined to move on SALT, and he
firmly supported the concept of detente. At the same time, Carter was critical of the way
the previous Administration had allowed the Soviet Union to exploit detente, and in
campaign speeches developed by me, he had stressed that detente inevitably had to in-
volve both cooperation and competition and that it had to be both more comprehensive
and more reciprocal.” (Power and Principle, p. 147)
2 No messages were found. However, Podgorny sent Carter a letter of congratula-
tions on January 20. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Presi-
dent’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 20, Union of Soviet Socialist Re-
publics: Chairman Nikolai V. Podgorny, 1/77)
3 In his January 18 speech in Tula, Brezhnev addressed de´tente and the desire for an
arms agreement. See The Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XXIX, no. 3 (February 16,
1977), pp. 1–5.
1
