Afghanistan 203 the Indus. As for U.S. relations, I think they will remain difficult, if for no other reason than VOA’s Persian-language broadcasts which the DRA finds irritating. If the insurgency starts to ebb—and it has shown few signs of intensifying—we may have to come to terms with Amin. Of fundamental interest to us will be whether the U.S. can woo, to any degree, Afghanistan away from Moscow’s orbit and can discourage any inclination by Amin to be irredentist. I am not sure we can. End summary. 3. Though Hafizullah Amin has welcomed the massive support of the Soviets, I believe him nonetheless to be a nationalist—and the only strong Khalqi leader around. Amin has shown himself to be intelligent, decisive, and extraordinarily energetic. He is also ruthless; otherwise he would not be where he is. 4. While in part one of this message, I expressed concern that the Soviets may now have a commanding influence in this country, I believe also it would be a mistake to characterize Amin as a Soviet toady. We have lots of evidence that he wants to run his own show, and that Moscow is less than ecstatic over the successive purges which have caused division in and depleted the ranks of the “progressive forces.” In this respect, Foreign Minister Shah Wali made a remarkable series of disclosures this week. On Oct 6, he invited all the “Socialist country” Ambassadors (excepting the Chinese) for a briefing. According to the Yugoslav Ambassador who was there, Shah Wali spent most of the time telling about the Sept 14 Palace shootout when Taraki was removed, and made the following startling disclosures: —Soviet Ambassador Puzanov was with Taraki on Sept 14 when Amin was called over to the latter’s office to be arrested. The inference is that the Soviets knew about the anti-Amin plot.3 —After the shootout, Amin’s departing car was fired on in the Palace complex by a rooftop sniper, apparently pre-positioned, but Amin had left Taraki’s building by another way. —Interior Minister Watanjar, together with the two other militaryofficer Cabinet ministers plus the secret police chief, fled to the Soviet Embassy but later allegedly left there. —At the Soviet Embassy, Watanjar placed a phone call to the Kabul Central Military Command ordering immediate action against Amin. But the commander refused to act unless so ordered by the Politbureau. Thus ended the anti-Amin plot. 5. Though the above Sept 14 account shows that Amin may not be Moscow’s first preference as the DRA leader, Moscow has now 3 For discussion of alleged Soviet foreknowledge of Taraki’s ouster, see Document 65.
