74 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 34. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to President Carter1 Washington, November 15, 1979 I believe that any rescue operation into Teheran within the next two weeks would have a very low probability of success.2 We need better to help you prepare for a decision on such an operation, and on what the alternatives are. First, you deserve an explicit statement of the likelihood of success of a rescue attempt. (Recall that the JCS reviewed the plan for the Bay of Pigs and judged it to have a “fair” chance of success. To the military, “fair” is like a “D” in college; the White House interpreted the JCS opinion as a “fair chance of success.”) Next, you need to know how the likelihood of success would improve over time. You may not be able to control the timing, but you will want to consider alternatives in this light. In addition, you deserve optional rescue strategies that have different political requirements. Only you can balance the political costs with the changes in probability they afford. I suggest that you ask the JCS and Secretary of Defense to prepare a chart like the attached. (A second copy with only nominal entries is also attached to provide a feel for how useful it might or might not be.)3 Finally, you deserve a considered list of alternatives. If you eschew a rescue operation, the pressure of public opinion will require as immediate and decisive a set of actions as possible. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 95M01183R: Policy Files (1977–1981), Box 1, Folder 5: DCI Turner—Eyes Only Files— Various Subjects. Top Secret; Sensitive. 2 According to an undated paper prepared by the JCS, on November 12, Jones, by verbal order, created a Joint Task Force within J–3 to develop operation RICE BOWL, the original name of the rescue operation. RICE BOWL led to the establishment of a linked communications and intelligence net among NSA, Department of State, JCS, DIA, CIA, Fort Bragg, Ranger, Fixed-wing, and Helicopter elements that comprised the components of the proposed rescue operation. (Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–07–0002, Records of J–3 DDSO, Box 8, Iranian Hostage Crisis 1979–1984, I–93 Rice Bowl Annex B (Intelligence) JTF Oplan 1–80) 3 The second chart is not attached.
