December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
777
General Jones noted that Defense Minister Ali is in Washington and
will be talking with Secretary Brown.12 He mentioned that he had seen
Ezer Weizman13 and he sent his regards (Sadat interjected. “I like that
Ezer.”) General Jones continued that a treaty is like a marriage license.
You sign it and throw it in the drawer and it is what happens after that
that counts.
President Sadat said that he had been sent a list of ten countries to
send weapons to in Africa. All are asking because they know I am your
friend and that you support me. I have a hard problem with Siad
Barre.14 He sent out the Soviets and then he asked me to come and hold
Berbera for him. He fears a Soviet push and that the Ethiopians will
take it. He has turned very bitter. He supported whole heartedly the
treaty signing since he knows that I will send tanks. Let us not depress
those who ask. You know that I do not seek an empire or others’ lands. I
seek to stop the game of the Soviets, mainly against Egypt as the leader
of the Arab world, especially after Iran faded. So I would like you to
put into consideration this idea. The Soviets chose agents of no impor-
tance. That boy in Libya, South Yemen, they are all despised. Iraq and
Syria are of no real significance. You do not need a base. You can get fa-
cilities better than any base. I could be asking for your help in building
a very big base, a naval base at Berenice for the Red Sea Fleet. This is a
very important location because of the Bab al-Mandeb, which is in
North Yemen and must be protected.
Ambassador Eilts said that after Secretary Brown had talked to Gen-
eral Kamel, he sent a list of military equipment. I sent it to Secretary
Brown.
President Sadat said that he had asked for a team from the Pen-
tagon. With an Egyptian team, it would visit everyplace and reach an
agreed certain strategy. All must be planned, not haphazard. We have
Sudan with us. We shall defend Saudi Arabia. The last time Numayri
met with Mengistu15 in Nigeria, Mengistu adopted a very hard line. He
will cause trouble in South Sudan. That is my border. Our waters come
half from Ethiopia, half from Sudan. Western Sudan alone is the size of
Egypt plus the East and the South. I would join them in the next mo-
ment if anyone tried . . .
Dr. Brzezinski said you are a factor for stability and we will work
with you. Dr. Brzezinski noted that he (Sadat) was an optimist and that
12 Ali met with Brown in Washington on March 19 to discuss U.S. military aid to
Egypt. The conclusions reached during this meeting are printed in Document 230.
13 See footnote 2, Document 217.
14 Mohamed Siad Barre, President of Somalia from 1969 until 1991.
15 Mengistu Haile Mariam, Chairman of the Derg and Head of State of Ethiopia
from 1977 until 1987; President of Ethiopia from 1987 until 1991.
