National Security Policy  795
papers. Thereupon Mr. Robert Gray presented to the President the 
draft document which is attached to Mr. Lay’s copy of this memoran­
dum. The President approved the document and Mr. Robert Gray left 
the meeting.
2. I then asked the President whether he would be willing to see 
Mr. Charles A. Haskins for a few minutes at the conclusion of my busi­
ness with the President to discuss the Jackson Committee study in view 
of the fact that Mr. Haskins was to be the President’s personal repre­
sentative. I indicated that I felt that it would make Mr. Haskins a more 
useful representative from the point of view of morale and it seemed to 
me important for Mr. Haskins to hear from the President the limitations 
he wished put upon the scope of the study. The President said he would 
see Mr. Haskins and I added that Mr. Edward McCabe would come in 
at the same time.
3. I then discussed the draft Record of Actions of the NSC meeting 
of July 23 with the President and called his attention particularly to item 
1c. I indicated that the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization had 
requested that it participate in any such study. I also pointed out to him 
that there was a difference of view between Defense and the Bureau of 
the Budget as to the second sentence in paragraph 1c. Defense wishing 
it deleted and Budget wishing it retained even though it might be mod­
ified in some respects.
The President said that he wanted no “ponderous studies” on 
this subject and that he wished an examination to be made by capable 
junior officers. He wasn’t even sure that he wished the study to be an 
NSC undertaking. However, he thought that such a study might be just 
for the benefit of the members of the National Security Council. He 
felt that he would like a picture of what the military believes to be the 
situation after a nuclear exchange. He would like to know what they 
felt to be the status of our resources, how we would have to use them, 
and in what way we would have to use them. For example, would our 
remaining resources be necessary for the purpose of winning the war 
or would the problem be one of survival.
He then recalled that the request that he had made in the July 23 
meeting was that junior staff officers make the study and that the senior 
officers of the Services should not involve themselves except as they 
took an interest in what their subordinates were doing. The President 
felt that he would like to know what really would be the military prob­
lem under the conditions of a nuclear exchange and thought it was 
possible that such a study would show that rather than planning to 
increase and enlarge the military services in such a situation, quite a 
different approach might be indicated. He reiterated that perhaps our
