Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
89
further the desirability of using the term “hostile acts”, and reminded
Khlestov that at Helsinki the U.S. side had mentioned two possible ap-
proaches, i.e., either (a) to simply list acts which the two sides would
undertake not to carry out against a space object belonging to the other
side, or (b) to list acts which should not be carried out against a space
object of the other side, and label them as “hostile acts” or as “acts in-
compatible with peaceful relations,” or identify them with some other
label. Following a longish discussion of the two approaches, both sides
agreed to be prepared to address these alternatives at the next plenary
meeting.
(C) Khlestov suggested that terminology formulations should be
submitted in writing to make future work easier. He added that, since
Moscow, and presumably Washington as well, were keeping an eye on
the Delegations, such written contributions should be treated as in-
formal working papers only and not as proposals or as documents for-
mally tabled.
(D) Buchheim then asked, as a procedural question, whether
Khlestov still wished to limit to private meetings discussion of the
question of suspending ASAT interceptor tests, as he had preferred in
Helsinki, or if this subject could now be raised in plenary meetings.
Khlestov replied that it could be raised in either forum. Buchheim said
that he would advise Khlestov in advance before raising the issue in
plenary. Khlestov expressed appreciation for this courtesy.
(E) Khlestov promised working texts on “hostile acts” and “acts in-
compatible with peaceful relations between states” at the next plenary
and expressed his hope that the U.S. Delegation would be similarly
prepared.
(F) Khlestov asked why U.S. had proposed Bern as site for this
round. Buchheim said USG had considered several possibilities and
had concluded Bern to be most appropriate for this round.
12. (S) Comment. Khlestov’s approach to definition of “space ob-
ject” (para 7 above) contains same substance as suggestion by Soviet
side in Helsinki concerning the things against which each party would
undertake not to carry out certain acts, that is, any object belonging to
the other party which is in earth orbit or in a super-orbital trajectory,
e.g., interplanetary probes, but not ballistic missiles. Our understand-
ing is that the ASAT working group recorded interagency consensus in
favor of such an approach. Unless advised otherwise by Washington,
we will, in further discussions with Soviet side on scope of definition,
adopt the view that an undertaking not to carry out certain acts would
be an undertaking not to carry out such acts against objects in earth
orbit and objects on trajectories more energetic than earth orbits, in-
cluding interplanetary trajectories. In this regard, we assume that word
“satellites” in phrase “ban on damage, destruction, and unauthorized
