1280  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
earnest desire quickly resolve this problem. We did this frankly in hope 
his govt would on own initiative take corresponding action to solve 
problem of Americans imprisoned his country. It could easily have done 
so if it had desired resolve this question and this whole matter which 
had continued be irritant in our relations could have been disposed of 
in first few days our talks. However, he had insisted on public agree­
ment on this subject and third party arrangement which would be able 
determine facts. As had pointed out to him at time, that agreement 
in self solved nothing. Only implementation that agreement could 
solve question. Nevertheless I willing enter into that agreement with 
him on understanding it would be implemented and would resolve 
question. As I had noted this morning it had not done so. He had spo­
ken of actual facts with regard implementation that agreement. It was 
his suggestion we establish third party arrangement so facts could 
be determined. I accepted that arrangement and it was that arrange­
ment which best demonstrated facts. I had often cited fact here that 
in no case had we received any notification from third party that any 
obstacle had been placed in way any Chinese my country who desired 
return his ­country. In reply that he had at times intimated here that 
Chinese may fear communicate with Indian Embassy. As I had pointed 
out this utterly absurd. Absurd think person would fear put letter in 
mail box or pick up telephone to communicate with Indian Embassy 
if he felt he being obstructed from leaving US. His govt must be per­
fectly aware this fact and perfectly aware facts regard communications 
between Chinese in my country and Indian Embassy. In this connection 
I had noted press statement made this week by Indian Ambassador in 
US in which he quoted as saying Embassy had assisted some twenty 
Chinese in returning Wang’s country. This established that Chinese 
able to and in fact were in communication with Indian Embassy. Indian 
Ambassador had gone on to say knew of no Chinese who had been 
barred from leaving US. I regretted UK Charge Peiping not able make 
similar statement. Regretted that facts with regard Americans his 
country would not justify or support such statement by Charge. UK 
Charge would have to say ten Americans who desired return US still 
held in prison. He would have to say Wang’s authorities refused accept 
representations from him with respect these Americans even though 
this clearly set forth in agreement. He would have to say authorities 
prevented him even from investigating facts of case as clearly set forth 
in agreement. I did not know how I could better illustrate or establish 
who had been carrying out this agreement. These not what he termed 
unjustified charges or unsupported allegations. These were actual facts. 
These were actual facts established by arrangement which he himself 
suggested for establishing such facts. I had cited these facts not only 
because of importance in themselves but because of relationship of 
them to fundamental question whether agreements between us were to
