International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 601 expansion of the German economy agreed at Bonn; they want that growth to continue. —Asking the US and other countries with large external deficits to increase investment in order to improve productivity. —Asking Japan, and to a lesser extent Germany, to undertake structural changes in their economies that would reduce their structural surpluses. (European representatives warned that if Japan has not made marked progress in improving its economic policies by Summit time, their heads of government will focus heavily on the need for such improvement.) (C) 3. North-South. The British will lead this working group, which will examine such questions as how to: a. encourage greater capital transfers to developing countries— particularly by international institutions (World Bank and IMF) and private investors; b. mount an expanded international effort, led by the World Bank, to help LDCs increase food output; c. launch an international effort by our new Institute for Technological Cooperation and like institutions and programs in other Summit countries to carry out effective research and development on programs of particular concern to LDCs. (C) Besides these three major issues, we talked about Summit consideration of international efforts to meet such threats to the quality of life as trade in toxic substances and the rapid depletion of natural resources (desertification, deforestation, etc.). The US will do papers on these issues. (C) It was agreed the heads of government would probably want to discuss East-West economic issues and such problem countries as Turkey at their pre-Summit dinner. (C) The group agreed to recommend to the heads of government that they issue on Thursday,4 6:00 p.m., Tokyo time (Thursday morning our time) the announcement (Tab A)5 that the Summit will be held June 28 and 29. You will recall that it was previously agreed to defer the decision on Summit timing until this first preparatory group meeting. (C) RECOMMENDATION That you approve our issuing the attached announcement (Tab A) through the White House Press Office.6 (U) 4 March 29. 5 Attached but not printed. 6 Carter indicated his approval of the recommendation. For the text of the announcement of the Tokyo G–7 Summit, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 550.
