374
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ment. He reported that the GOI is “very eager” to buy Egyptian petro-
leum at current market prices; this would serve GOE interests as much
as it does those of the GOI.
According to Vardi, the October 23 discussions touched on the Is-
raeli suggestion that at some future time a gas pipeline might be laid
from the Egyptian Delta and Northern Sinai into Israel. This was not
discussed at length.
Again on the issue of Israeli future purchases, Vardi stated GOI
willingness to accept the concept of international bidding (apart from
production from the Alma field where the principle of payment-in-
kind would apply). The latter would involve renegotiation of the
sharing arrangements between the Israeli proposed Neptune-INOC
consortium (as operators) and the GOE.
Mr. Korn asked how much oil the Israelis wanted to purchase from
Egypt. After some consultation amongst themselves, Vardi spoke for
the Israeli team, stating that they would hope for approximately 22,000
bpd during the second half of 1979; this amount might be doubled in
1980. He also volunteered that the GOI is prepared to help Egypt
market additional oil, including possible re-exportation.
When we sought clarification of Israeli thinking on the date of
transfer, Bar-On, seconded by Vardi, stated that the present negotiating
mandate for the team is to press for the transfer of the present operating
arrangement to Egyptian suzerainty. If this transpires, the transfer
could take place quickly. Contrarily, the Israelis hinted that Egyptian
refusal to accept this formula might cause extended negotiations
which, perforce, would delay the transfer.
At the conclusion of the discussion, Vardi and Bar-On argued that
AMOCO is a key actor in the considerations, and that that company, by
seeking to hold the GOE to legal obligations, might impede progress.
The thrust of this remark was that the USG should intervene to move
AMOCO towards a compromise along the lines proposed by the GOI
(Bar-On made this point to Korn again more specifically as the meeting
broke up). We pointed out that we do not feel in a position to tell either
of the two American companies what to do. Korn said Neptune’s
Counsel, Bill Rogers5 of Arnold & Porter, had called at the Department
earlier in the day and that we had suggested that he speak to the legal
counsel for AMOCO. Finally, we noted that USG responsibility to pri-
vate commercial firms is essentially to help protect such firms against
uncompensated expropriation action.
5 William D. Rogers previously served as Under Secretary of State for Economic Af-
fairs from 1976 until 1977 and as Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
from 1974 until 1976.
