Eastern Europe Region
157
request rescheduling. We would insist on a multilateral approach and
tough financial and economic conditions designed to get the Soviets
to bear as much of the burden as possible.
—While supporting an end to any kind of economic assistance to
the Polish Government, many Americans will support private assist-
ance to the Polish people provided it can be monitored to insure against
diversion to the USSR. We should support Catholic Relief, CARE,
Project Hope and other private organizations ready to act as transmis-
sion belts for assistance. UN agencies probably would not get involved
because of the Soviet angle.
—In other areas we would suggest:
—Letting EXIM financing seek its natural level—which will be
very low given Poland’s financial problems.
—Ending any especially favorable treatment on fish allocations.
—Dropping any effort to fund cooperation in science and technol-
ogy, which would mean that the cooperative program would grind to
a halt for the present.3
Romania
—Romania is another special case. Ceausescu appears to have made
a genuine effort to head off Soviet intervention and he may not even
lend rhetorical support to any action. If he does not, our aim should
be to find new ways of supporting Romania—consonant with their
wishes—and providing incentives for continued foreign policy inde-
pendence in the fact of growing Soviet pressure. Some suggestions:
—Scheduling a high-level visit to Romania if the Romanians
want one.
—Supporting Romania’s bid to host the next CSCE review confer-
ence, if we can work out a way not to offend our Belgian allies who
have put forward Brussels as a site.
—Acting quickly on Romania’s request for a COCOM-controlled
aileron drive assembly for the fighter they are producing with
Yugoslavia.
—Establishing a meaningful differential in US export control regu-
lations and COCOM to permit prompt gray-area exceptions for
Romania.
—Approving some $100 million of Romania’s $450 million request
for CCC loan guarantees.
3 In telegram 12654 from Warsaw, December 18, the Embassy endorsed the argu-
ments in the paper and expressed strong support for continuing a policy of differentiation
among Eastern European states. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800601–0996)
