Human Rights
183
1. USIA will provide a phased series of videotaped interviews or
direct video statements by the President, Secretary of State, other
cabinet-level officials, and Assistant Secretaries of State. These would
provide an essential overview.
2. Agency elements and State/CU should cooperate in the conduct
of at least one, and possibly more, International Visitor projects on an
appropriate human rights topic. The projects and visitors would be se-
lected on the basis of their potential for tangible follow-up programs
(seminars, workshops, symposia, etc.) and other activities overseas.
3. The Agency will provide directories of major American and in-
ternational human rights organizations to USIS posts and libraries for
reference or for presentation to indigenous organizations.
4. We will continue Agency/CU efforts to foster inter-personal
communication among officials, opinion leaders and professionals in
the human rights field. Three major programs including speakers and
media support will be conducted by USIS posts in the coming year:
(a) Human Rights Aspects of U.S. Foreign Policy: e.g. the impact of
human rights concerns on bilateral relations; the relation of human
rights to arms sales, aid, technology transfer, etc; origins of U.S. foreign
policy emphasis on human rights (national beliefs, traditions, Congres-
sional interest, public interests groups).
(b) U.S. Challenges and Responses in the Human Rights Field, e.g.: civil
rights—voting, political participation, the legitimacy of opposition,
peaceful transfer of power, equal opportunity, minority rights,
freedom of expression and movement; civil liberties—freedom of
information, privacy, legal representation, habeus corpus; “human
fulfillment”.
(c) Human Rights Questions and Economic Development e.g.: the ques-
tion of whether economic mobilization can occur without suppression
of political freedoms and individual rights; North-South issues of dis-
tribution of wealth.
5. The Department and USIA should issue guidelines and provide
whatever support necessary for Missions to encourage foreign leaders
and internationally respected individuals to speak out in support of
human rights.
6. The Agency, through its Washington and New York Press
Centers, will organize a series of tours for foreign journalists resident in
the U.S., including official briefings on human rights concerns and
American responses.
7. An international conference on human rights should be proposed
for September–October 1978 or in 1979. It would provide a focus for
strengthening international understanding of human rights questions,
reinforcing commitments to human rights progress, and providing for
