576 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 113. On the basis of Soviet conscription trends, published labor statistics, and other indirect data, we believe that there has in fact been a substantial reduction in the number of men in service since the peak reached during the Korean War. A considerable portion of this reduction apparently occurred prior to the first Soviet announcement of cuts in 1955. Reductions are known to have been made in nonessen­ tial supporting and administrative elements. It is probable that other reductions were accomplished by cutting down the strength of cer­ tain units and by the transfer of labor troops from military to nonmil­ itary status. On the other hand, we have acquired no evidence of the deactivation of any major units and we are fairly certain that most of the units withdrawn from satellite areas in recent years were merely moved to locations within the USSR. 114. The evidence suggests that in their announcements the Soviets took propaganda advantage of fairly substantial reductions made after the Korean War, and that additional reductions were in fact begun but were delayed or cancelled entirely. The apparent failure to carry out the announced cuts may have been due in part to increased tension in the satellites, and in the world situation generally, beginning in the fall of 1956. It may also have resulted in part from Soviet discovery that reduc­ tions in some elements were to a large extent offset by the increased need for technically-­qualified personnel to serve new and more com­ plex equipment. 115. On the basis of available order-­of-­battle information, we esti­ mate present Soviet military manpower strength at somewhat more than 4 million men, of whom about 2,650,000 are in ground force units, about 835,000 are in the air forces (including about 110,000 naval avia­ tion personnel), about 765,000 are in naval units, and about 75,000 are in air defense control and warning. In addition, we carry about 400,000 men in border guard and internal security forces.11 While there has been no reliable evidence of reductions over the last year, we do not exclude the possibility that the Soviet leaders believe that some additional cuts can be made without danger to Soviet security. But we think it unlikely that in the present state of the Bloc’s relations with the West further reductions of substantial size would be made. 116. Military policy toward other bloc nations. The Soviet leaders view the East European area as vital to the military posture of the USSR, both as an extension of the defense perimeter of the homeland and as a base for offensive power; Communist China and North Korea similarly 11 For more detailed estimates of the personnel strength of Soviet and other Bloc forces, see Annex, Tables 1 and 2; it should be understood that these figures are only approximate and that there is considerable uncertainty inherent in this type of estimate. [Footnote is in the original.]
