574 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 proceeded to give his briefing.4 The following questions and answers arose in the course of the briefing. The President asked whether the seizure of the airfield at Nain5 was supposed to take place without the knowledge of the people in the town 10 kilometers away. The Chairman replied yes, that was the key problem and uncertainty associated with that part of the operation. He pointed out, however, that it would be a weekend and that in monitoring the activities around the airfield, it appeared that there was very little interaction between the town and the base on the weekend. The Secretary of State asked what we know about the alleged mining of the Embassy. The Chairman replied that we have no evidence that any mining or booby-trapping has taken place. He said that in addition to talking to those who had been inside the Embassy, they have also debriefed the few hostages who have been released. None of them indicate that any such mining actually has occurred. The Secretary of State asked what is the distance to the stadium from the Embassy. The chairman replied that it is about 100 yards. He explained that the street would be sealed off at both ends and the C–130 gunships would provide cover. The Vice President asked whether the helicopters would be left behind. The Chairman indicated that they would be. The Secretary of State asked how confident we were of the location of the hostages; whether they rotate them in different locations. The Chairman said that we are not sure and that uncertainty over the location of the hostages within the compound is a major factor. We believe that all of the hostages are still in the compound but we could not be certain. However, our best estimate is that the hostages are located in the buildings indicated in the briefing but the rescuers might have to go into all the buildings to search for the hostages. Dr. Brzezinski commented that we will have to kill quite a few Iranians in this process and that there is a possibility that some Ameri- 4 Presumably Jones briefed from available material including an undated paper, “Concept of Operations,” and a March 11 untitled survey of conditions at the Embassy. (Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–07–0002, Records of J–3 DDSO, Box 7, Iranian Hostage Crisis 1979–1984, I 102–103 Rice Bowl Concept of Operations, and Box 2, B 184–188 Executive Info Package) Also available was a March 11 “Military Options Matrix” that included the rescue operation. In its original form, this matrix had assessed such options as attacking the Abadan refinery, destruction of Iran’s F–14 fleet, a naval blockade, mining of key ports, and seizure of Abu Musa and Tunbs Islands. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 13, [text not declassified]) Odom hand-carried the original matrix to Carter at Camp David on November 20, 1979. (Joint Chiefs of Staff History Office, The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy, 1977–1980, p. 73) 5 A potential staging area in Iran between Yazd and Isfahan.
