Chapter 5, May–June 1990 773 Bartholomew: Look again. I cannot believe the Russian language cannot capture this nuance. It must say something different in Russian. Your president said he was prepared to discuss this. Karpov: Here is what our president wrote to yours—“the whole range of issues which each of the sides considers important in achieving the goals of the negotiations could be examined. In particular, we believe it is possible to consider the question of considerably reducing the concentration of warheads on all ballistic missiles (ICBMs and SLBMs) and of ALCMs on heavy bombers and the number of delivery vehicles.” Bartholomew: He said this is not a subject for discussion in the current framework, but it was clear that this is a subject to be addressed in the subsequent phase. We should say in this statement what we are “addressing.” The whole value of the statement is clarity on how we begin the future negotiations. This does not commit you, we would be “beginning with addressing.” Karpov: These problems will become the predominant problems. We don’t feel these are the predominant problems. There are other problems, such as reductions. Bartholomew: Reductions are mentioned, and the subject is all strategic offensive arms, “beginning with addressing.” Karpov: You indicate three elements—­mobile ICBMs, heavy ICBMs, and land-­based ICBMs. Bartholomew: No, the sentence refers to ballistic missile forces, without qualification. Karpov: And cruise missiles and heavy bombers. We want “including mobile ICBMs and heavy ICBMs.” Bartholomew: This statement is about priorities, and we should be “beginning with addressing.” Karpov: Your approach prescribes the systems we are addressing. (Break until 8:30) Bartholomew: Have you reflected on Backfire? I have no instructions other than those I have set forth before. Karpov: I also have no instructions other that those I have set forth before. Bartholomew: This ingenious idea of a freeze. (Gives him a new draft Backfire declaration.5) This draft has a new paragraph on the number. Rather than a specific number, it would freeze the number. Karpov: I see no real change in the new text. The number is the same but not identified. What we have set forward before still stands. 5 Not found.
