330 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI limits, the ALCM range threshold, non-­deployed ALCMs, and numerical limits. Burt said he agreed with Nazarkin that the sides should be able to resolve these issues; he seconded Bartholomew’s hope that the Soviet side would have ideas on how to resolve them. Replying, Nazarkin said he thought that at this meeting the sides could really continue the search for a solution. Mobile ICBM Verification 33. Regarding mobile ICBMs, during his opening remarks Nazarkin recalled that the Soviet side had presented proposals during Round XI. The Soviet approach to a solution included verification. The Soviet side hoped the U.S. side had had time to study the Soviet proposals, and was awaiting the U.S. response. 34. In his reply to Nazarkin, Bartholomew noted that the U.S. side was also prepared to discuss ways to expand the elements of common ground on mobile ICBM verification. Burt said that the Soviet side had presented some interesting ideas during the last round. Proposing that the sides discuss additional elements of common ground, he handed over a U.S. list of such elements for possible agreement (attached) and offered to explain each of the concepts in the subgroup. 35. Nazarkin said the Soviet side also looked forward to a productive dialogue on mobile ICBMs. He had not seen the document Burt had handed over and would have to study it, but its appearance showed the U.S. side was thinking about how to address this issue and the Soviet side welcomed this move. Unit of Account 36. In his opening remarks regarding unit of account, Nazarkin recalled that the sides had exchanged views in detail during Round XI; he thought the problem could be solved. Nazarkin had a detailed proposal to make, but he would not dwell on it at this point; it was technical. He hoped the working group could work out an acceptable solution to report to ministers. 37. Bartholomew noted that the sides had already had extensive discussions on the subject of unit of account; resolving this issue would result in the elimination of many brackets in the JDT. The U.S. side was prepared to discuss the issue in the experts’ group so that brackets could be eliminated. 38. Burt recalled that in Round XI both sides had agreed that the issue of ballistic missile unit of account should be resolved at the ministerial. Their differences were well known. In the U.S. view, the missiles were the weapons and therefore should be counted; the Soviet side favored a reference to launchers. However, there were places in the JDT where both sides favored a reference to both the missile and the
