1080 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI helpful and that he would discuss it with the Moscow participants before they departed. 12. Nazarkin said he wished to make a “very personal” proposal. Suppose, Nazarkin continued, the Soviet side accepted U.S. proposals to use the Global Positioning System (GPS) during reentry vehicle inspections. Could the U.S. side, in return, accept a quota of seven reentry vehicle inspections? Nazarkin said that, if Brooks found the idea attractive, he would discuss it with Obukhov and Ladygin. 13. Brooks asked if the quota of seven would be increased if downloading were to be allowed. Nazarkin said it would, but repeated his past assertion that the Soviet side could not, under any conditions, accept more than ten reentry vehicle inspections per year, including those resulting from downloading. Brooks asked whether it would be possible for the Soviet side to accept ten now, but the U.S. side would agree that there would be no increase for downloading. Nazarkin said he was doubtful. 14. Brooks said he would consider the proposal overnight, but suggested that Nazarkin not raise the subject with Obukhov, since Brooks was skeptical that the approach would be acceptable to the U.S. side. Nazarkin said he would await further word from Brooks on the subject. 15. Nazarkin said that he assumed, based on the recent agreement on the language for ALCMs with multiple nuclear weapons, that the U.S. side wanted to change the SLCM declaration to refer to SLCMs “armed with two or more nuclear weapons.” Brooks said he believed this was correct, but that he would check the text and confirm by phone later in the evening. (Comment: Subsequently done. End Comment.) 16. Nazarkin again proposed that the sides meet the next day to continue the discussion of unresolved ALCM and heavy bomber issues. Brooks stressed that the U.S. side wished to turn first to the documentation of the agreements already reached. 17. Documents exchanged: U.S. proposed exchange of letters on heavy bomber contingency operations (English Only) Brooks
