858 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Military Equipment The conversation then turned to armaments. The General said his country had enough armaments for its needs for the next four or five years. However, he said that he would like to receive the 200 Browning automatic rifles (BARs) which had been ordered from the U.S. some time ago. Mr. Rubottom said that we were reviewing our policy with regard to the sale of armaments and indicated there would be a greater tightening up of such sales to the Central American countries.4 The General indicated this was most understandable and recognized it as a good move. He said that, with the exception of the 200 BARs, and occasional purchases of training ammunition, Nicaragua would not need anything further in this line. Housing Project The General then commented on the ICA aided self-­help housing Servicio. He said this project had been well received by the Nicaraguans and had dealt the Nicaraguan Communists a blow, as they had been agitating for a socialized housing project to be carried out by the Government. Figueres’ Activities Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa then turned the conversation to the activities of Figueres, former Costa Rican President. He said that Figueres was participating in a plot to overthrow the Somoza’s. The General remarked that Figueres had long been interested in overthrowing the Somoza’s. Sevilla-Sacasa pointed out that, as Figueres no longer had official status, he could participate more freely in such activities. He said that President Echandi was following through with his policy of doing away with the military, while Figueres with his personal resources was purchasing arms. He added that Echandi was concerned over Figueres’ activities, and that, whereas Figueres had the funds to purchase armaments, the Government of Costa Rica was low on funds. Mr. Rubottom then mentioned the Figueres-Castro rift arising from the recent speech Figueres gave in Cuba. Economic The General then said he wanted to discuss for a moment Nicaragua’s economic problems. He said that the low prices of cotton and coffee were contributing to economic difficulties within the 4 In January 1959, the Department of State received a request from the Nicaraguan Government for permission to purchase two Navy aircraft for the exclusive use of the Nicaraguan Air Force. As of March, the request was still under consideration. (Memorandum from Taylor to Rubottom, March 30, 1959, not printed; ARA/REA Files, Lot 61 D 248, “Nicaragua”)
