3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
348
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
massive campaign against it. They wanted to show a reasonable atti-
tude and that American Jews were not just nay-sayers. They asked the
Secretary if he thought this should be pointed out to the Soviets as a
way of encouraging them to continue their better performance in emi-
gration. Schindler felt that this should be made explicit, that the mes-
sage on the Jewish community’s flexibility should be imparted to the
Soviets directly by the Administration. Gold said this reasonable atti-
tude would be clear from the legislative history of the Humphrey-
Findley Bill and that perhaps this could be pointed out to the Soviets.
The Secretary said he thought the NCSJ’s policy of demonstrating
flexibility was a good one. Holding out a carrot and showing that posi-
tive developments in the emigration field could produce movement in
the future could be useful. While the Administration could not take too
much of a forward position on the Bill, he said we would be glad to
make the Soviets aware of the more flexible stance by American Jewish
organizations on the CCC issue if Gold and Schindler wanted us to do
so. Both felt this was a good idea and said they would stay in touch
with the Department on this.
Goodman said the NCSJ appreciated what the Administration had
done on the Shcharanskiy case and on the general Soviet Jewry issue.
He noted, however, that although the emigration figures were up, the
overall picture (i.e. harassment of Soviet Jews, arbitrary treatment, etc.)
was more troubling. The level was now about 2,000 per month. Did we
have any assurances that this would continue?
The Secretary said that he could not give such assurances. He had
a “gut feeling” that the trend would continue, but nothing more than
that. The Secretary said that if we get a SALT agreement with the So-
viets this would improve the overall atmosphere considerably. SALT
was the litmus test of the relationship. He said he thought we would
have a good agreement eventually but that he could not predict when.
