170 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV of Staff. They are then incorporated in the contingency operations plans prepared by the CINCs to support defense tasks and objectives in their assigned geographic region or functional area of responsibility. (U) For the most part, LNO–RNO development has produced options that emphasize their military utility (rather than political utility) in the defense of an area or interest believed vital to the US. While criteria for assessing military effectiveness are well developed and widely understood, and thus can be used to guide preplanning of options, definition of useful criteria for evaluating the potential political utility of LNOs and RNOs has been found to be very complex. Factors relevant to a determination of political utility are extremely subjective, and may not be adequately understood until an actual crisis begins to unfold. Thus, it has been easier to conceptualize and pre-­ plan limited options on the basis of their potential military utility rather than potential political contribution in the contingency situations that have been postulated. Progress is needed toward the development and statement of political objectives and criteria to enhance the military planners’ capability to pre-­plan, and more importantly, to translate national political objectives into limited options useful to the NCA in a nuclear crisis. In this regard, the Joint Chiefs of Staff in collaboration with the Office of the Secretary of Defense, have initiated a series of politico-­military war simulations designed to raise the level of familiarization and understanding of nuclear war considerations among senior civilian and military officials. Two separate series of simulations have examined limited nuclear option concepts in crisis scenarios focused on the Mid-East and northeast Asia. The simulations have been considered very informative and useful by most participants, and should be continued. Better insight, however, still remains to be developed in the area of interfacing political objectives, requirements and criteria with military plans and capabilities. This will be particularly important in the management of an actual crisis when it will be necessary to integrate political and diplomatic measures with military activities if an attempt is being made to control escalation through the limited employment of nuclear weapons. V. Advisability of Retaining NSDM–242 (S) The NSDM–242 nuclear weapons employment policy provided, for the first time, a nationally promulgated common policy framework for both strategic and theater forces. It remains for this Administration to determine whether or not NSDM–242 should be retained, modified or replaced. (S) It would be inadvisable merely to cancel NSDM–242 in the absence of an equally comprehensive national nuclear weapons employment policy statement. Nuclear weapons employment planning is an immensely complex and time consuming activity. Significant
