252 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement June 27, 1958; as summarized at the meeting by Mr. Rogers Cannell, of the Stanford Research Institute. 4. STATUS OF SHELTER MEASURES AS OF JUNE 30, 1958 (NSC Action No. 1882; NSC 5807/1; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated July 1, 1958) Governor Hoegh stressed that it was the note of prudence rather than the note of alarm which had been emphasized in the FCDA program on shelter measures. The program had been given to the American people in a low key. He then went on to summarize the contents of his report, a copy of which is filed in the minutes of the meeting. After concluding his summary, Governor Hoegh stressed the importance of Congressional provision of sufficient funds if the shelter program was to be carried for­ ward along the lines suggested. Governor Hoegh felt that the program could be successfully accomplished if Congress provided $13 million. After Congress had acted on the appropriation, Governor Hoegh indi­ cated his desire to present to the Council a supplementary status report. The President asked several questions about the construction char­ acteristics of shelters, particularly as to means of entrance and exit. These questions were answered by Governor Hoegh. The National Security Council: a. Noted and discussed the report on the subject prepared by the Federal Civil Defense Administration pursuant to NSC Action No. 1882–­c and transmitted by the reference memorandum of July 1, 1958; as summarized at the meeting by the Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization. b. Noted that the Director, Office of Defense and Civilian ­Mobilization, would submit to the Council a supplementary status report following Congressional action on FY 1959 appropriations, and appropriate recommendations on shelter measures (including those on which action was deferred by NSC Action No. 1882–­d) in the light of Congressional action on appropriations and of further study of the reports presented in Items 1 through 3 above. NOTE: The action in b above, as approved by the President, sub­ sequently transmitted to the Director, ODCM, for appropriate action. 5. NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL AND NSC PLANNING BOARD MEETINGS, SEPTEMBER 1947 THROUGH JULY 21, 1958 General Cutler asked the President’s indulgence while he briefly explained a tabulation comparing the number of meetings of the National Security Council and the NSC Planning Board during the Truman and Eisenhower Administrations. General Cutler stated that he realized that more important than the number of meetings was the quality of the actions taken by the Council, but, being possessed of a finite mind, he could not resist giving the Council members this
