1002
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
The G–77 entered the conference with a wide range of arms control
demands. These were eventually narrowed to three items that they in-
sisted be included in the final declaration:
• The establishment of a multilateral working group on a compre-
hensive test ban treaty (CTB) in the Committee on Disarmament.
• A pledge by the Soviet Union and the United States to observe
the terms of the SALT II agreement pending ratification.
• Language that would single out Israel and South Africa for criti-
cism and prohibit nuclear cooperation with these two nonsignatories
unless they accepted international safeguards over their entire nuclear
programs.
Significant concessions by the industrial nations giving assurances
about the supply of nuclear fuel and technical assistance to nuclear pro-
grams of Third World signatories of the NPT were not sufficient to lead
to compromise in the arms control area. Indeed, G–77 leaders like Yu-
goslavia and Mexico apparently persuaded the more moderate nations
within the Group to dig in their heels because the nuclear weapons
states showed no signs of agreeing to any of the arms control demands
until well into the last week of the conference. The United States even-
tually indicated a willingness to accept a CTB working group under
certain conditions, but by that time most of the developing nations had
decided that an inconclusive conference outcome would provide a dra-
matic warning to the superpowers.
Consequences of Failure
The failure of the review conference to reaffirm the NPT in a final
declaration is likely to have a number of far-reaching consequences:
• It will weaken the global nonproliferation regime. The inconclu-
sive outcome does not alter the treaty obligations of signatories, but the
failure to agree on whether the treaty has been effectively implemented
raises serious questions about its long-term viability.
• No signatory is likely to withdraw from the treaty in the next few
years because of the conference outcome, but the prospects for per-
suading nonsignatories to adhere to the treaty have been greatly re-
duced. Some nonsignatories may conclude that the costs of nonadher-
ence and the potential penalties for crossing the nuclear threshold have
been reduced.
• The issue of nuclear weapons programs in the Third World is
likely to be further politicized. The G–77 nations at the conference, for
example, were unwilling to discuss the question of how to deal with
potential proliferators within their own ranks.
The developing nations’ insistence on discussing nuclear arms
control between the superpowers probably will complicate future dis-
cussions of nuclear proliferation. This linkage may make any strength-
