84
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Internal political forces which may defeat the Mosadeq program
certainly include the reactionaries who can be expected to oppose vig-
orously any social or economic reform program. The Court and the Par-
liament represent landed and wealthy interests who will resist any at-
tacks on their prerogatives or profits. Already several representatives
of the Court and old line political circles have indicated delight that
Mosadeq is Prime Minister because he must now wrestle with the
problems which he previously forced on the Government. Close candi-
date for Premiership, Seyid Zia, on the day that Mosadeq’s appoint-
ment was announced, gleefully told an Embassy officer that he was
very pleased at this development which would remove Mosadeq from
the Majlis and surely cause him to fall on his face while Prime Minister.
The Shah reportedly indicated to a British Embassy source on May 3rd
that Dr. Mosadeq’s stay in power was not expected to continue for a
long time.
If Dr. Mosadeq fails to correct the ancient evils of oppressive Gov-
ernment and economic woes he will lose much popular support and in-
crease popular disappointment and cynicism. Distrust and dislike of
Government is deep-rooted in Iran and even a popular hero like Dr.
Mosadeq will have difficulty in overcoming this, even without the
added problems of possible loss of oil revenues and lack of U.S. eco-
nomic aid. He has emphasized his concern in this regard and his strong
desire to have an economic program for the alleviation of popular
discontent.
The leftist part in the picture is not yet clear. Several National Front
Deputies who were close to Mosadeq represent a radical leftist ap-
proach to politics. Their brand of political action will probably be
pressed on Mosadeq who may be forced to take such action which will
split his National Front supporters, presently a coalition of radical and
moderate elements, into opposing elements.
In summary, while there are many forces which may well work to
bring the downfall of this Mosadeq Government it is not inevitable that
it will fall in the immediate future. Further, it is entirely possible that a
complete failure of the Mosadeq Government to implement the social
program which the nation so evidently expects will be blamed on the
reactionaries and the British and possibly on us. His utter failure might
drive numbers of presently moderate Iranian liberals, discontented
with further abortive attempts to improve conditions within the ex-
isting frame work of Government, to seek alliance with the Commu-
nists in achieving reforms through drastic means.
It may well be advisable for the United States to indicate support
of the Mosadeq Government. By increasing Dr. Mosadeq’s confidence
in U.S. efforts to assist Iran we may well bring his Government to coop-
erate in implementing our programs here. His aims, while presently
