546
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
172.
Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Inderfurth) to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 1, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights Performance
For background purposes I have prepared the attached unclassi-
fied paper on “Human Rights Performance: January 1977–December
1978.” It is based on CIA’s “confidential” study which the Agency (Bob
Bowie) refused to declassify.2 I suggest that you—and others—use this
information to background the press on human rights improvements
during the Carter Administration. We do not want to appear to take
credit for all such improvements, but the fact remains that the Presi-
dent’s human rights policy has made the world a better place to live in
and he should get some of the credit for this.
In addition to discussing worldwide improvements (and regres-
sions) in human rights, you might also use the following, which is
based on an earlier memo from Jessica.3
The Carter Administration has three human rights objectives:4
—To raise global awareness of human rights so that the issue is a reg-
ular concern of all governments and an expected component of rela-
tions both with other countries and with the international community.
We have met this objective.
—To organize U.S. foreign policy making so that human rights
concerns are taken into account in all relevant decisions including for-
eign assistance, political actions and economic benefits.
We have partially met this objective. Excessive delays and inconsist-
ent decisions still persist.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Inderfurth
and Gates Chron File, Box 3, Inderfurth Chron: 11–12/78. No classification marking.
Copies were sent to Schecter and Tuchman Mathews. Brzezinski wrote the following
handwritten notation in the top right-hand corner of the memorandum: “RI, good, put in
folder for the meeting. ZB.”
2 Presumable reference to a CIA study of the same name prepared by the National
Foreign Assessment Center in September 1978, which Inderfurth forwarded to Oksen-
berg under an October 27 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Inderfurth and Gates Chron File, Box 3, Inderfurth Chron: 10/78)
3 See Document 168.
4 An unknown hand drew an arrow from the margin to this sentence.
