278  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
the two sides’ under the mutually agreed communique issued by our 
two governments on July 25, and our agreed agenda.
B. I cannot but consider that such a proposal would nullify the 
agreement we now have to discuss at the Ambassadorial level practical 
problems at issue between our two governments.
C. My government is not prepared to substitute another forum for 
this one. Neither is my government prepared now to discuss or agree 
as to what will happen after our talks here have been concluded. We 
would hope this would be when all practical matters at issue had been 
disposed of. We feel that both sides should make a maximum effort 
to settle ‘practical matters at issue’ in our talks here as already agreed 
rather than propose another forum even before the two of us have 
undertaken discussion of the second item of our agenda.”
39. Wang countered that according to the agreement at the outset 
of our talks and with respect to his statement at the last meeting he 
believed each side could raise issues it considered should be discussed 
under item two. He had suggested two problems: embargo; second, 
preparations for Sino-American negotiations at a higher level. He con­
sidered objective of talks was improvement relations two countries and 
easing of tensions in Far East. Therefore, PRC did not consider that all 
practical issues between US and China could be settled in these Ambas­
sadorial talks. He thought it would be more significant to refer these 
issues to a meeting at a higher level. This proposal not only conformed 
with desire two peoples and world public opinion but also conformed 
with desire some high officials in US Government. Of course this was 
his opinion regarding agenda item two and he was prepared to listen to 
anything I wished to put forward.
40. Said I had nothing further to say this morning.
41. Wang said he had nothing further to say. He suggested we meet 
again September 23.
42. In discussing release to press Wang suggested we issue state­
ment saying we had discussed (a) implementation of agreed announce­
ment and (b) item two.
43. I suggested we say we “discussed points of view with respect 
to item two”.
44. We finally agreed on text Mytel 743.
Shillock
