604
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
was on overcomplement and we didn’t get a slot for that job for many
months. We are still operating with an overcomplement officer for the
second country reports slot6 and it took several months for the system
to produce an officer. Our asylum officer7 is said to be the USG’s fore-
most authority on asylum, but his rank is not commensurate with his
duties or skills. He is unspeakably overworked and our only assistance
to him is an erratic overcomplement system. We have had to resort to
outside hires which have been a source of some criticism. Personnel
must be persuaded that HA deserves as much priority in receiving
qualified personnel as the geographic bureaus. Service in HA should be
recognized. A number of our officers and potential officers have told us
that their personnel counselors have advised them not to come to work
in HA. Our officers have received good onward assignments although I
was disappointed at the way HA fared in the recent promotion list.
—Improved Human Rights Training
This is necessary for Foreign Service officers and later for other
USG officers with foreign affairs responsibilities. There has been an un-
fortunate tendency for some officers to disparage the human rights
policy and occasionally HA in their official and unofficial contacts.
If we are taken seriously, have the quality personnel needed to
staff our positions and can attenuate bureaucratic resistance to the
policy, we can make more progress toward achieving our substantive
goals. These are:
—Human Rights Strategy Papers for Problem Countries. These
should be the product of HA and Regional Bureau collaboration.
—Senate Ratification of International Human Rights Treaties. HA,
H and Department principals should work to ensure their favorable
consideration. U.S. failure to ratify the Genocide Convention, Interna-
tional Covenants, Racial Discrimination Convention and American
Convention seriously impairs our credibility in the human rights areas.
—Development of a mechanism to permit effective response to
complaints about U.S. domestic human rights violations. This will re-
quire close coordination between HA, IO and the Department of Justice
and the Civil Rights Commission. We might consider the creation of an
interagency group along the lines of the Interagency Committee on
Human Rights and Foreign Assistance.
—Closer cooperation with the NSC to coordinate the activities of
and promote acceptance by domestic agencies of the human rights
policy.
6 Reference is to the Deputy Director for Country Reports Kenneth Rogers.
7 Reference is to Lawrence L. Arthur.
