Afghanistan regularly twice a week to coordinate their activities in accordance with instructions from home, and some of them resent it if one of their number does something out of step with the others; see Kabul 1340/ Notal.)4 My initial impression is that regular monthly meetings like Sunday’s will have some value in keeping one another informed of current thinking on these matters in our capitals and in coordinating our tactics locally to the extent allowed by national policies but will be of very little use in coming up with innovative ideas to help shape those policies. These meetings could be useful in reinforcing USG policy proposals which are also made in the respective capitals or to the Embassies in Washington, but my guess is that not much would come of trying to use the Kabul Chargés as a means of channeling USG suggestions to their governments. 4. The following summarizes the personal views of those at Sunday’s meeting on how we can best maintain our diplomatic presence in Kabul without undercutting our policy of nonrecognition and the avoidance of diplomatic contact. (Please protect the Chargés in any discussions with other governments.) The British Chargé believes that eventually, and probably sooner rather than later, we will have to expand our contacts with the regime somewhat beyond the current administrative and consular areas if we are to protect our interests here. He believes this can be done in an incremental, non-dramatic way and that if necessary enough disclaimers can be built in to assure there is no implication that we “recognize” or approve of the regime. The German, on the other hand, believes we ought not to increase our dealings with the DRA but wait the situation out. He thinks we should be able to find ways to reciprocate and make our displeasure known if the regime does something we can’t put up with, but he wasn’t able to suggest specific measures when various situations were posed. The French Chargé felt it was important not to do anything to jeopardize future good relations while waiting for the “very awkward” political situation to get better. (Most of the French Embassy staff here, the largest of any non-Communist country, is concerned with maintaining and improving cultural ties with France.) The Italian tended to agree with the British Chargé, while the Japanese didn’t offer an opinion. 5. My own view is that for the time being, at least, we can live with the present arrangement in spite of the difficulties we may increasingly face in our day-to-day operations and that it is probably worthwhile doing so for the sake of our overall objectives. (Not everyone in the Embassy agrees; some believe, as the British Chargé does, that if
