National Security Policy 895 Lemnitzer said that these have been greatly reorganized and tightened up. Paid drill strength has been cut down from 1,254,000 in 1954 to 700,000 at the present time. We have cut down manning levels, knocked out ten divisions, and cut down the number of battle groups in sixteen divisions. We have reduced from 11,000 to 8,800 units. We are giving the National Guard and Reserves more of a civil defense mission. We have just completed this reorganization, and an attempt to make a further change coming at this time would inflame the whole National Guard and Reserve structure. He said that with the six months’ training pro­ gram now in effect, and the elimination of excess units, we now have six good divisions. To attempt to decrease to 630,000 would explode the situation, he felt. The President said he had recommended a strength of 630,000 for the last several budgets. If we are not careful, we will get into the position of making recommendations simply to fight politicians rather than to solve military problems. He recalled that he had called for State Guards to be established, with the rest of the structure brought under Federal control. This had been bitterly opposed. The biggest mission of the Reserves today is rehabilitation in case disaster should occur through nuclear war. He thought it is wrong to keep the National Guard and the Reserves in an antiquated concept. He real­ ized that he had been defeated by the National Guard and Reserves on this issue, and realized that he would probably be defeated again. General Lemnitzer said it had taken tremendous effort, but he had gotten agreement from the National Guard and Reserves on a 700,000 man force. He said he has resisted pressures for an increase in the strength of units. He has had a restudy of the pentomic division made, under a guideline that he would not approve an increase of even one man in total strength. The President said he was going to stick with his 630,000 man rec­ ommendation. He wants to tailor the force to the real need. He com­ mented that defense will never be as sound on an unstable economy as it will be on a sound one. The Chiefs to him are the hinge between the professional forces and the supporting nation. He referred briefly to the so-called new look concepts, and commented that the old rela­ tions between military forces and the nation in time of war are chang­ ing. General Lemnitzer said that the National Guard and Reserve units are undoubtedly the best nucleus on which to carry out rehabilitation in case of nuclear attack. He must sell and develop this concept grad­ ually, however. The President commented that we have got to keep our economy expanding through private initiative by three to four percent a year. To do this we must keep our dollar sound. In addition, it is the currency base throughout the world. We must not permit a run on the dollar to develop. Our people must support their military
