World Hunger and Food Policy
865
productive in international conferences or negotiations convened
during the 1970s to address global problems.
Neither the cost to national security of allowing malnutrition to
spread nor the gain to be derived by a genuine effort to resolve the
problem can be predicted or measured in any precise, mathematical
way. Nor can monetary value be placed on avoiding the chaos that will
ensue unless the United States and the rest of the world begin to de-
velop a common institutional framework for meeting such other critical
global threats as the growing scarcity of fossil fuels and other non-
renewable resources, environmental hazards, pollution of the seas, and
international terrorism. Calculable or not, however, this combination of
problems now threatens the national security of all countries just as
surely as advancing armies or nuclear arsenals.
The Commission believes that stimulating an effective, coopera-
tive campaign against world hunger would help the United States to
break the impasse in “North-South” relations. For the foreseeable fu-
ture, the United States is less likely than most other countries to suffer
directly from a world food crisis. Despite—or perhaps because of—this
fact, a concerted effort to eliminate hunger would enable the American
people to demonstrate their solidarity with “the poorest of the poor,”
and, at the same time, to contribute significantly toward raising living
standards for poor people throughout the world.
It is the Commission’s view that hunger constitutes the central
strand in the web of underdevelopment—poverty, powerlessness, low
productivity, lack of education, unemployment, disease, and high rates
of population growth. Malnutrition cripples the abilities of disadvan-
taged populations to help themselves, by preventing large numbers of
citizens from working to capacity or performing effectively in school.
But the reverse is also true: helping people acquire the means and skills
for producing or purchasing their own food will necessarily require
progress along the entire spectrum of development needs: creating
more jobs in both rural and urban areas, improving basic health,
and evolving higher degrees of social organization and political
participation.
As both symptom and source of underdevelopment, then, hunger
presents an appropriate and badly needed focus for America’s rela-
tions with the developing nations. The Commission believes that ef-
forts stemming from this new focus would engender increasing coop-
eration by the developing nations in addressing the rest of the global
agenda.
3. Economic Interest
The Commission also finds compelling economic reasons for the
United States to focus on the elimination of hunger. The United States
