Covert and Overt Operations
883
The latter may well be even more intransigent on the hostage issue
than the moderates; there is however at least a chance that their victory
in this key phase of the ongoing struggle and their assumption of
responsibility for the functioning of the government will lead them to
want a final resolution of the hostage issue.
We believe there is an opportunity for new efforts to resolve the
crisis. We have concluded that—after reviewing the six options identi-
fied in the attached study8 —we should put together a new diplomatic
effort, combined with family and Congressional initiatives.9 There is
no assurance of success by this route, but given the fact that Khomeini
has said the parliament would decide, it seems wise to act for the
moment on the assumption that we have something new to work with
and that we should pick the Iranians up on Khomeini’s prescribed
approach. We will be refining approaches for the specific further steps
that we may want to consider in the next few weeks.
Elements of a Proposed Strategy
The main objective of the proposed strategy would be to try to
encourage the new government to take control of the hostage issue as
it is put before the Iranian parliament so as to assure to the extent
possible that the parliament’s decisions on the issue do not preclude
a reasonable settlement.
In pursuing this objective, we would work on two parallel tracks:
—encouragement of private and Congressional initiatives to test
the potential for a people-to-people approach such as you discussed
with hostage wives10 and
—a series of approaches through diplomatic and private channels
to key Iranians to establish a negotiating channel with the most power-
ful elements in the new government.
At the same time, we would try to generate renewed support from
enough other quarters outside Iran to keep the Iranians alert to their
stakes in resolving the crisis. During this period, we would continue—
and would press our allies to continue—the economic and psychologi-
cal pressures on Iran.
Hostage Families. As you instructed, I am discussing with the leaders
of the hostage family organization ways in which they might propose
8 The options listed in the strategy paper were: 1) intensify support for opposition
groups in order to destabilize Iran; 2) implement a blockade or mining of Iranian ports and
make efforts to block air transport links; 3) intensify negotiations; 4) make a humanitarian
appeal for release; 5) develop a response should Iran demand trials as part of a release
scenario; and 6) put any U.S. initiatives on hold and wait for Iran to make the next move.
9 Carter wrote in the left margin beside this sentence: “I agree—move on it.”
10 See Document 320.
