762
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
special equipment used on the helos and in other parts of the operation;
and (4) any estimates of possible casualties. (TS)
5. Covert Action on Iran. The SCC reviewed a CIA proposal for
stepping up our covert action on Iran, which was slowed down during
the negotiating phase. No additional findings are required. The essen-
tial question is where we should place our primary emphasis. The CIA
paper proposed advisory assistance to Bakhtiar and Oveissi, each of
whom is beginning to cooperate independently with the Iraqis. Our
objective would be to exploit the existing organization, but attempt to
assist them to pull the various groups together and add more realism
to their planning [less than 1 line not declassified]. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that this was essentially an external strategy
and he questioned the wisdom of becoming too closely identified with
the Bakhtiar/Oveissi group as the central organizing point when they
are subject to manipulation by the Iraqis. [1½ lines not declassified] We
have seen that the situation is chaotic and the country porous. [15½
lines not declassified] (TS)
Mr. Christopher expressed strong reservations about the wisdom
of supporting Bakhtiar and Oveissi. [1½ lines not declassified] On balance,
his expectations with regard to Bakhtiar/Oveissi were more minus
than plus. We risk anointing them as the recognized leaders of the
exile forces. They have been discredited by their relationship with the
Shah and they are bad horses for us to ride. He did not object to some
level of contact with them, however. (TS)
Admiral Turner said he thought there was little likelihood we
would be able to subvert members of the revolution. There is too much
anti-Americanism. Bakhtiar and Oveissi are currently fighting an uphill
battle since the myth persists that the U.S. actually brought down the
Shah, put Khomeini in place, and that we are secretly supporting
an outcome which would favor Khomeini’s leadership. That may be
ridiculous on the face of it,7 but it is prevalent among the groups
opposing Khomeini and it inhibits their ability to organize effectively.
A clear decision on our part to support Bakhtiar and Oveissi would
overcome that misperception. (TS)
[2½ lines not declassified] Mr. Christopher noted that he was not
persuaded that support for Bakhtiar and Oveissi would result in
expanding contacts inside the country. On the contrary, it is likely to
complicate efforts to develop such contacts. Dr. Brzezinski said that
our plan should think through the implications of support for Bakhtiar/
7 Carter underlined the phrase “ridiculous on the face of it” and wrote in the left
margin: “It’s ridiculous all the way through.”
