794 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII The first major Soviet counterinsurgency campaign, which ran through mid-March and employed conventional march tactics and area sweeps, failed to trap or destroy any large insurgent bands. The insurgents, who easily eluded these operations, sabotaged roads and struck government outposts to the rear and on the flanks of the road-bound Soviets. Furthermore, they reinfiltrated after the Soviets withdrew from operational areas. This forced the Soviets to garrison many disaffected areas. As a result, their forces became thinly spread, making them more vulnerable to ambushes, reducing their ability to mount operations without regrouping, and creating logistics problems. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]) By early April 1980, senior Soviet military officers in Afghanistan had become pessimistic about their situation and short-term military prospects. [2½ lines not declassified] tactical and organizational adjustments were begun. For example, the Soviets organized hybrid brigades that combine airborne, infantry, and helicopter units. They also created regiment-sized task forces composed of motorized rifle units heavily reinforced with area-saturation artillery, such as multiple rocket launchers. In addition, they formed small airborne detachments able to respond quickly to targets of opportunity. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]) Although it is too early to judge the effect of these changes, results have been limited so far. The new brigades have been used in several recent operations, one of which resulted in large Soviet losses, suggesting that the Soviets have not yet mastered airmobile tactics. Nor have the Soviets trapped any large insurgent groups in decisive battles despite several sweep operations. The infantry-artillery task forces have not suffered any setbacks, but the Soviets have not yet demonstrated that such organizations will be mobile and flexible enough for counterinsurgency operations in difficult terrain. Soviet patrols may be achieving some modest success in slowing border infiltration from Pakistan, and their sweeps may have some effect on the ability of insurgent forces to concentrate for operations against Soviet and Afghan units. The Soviets probably will continue to emphasize and improve their airmobile and infantry-artillery task force tactics this summer. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]) There are several persistent impediments to responsive counterinsurgency operations which the Soviets so far apparently have not resolved. [3½ lines not declassified] In addition, the slow pace of Soviet tactical adjustments in Afghanistan suggests that approval for operations must be obtained from Moscow. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]) The Soviet forces now in Afghanistan appear to have little prospect of substantially reducing the insurgency unless the Afghan Army can
