1955 363 since that time have continued to depart freely. From July 11 to October 3, 402 Chinese left United States for Far East. 19. I said he had accused my government of intentionally stalling in order not to begin discussion of subjects introduced under agenda item two. I did not see any basis for such an accusation. My government acted with great promptness to implement agreed announcement and thus cleared way for promptly going on to item two. It was only failure of his government to act with equal promptness which had resulted in slowing progress of talks. If stalling was involved, it should be obvious that that was where fault lay. 20. I said he had also implied that if his government were to release all Americans promptly, this would be submitting to pressure. I did not see how carrying out promptly an obligation which a government had freely and publicly accepted could be regarded as submitting to pressure. My government certainly did not consider it was submitting to pressure in setting up arrangements for India to assist departure of Chinese from the US and taking other action it had taken with respect to Chinese in the US. Why should it be considered any more submis­ sion to pressure for his government to do what it publicly declared in our agreed announcement it was going to do? 21. I said I would comment later on some other points raised in remainder his statement. 22. Wang replied he considered all remarks I had just made belonged in field agenda item one which we had already covered in our discussion and to which his side had already replied. Regarding implementation agreement he had repeatedly said his side would carry out agreement faithfully. However he would not allow any dis­ torted interpretation of agreement question return of Americans in prison had to be dealt with according Chinese law. His side would continue review cases these people but action on part his government could only be carried out in light of conditions which he had told me. That is their cases would be reviewed by taking into account degree of their offenses, their conduct, and improvement relations between two countries in light of agreement we had reached. Only under such circumstances would it be possible his government adopt measures more lenient than present very lenient measures being taken. He could not agree to changing legal procedures of China and conditions he had informed me of and demand that Chinese Government do cer­ tain things unconditionally. 23. Wang said with respect question details implementation agree­ ment he had suggested assistants both sides hold meetings at which our side could put forward any reasonable suggestion it wished. As he had said in statement this morning these questions might also be raised by UK Charge with his government. In his view if we continued
