3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
110
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
The Soviet Union, for its part, intended to raise certain matters, some
new and some already mentioned. It would act fully in accord with the
spirit of detente and in the direction of improving Soviet-American
relations.
The Secretary said that we also wished very much for a constructive
intent and purpose. He said we would conduct ourselves consistent
with that purpose.
MARITIME AGREEMENT
Gromyko took note of the fact that the protocol on maritime ship-
ping had finally been agreed upon. That was a positive fact.
The Secretary said he, too, was pleased that the maritime agreement
had finally been concluded.10
CIVIL AVIATION
Gromyko noted with regret that the aviation question so far had not
been resolved. However, it was necessary to apply further efforts to
finding a solution to this matter, too.
The Secretary thought that some progress had been made on civil
aviation and looked forward to resuming negotiations in the near fu-
ture to bring this matter to a satisfactory conclusion that would be ac-
ceptable to both sides. He would suggest that in the meantime the
status quo of scheduled service be maintained, and that discussions be
picked up as soon as possible, to reach a final agreement.
Korniyenko asked the Secretary to explain the meaning of the status
quo. Some discussion followed as to whether this meant to maintain
two scheduled flights a week for each airline, or whether the normal
April 1 schedule of four weekly flights each would go into effect. The
problem was not resolved and remained to be taken up at another
level.
CONSTRUCTION OF EMBASSIES
Gromyko noted with satisfaction that agreement had been reached
on the construction of the respective embassies.
The Secretary said he, too, was pleased.
SOVIET MIG–25 DEFECTION11
Gromyko said the Soviet leadership had been very much affected
and even hurt by the US Government’s direct attitude in connection
10 Reference is to the Agreement Regarding Certain Maritime Matters between the
United States and the Soviet Union, January 1, 1976. The Agreement dealt primarily with
shipping concerns.
11 For an overview of the Soviet defection, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XVI,
Soviet Union, August 1974–December 1976, Document 290.
