1978 295 67. Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, July 15, 1978 SUBJECT Planning and Coordination: Crisis Management This is in response to your memorandum on planning and coordination which requested a list of issues for discussion. The following issue areas are appropriate for crisis management: I. White House Emergency Procedures. General: This area is in reasonably good shape, but it is important to have another IVORY ITEM exercise sometime before late fall. Plan D: This concerns successors and continuity of government. It is a travesty of neglect. Mitchell, Director of FPA, has discovered this and wants to do something. So does OMB. Short-­term “fixes” may be possible this fall, but a larger solution is possible as FPA goes into the new Federal Emergency Management Agency. By late summer I hope to have a scheme for launching a major but closely held review of these Plan D deficiencies.2 C3I: This area is the revolutionary front. The DOD is beginning to wake up to it. I get into it through both WHEP and telecommunications policy. How we approach C3I will be indicative of how we intend to structure our forces, strategic and general purpose, for the rest of the century. It will also be indicative of continuity or change in our military doctrine. Presently, our C3I vulnerabilities are staggering, even for only a retaliatory doctrine. This year’s C3I budget issue review is an upcoming opportunity to do something in this area. I am working with Utgoff on it. II. Telecommunications. General: This has been a quiet front. OSTP has the emergency preparedness management functions [6 lines not declassified]. Possibilities are: —Leasing satellites for DOD instead of buying them. —Tactical radio systems and Commerce’s role in setting the standards. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 15, Crisis Management; 8/77–10/78. Top Secret. Outside the System. 2 An unknown hand drew two vertical lines in the right margin next to this sentence.
