554
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Adolph Dubs—gave his life in the performance of his duty as a repre-
sentative of the United States.3
As we meet here today at Georgia Tech—enjoying the blessings of
freedom and peace—we must remember that we are indebted for those
blessings to the sacrifice of men and women like Spike Dubs.
We also see the darker side of change when countries in turbulence
provide opportunities for exploitation by outsiders who seek not to ad-
vance human aims, but rather to extend their own power and their own
position at the expense of others.
As I speak to you today, the country of Iran—with which we have
had close relations for the last 30 years—is in revolution.4 It’s been our
hope that Iran could modernize without deep internal conflicts, and we
sought to encourage that effort by supporting its government, by urg-
ing internal change toward progress and democracy, and by helping to
provide a background of regional stability.
The revolution in Iran is a product of deep social, political, reli-
gious, and economic factors growing out of the history of Iran itself.
Those who argue that the United States should or could intervene di-
rectly to thwart these events are wrong about the realities of Iran. So,
too, are those who spout propaganda that protecting our own citizens
is tantamount to direct intervention.
We have not and we will not intervene in Iran, yet the future of
Iran continues to be of deep concern to us and to our friends and allies.
It’s an important nation in a critical part of the world, an immediate
neighbor of the Soviet Union, a major oil producer that also sits beside
the principal artery for most of the world’s trade in oil. And it is still a
significant potential force for stability and progress in the region.
Iran is a proud nation with a long history—more than 2,000
years—of struggle to establish and to guarantee its own freedom. The
independence of Iran is also in our own vital interest and in the interest
of our closest allies—and we will support the independence of Iran.
Out of today’s turmoil, it is our hope that these troubled people
will create a stable government which can meet the needs of the Iranian
people and which can enable that great nation not only to remain inde-
pendent but to regain its internal strength and balance.
3 Dubs was kidnapped in Kabul on February 14 and was killed during an attempt to
free him. For the President’s and Vance’s comments at a February 18 ceremony honoring
Dubs, which took place at Andrews Air Force Base, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I,
pp. 295–296.
4 Documentation on the Iranian Revolution is scheduled for publication in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. X, Iran: Revolution, January 1977–November 1979.
