Human Rights 349 —In Chile, the secret police, DINA, has been altered in form and its power apparently diminished, and fewer reports of abuses of the individual have been received. —In Nicaragua, there has been a significant decrease in reports of violations of the integrity of the person. —In El Salvador, President Romero has acted with considerable restraint and regard for human rights considerations in dealing with a potentially explosive internal political situation. On the other hand, authoritarian regimes that have, in some cases, proven to be insensitive to human rights considerations continue to rule millions in Latin America. —In Argentina, the rate of disappeared persons remains unchanged, reports of official torture continue to be received, and there is convincing evidence that government security personnal continue to operate in vigilante fashion—all of this in the context of a decreasing terrorist threat as a result of successful counter-terrorist action by the government. —In Uruguay, progress continues to be blocked by the government’s unwillingness or inability to take effective measures to resolve its serious human rights problem, as manifested especially with regard to its continuing negative attitude toward a visit by the Inter- American Human Rights Commission. —Paraguay remains an authoritarian state whose affairs are conducted in some ways at the personal whim of President Stroessner and with little regard for the rights of individuals on his part. —Cuba continues to hold thousands of political prisoners (estimated by some to be as many as 20,000.) Soviet Union and Eastern Europe Soviet authorities made a major and rather successful effort in 1977 to weaken the dissident movement. In Eastern Europe, while the human rights picture continued to be mixed, all of the governments there remained repressive by US standards. Soviet Union. Soviet tactics against dissidents minimized potentially embarrassing dissident activity during the Belgrade Conference and the October Revolution anniversary celebrations. Although the Shcharanskiy case was drawing greater attention in the West than the Soviets probably expected, they apparently were able to break up embryonic human rights movements in the Ukraine, Armenia, Lithuania, and Georgia. The Soviet tactics include isolating dissidents: —from the West, through harassment of Western correspondents, inhibiting contacts with embassy officials, and interfering with the flow of mail from abroad;
