810 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI that there was much the summit could add. The more interesting question was the second—that of meeting legitimate atomic energy needs. In this area it seemed to him that there were three principles which might be discussed and perhaps agreed upon at the summit. These were: —that these needs were real and should be met; —that it was in the general interest that these needs be met with the minimum risk of providing countries the means to convert civilian to military nuclear programs; —in some cases a multilateral or international role in meeting these needs might be desirable. If summit discussion could focus on these principles, continued Owens, and if agreement could be reached to launch a study to give effect to them, this would represent an important outcome. Owen noted that the issue of energy was already on the summit agenda and suggested that as nuclear energy and thus nonproliferation were inextricably connected to this topic, perhaps they should be discussed under the energy item. De Laboulaye acknowledged that it might be impossible to avoid a discussion of nuclear energy under the energy item. It was probably better, however, not to go into detail, given the limited time available at the summit. He suggested, therefore, that discussion be limited to the first two of the three principles Ambassador Owen had outlined. He felt that there was insufficient preparation for discussion to proceed to the third point—that of international intervention. In the absence of agreement, discussion at the summit on this point could be counterproductive. Owen wondered whether there might not be agreement on the first of these two points, and on the initiation of a study. De Laboulaye replied that this was perhaps possible, but would seem to him to be the maximum his government could accept. Van Well agreed that proliferation should be discussed under energy. He felt, however, that the third of Owen’s proposed principles should be discussed among the four before participation was enlarged. At this point there was some discussion about whether the fourpower summit should come before or after the seven power meeting.3 It was agreed that the desirability of discussion of non-proliferation among the four should not override other considerations which tended to favor scheduling the four-power meeting following the seven nation summit. 3 Reference is to the meeting among the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Federal Republic of Germany scheduled for May in London.
