worked out and none can be until full data of claims are available. In
considering such debts no distinction can justly be maintained between
external and internal. Both must be dealt with on the same basis.
6. Debts of Finance Department and of Communications cannot be
distinguished because of the fallacious assumption that the railways’ earnings
are adequate. Due to political conditions we know that they are quite
inadequate.
7. Each claim should be established on its individual merits based on the
amount actually received by the Chinese Government.
8. While the conference cannot legally act as a judicial body, in practice it
may have to do so through full cooperation between the powers.
Shidehara expressed agreement with the general statement of the situation, the
proposed treatment of it politically and adjustment of debt claims. He said he knew of
some sham debts where no money passed. He suggested a convening of the
Extraterritoriality Commission without delay.
MacMurray answered that it seemed they should not sit at the same time because one
would be played off against the other and would interfere with the best results and
encourage the Chinese to attempt to control the action of each; that it would be better if
the Extraterritorial Commission were convened at a fixed date after the completion of
the work of the economic conference. Shidehara answered “perhaps that would be the
better way of treatment.”
As to the British claim that the two and one-half percent should be a part of the
customs revenues, which would thus be deposited in certain banks, Shidehara
responded “That means that it would go to the custodian bank. I think we might well
align ourselves with you on this point.”
MacMurray further suggested that the two and a half percent is described as a surtax,
the amount, time and disposition of which the conference is specifically authorized to
fix and clearly there is no reason for increasing the security of the secured loans.
Shidehara then suggested that an additional two and a half percent would have the
effect of a substantial protection to the industries of China and it occurred to him that to
be accompanied by this protective feature the powers might propose a countervailing
excise tax of two and a half percent on domestic productions for the benefit of the
provinces. This would be agreeable to them and might help to induce them to surrender
at an earlier date the likin. Shidehara further suggested that an average of seven and
one-half percent duty on all imports is very high, as high in fact as the average duty in
high tariff countries like the United States—and a 12 percent duty is unheard of
