(4) For the opening to public scrutiny of the lists of registered voters before
the date set for voting so as to furnish opportunity for the investigation of
contested cases and the correction of the voting lists;
(5) For the secrecy of the ballot;
(6) For the printing of the plebiscitary ballots which shall be in simple form
with two columns headed by representations of the national flags of Chile
and Peru, respectively, with the words “for Chile” in one column and the
words “for Peru” in the other, and a square in each column to be marked by
the voter according to his preference;
(7) For the reception and counting of the ballots;
(8) For the tabulation and scrutiny of the returns of the vote;
(9) For appeals from the Registration and Election Boards to the Plebiscitary
Commission;
(10) For proceedings either by way of appeal from the Registration and
Election Boards or by way of original contest proceedings before the
Plebiscitary Commission to exclude any or all votes cast or apparently cast at
any voting place on account of intimidation, bribery or fraud.
D. Appeal to the Arbitrator. 1. The Arbitrator reserves the power and right on his own
motion to entertain an appeal from the Plebiscitary Commission on any question
decided by it. The Arbitrator further reserves the power and right to entertain an appeal
on the certificate of the Commission to the effect that the question decided involves the
interpretation of the Award, the jurisdiction of the Commission, or some question of
general importance in relation to the holding or result of the plebiscite and that one
member of the Commission has filed a dissenting opinion in writing and requested that
the question be certified to the Arbitrator.
In every case of appeal, the Arbitrator reserves the power and right to determine the
time and manner in which, and the record upon which, the appeal shall be submitted to
the Arbitrator.
E. Report to the Arbitrator—Contest Proceedings. After the tabulation and scrutiny of
the returns submitted by the Registration and Election Boards to the Plebiscitary
Commission is complete, the Plebiscitary Commission shall report by telegraph the
result of the plebiscite to the Arbitrator and to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the
Parties. Within five days after this report either Party may institute contest proceedings
before the Plebiscitary Commission upon the ground that the result of the plebiscitary
vote as announced has been affected by intimidation, bribery or fraud to such an extent
