Costa Rica 409 to diversifying their production and placing the national economy on a more solid basis. Furthermore, this would make available the amounts which the Government now devotes to servicing the national debt for a broad program of road construction which they are working on at the present time with the World Bank. If the loan were secured the Government would then feed this amount into the National Bank system to be loaned out to small rural credit agencies for direct loans to the small planter and farmer. 20% of the loan would be used for diversifying agriculture, developing cattle breeding and improvement of the breeds; 20% would go to stabilize the coffee industry and the remaining 10% would be devoted to housing. The President pointed out that not one cent of this money would be taken by the Government for any public works. For the first time in Costa Rica’s history the total amount of the loan would be turned over to the Development Bank for strengthening the economy and developing private initiative. The recent election had been fought largely on an issue of private initiative against “stateism.” The President and members of the Cabinet expressed the hope that this loan could be secured from Governmental or private sources in the United States as it was essential for the implementation of their plan. All members of the Government including the President were warm in their expressions of friendship for the United States and understanding of the immensity of the burden borne by the American people. They seemed proud of the high standard of living in Costa Rica. Reception of Dr. Eisenhower’s party was everywhere friendly and warm and while attending the funeral of the Minister of Health who died during Dr. Eisenhower’s stay in Costa Rica,3 Dr. Eisenhower walked several miles in the funeral procession, receiving the warmest demonstrations of friendliness from Costa Ricans of all classes. The matter of alleged United States support for dictators was not brought up by anyone on the Governmental side, although it was brought up forcefully by opposition leader Jose Figueres4 during a breakfast at the Embassy which he had with Dr. Eisenhower. Both former Presidents Figueres and Calderon Guardia5 expressed the friendliest feelings for the United States, the latter expressing his desire to help President Echandi in the measure in which he were allowed to do so. Figueres stated his belief that the United States had in some measure given the impression of favoring dictatorships and Calderon Guardia expressed his feeling that the
