Costa Rica  409
to diversifying their production and placing the national economy 
on a more solid basis. Furthermore, this would make available the 
amounts which the Government now devotes to servicing the national 
debt for a broad program of road construction which they are working 
on at the present time with the World Bank. If the loan were secured 
the Government would then feed this amount into the National Bank 
system to be loaned out to small rural credit agencies for direct loans 
to the small planter and farmer. 20% of the loan would be used for 
diversifying agriculture, developing cattle breeding and improvement 
of the breeds; 20% would go to stabilize the coffee industry and the 
remaining 10% would be devoted to housing. The President pointed 
out that not one cent of this money would be taken by the Government 
for any public works. For the first time in Costa Rica’s history the total 
amount of the loan would be turned over to the Development Bank 
for strengthening the economy and developing private initiative. The 
recent election had been fought largely on an issue of private initiative 
against “stateism.”
The President and members of the Cabinet expressed the hope that 
this loan could be secured from Governmental or private sources in the 
United States as it was essential for the implementation of their plan. 
All members of the Government including the President were warm in 
their expressions of friendship for the United States and understanding 
of the immensity of the burden borne by the American people. They 
seemed proud of the high standard of living in Costa Rica. Reception 
of Dr. Eisenhower’s party was everywhere friendly and warm and 
while attending the funeral of the Minister of Health who died during 
Dr. Eisenhower’s stay in Costa Rica,3 Dr. Eisenhower walked several 
miles in the funeral procession, receiving the warmest demonstrations 
of friendliness from Costa Ricans of all classes. The matter of alleged 
United States support for dictators was not brought up by anyone on 
the Governmental side, although it was brought up forcefully by oppo-
sition leader Jose Figueres4 during a breakfast at the Embassy which he 
had with Dr. Eisenhower. Both former Presidents Figueres and Calderon 
Guardia5 expressed the friendliest feelings for the United States, the 
latter expressing his desire to help President Echandi in the measure 
in which he were allowed to do so. Figueres stated his belief that the 
United States had in some measure given the impression of favoring 
dictatorships and Calderon Guardia expressed his feeling that the 
3 Dr. Adolfo Jiménez de la Guardia died July 19, 1958.
4 José Figueres Ferrer, President of the Founding Junta of the Second Republic, May 8, 
1948–November 8, 1949; President of Costa Rica, November 8, 1953–May 8, 1958.
5 Rafael Angel Calderón Guardia, President of Costa Rica, May 8, 1940–May 8, 1944.
