Options Identified a. He has been assembling a “staff” in Tehran to plan for his return. Among the members are military officers who can mobilize large groups upon which he can call for support in time of need. b. He is planning to return to Khuzestan in about a month if his planning permits. c. He has established contact with Admiral Madani, Governor of Khuzestan Province and Commander of the Iranian Navy. [3 lines not declassified] d. He has links to [less than 1 line not declassified] prominent Iraqi Kurdish factions, the [2 lines not declassified]. e. The National Front now completely supports him, and he considers this a solid political development. Karim Sanjabi has allegedly been thrown out along with others who oppose Bakhtiar. f. His staff in Tehran is now operating a small portable FM station broadcasting cassettes of his speeches. g. The Iraqis have offered him support in exchange for an agreement that he would not oppose their absorbing Kuwait. Bakhtiar believes that he can make this deal now but subsequently when in power in Iran ignore the part of the bargain concerning Kuwait. h. [4 lines not declassified] We lack corroborating evidence that would either confirm or deny that Bakhtiar has made as much progress as he avers. We will continue to check on his actual state of progress. 3. Our officer was also told that Bakhtiar is concerned about his contacts with General Gholam Ali Oveisi, former commander of the Shah’s army. While Oveisi is a highly competent officer and would be very useful to Bakhtiar, he feels that Oveisi’s contacts with Princess Ashraf and supporters of the Shah could cause trouble, and he emphasized that he wants nothing to do with the former royal family. [2 lines not declassified] 4. Our officer then asked Bakhtiar exactly what he wanted from the United States Government. Bakhtiar replied as follows: a. He would like us to influence other governments to support him. He would like favorable media coverage. He would like us to encourage some governments [less than 1 line not declassified] to provide financial support. b. He would like us to try and keep the Shah and his supporters from becoming involved. Bakhtiar said that time is critical because Khomeini will soon fall, creating a political vacuum that must be filled. He said that he is prepared to move and that if he gets the necessary financial support he has a reasonable chance of succeeding. While Bakhtiar’s requests for assistance are modest, we believe from other information that he feels without US support behind him, and without direct US guidance, he has little chance of success. He has said that while he would willingly accept material assistance from other nations, the “brainpower” must come from the US.
