721.2315/175: Telegram
[Document 291]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, February 28, 1925—3 p.m.
[Received 5:45 p.m.]
9. Section 2. At 11:20 this morning the Minister for Foreign Affairs under instructions
of the President handed me a copy of his proposed instructions to Ambassador Velarde.
Upon examination I found the second paragraph of the proposed procès-verbal omitted,
namely: “the ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above-mentioned boundary
convention” and also omitted from the third paragraph the words “immediately after
the ratification of the above convention.” After much conversation and insistence I
finally secured an agreement from the Minister, after he had consulted with the
President, to reinsert in his instructions to the Peruvian Ambassador the aforesaid
second paragraph of the suggestions of the Secretary of State as I pointed out that that
was the essential feature of the entire negotiations.
Both the President and the Minister for Foreign Affairs were insistent upon changing
the paragraphs of the procès-verbal containing the remarks of Peruvian Ambassador so
as to read as follows:
“Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government in
view of the withdrawal by Brazil of its friendly observation upon which
consideration of the treaty was suspended to express his acceptance of the
friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made, in the sense
that consideration of the treaty by the Peruvian Congress would be resumed
and it would take its regular constitutional course before that body.”
Both the Minister and the President stated that the greater part of the language
eliminated from Dr. Velarde’s remarks was a repetition and mere recital and that as it
refers to matters purely relating to Brazil and Colombia with which Peru had no
concern, they preferred to make no mention of it. Both were quite fixed in making the
change reported in my number 6, February 27 noon by which “take its constitutional
course” is substituted for “recommendation that it approve”.
POINDEXTER
