The Austrian Federal Government, on their part too led by the conviction
that it will be in the interests both of the creditor Governments and of
Austria that a definitive settlement of the Relief Debts should be reached,
have taken note, with thanks, of the consent given in principle by the
International Relief Bonds Committee, to the proposal made by the Federal
Government of an alternative plan for the payment of the Relief Debts. The
Federal Government have already received a letter from Messrs. J. P.
Morgan & Co. according to which the said banking house have to make no
objections to the present plan of payments as seen from the point of view of
the League Loan prospectus. Moreover, the Federal Government have
addressed a letter to the Trustees of the League Loan asking them whether
any objections will be raised by them to the said proposals. As soon as an
answer will be received from the Trustees it will be transmitted to the
International Relief Bonds Committee. To the proposals, as laid down in the
Aide-Memoire of the International Relief Bonds Committee, the Federal
Government have the honour to reply as follows:
1. In order to exclude any misunderstanding the Federal Government beg to
state beforehand that by making their offer of paying certain amounts
denominated in Austrian schillings, it was by no means their intention to
turn the debts hitherto denominated in various currencies into debts
denominated in schillings. The offer was made in the schilling currency for
the reason only to reduce for the purpose of the present negotiations and for
the sake of calculation, the various currencies to a common denominator
and to give hereby the clearest and most lucid possible idea of the plan of
payment, which otherwise would have had to be made for each currency
separately or expressed in percentage. It is a matter of course that after an
agreement had been reached on the principles of the plan of payment,
payment, in accordance with the plan, in respect of the debts to the various
States was to be made in original currencies of the respective debts.
Now, a completely new arrangement in respect of the character as regards
currency, of the present obligations is provided for in point 4 of the Aide-
Mémoire. In place of the present obligations denominated in the various
respective currencies, the obligation towards all the creditor Governments is
to come to pay in gold. This would mean that Austria would have to secure
the creditor Governments against the risk of fluctuations, if any, of
