Covert and Overt Operations officials should sit down with the Secretary. They should plan to bypass Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh and the U.S. Government. The sooner the better. The Iranians seem to be on the verge of choosing a Prime Minister. Katherine Keough said she would rather not rush. It would be worth waiting a bit to see if the new Prime Minister lasts. Gary Sick noted that the end of Ramadan may provide an appropriate moment for initiative. The President observed that Khomeini appeared to knock down anyone who sticks his head up in Iran. He recently criticized Beheshti and the clerics. Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh were not aware that Richard Queen was going to be released until they were asked to arrange transportation. Katherine Keough mentioned that the families had recently written a letter to Ahmad Khomeini on a person-to-person basis when there appeared to be a chance that he might become the Prime Minister. The letter is being carried to Tehran with Professor Ricks who is presently on his way. The President said that if they saw some positive sign or an opportunity, they should call him directly. Katherine Keough said one final point they wished to make was to propose the establishment of an international commission to deal with questions such as the sanctity of embassies, the inviolability of diplomatic immunity and the like, perhaps under the auspices of the UN. The President said we would certainly join such a commission. Katherine Keough said she hoped, if such a commission were formed, that the leadership of FLAG would be considered for membership in the U.S. delegation. The President asked how the families of the hostages get along among themselves. Katherine Keough joked that they fight. There is a continuing problem of those outside Washington vs. those inside. When those from other locations are brought in, they have unrealistically high expectations about what is known and what can be done. When their expectations are not realized, they are frustrated and tend to think that the government is doing nothing. By the time a meeting is over, they usually go away with a positive attitude which lasts 2–4 weeks before frustrations again begin to mount. Seventeen families were represented in the meeting with Richard Queen. Louisa Kennedy added that there was flak from those who were not there. It had been hard to arrange quickly for everyone. Richard Queen plans to call all the families. The President said that it was obvious that Queen was weak. Even though he was quite animated and excited during his hour visit with
