Chapter 5, May–June 1990  725
elements.” There undoubtedly will be hiccups (or worse) along the way 
as we translate these policy level agreements into detailed treaty text, 
but I do not expect anything further to arise in these two areas between 
now and the conclusion of the Summit. The issue of the START Treaty’s 
duration was resolved in Geneva immediately before the Ministerial. All 
of the other outstanding START issues remain unresolved.
Unresolved Issues
Baker got nowhere with the Soviets in Moscow on additional heavy 
ICBM limits, mobile ICBM limits, road-­mobile verification, Backfire, or 
non-­circumvention. This list will constitute our initial agenda for the 
weekend meetings with Karpov. The recent NSD gives us flexibility 
on some of these issues that was not used in Moscow. I convened my 
Ungroup yesterday to review the state of play and to identify other 
potential areas of flexibility (e.g., a different package on Backfire, drop-
ping our 3000/3300 ICBM RV sublimit). With the possible exception of 
mobile ICBM limits, however, none of the unresolved issues is a candi-
date for quick and easy agreement with the Soviets in Washington.
We have been careful to avoid identifying any specific remaining 
issues as ones that must be resolved by the time of the Summit. We like-
wise have worked to preserve the option of deciding that, with ALCMs 
and SLCMs, we already have reached “substantive agreement on the 
major START issues.” With issues such as Backfire and SS-18 still open, 
however, this could be a hard sell.
More generally, we want something from the Soviets on most of 
what is left to resolve. Declaring victory on the basis of the current areas 
of agreement, therefore, will weaken our hand on the remaining issues. 
This tactical situation argues that we should not be too quick to signal 
during the weekend meetings with Karpov that we are more eager than 
the Soviets to announce substantive agreement on START at the Summit.
Joint Statements
As noted above, there are two possible joint statements that could 
be signed or otherwise issued during the Summit. The first would be 
a document that recorded the substantive agreements that have been 
reached to date in START. The Soviets reportedly have a 20 page draft 
they will be bringing to Washington to work during our weekend meet-
ings. State has just circulated for comment its cut at a U.S. draft.
It is likely that these drafts will become the vehicle for addressing 
at least some of the unresolved issues (e.g., each side includes its ver-
sion of the prospective agreement on the heavy ICBM issue). At some 
point, therefore, we will need decisions on what we can accept in the 
joint statement on each of the unresolved issues, including which ones 
can be omitted altogether and which, if any, need to be explicitly noted 
as still outstanding. After we see what has been agreed with the Soviets,
