Bolivia  173
must be maintained and implemented. The U.S. should be firm in 
supporting the IMF in insistence on exchange rate flexibility. We 
should depend upon the IMF to take the lead in judging the spe-
cific rate of exchange which is appropriate and in counseling the 
Bolivian Government on rate policies. We should inform the Bolivian 
Government that utilization of the FY 1959 balance of payments spe-
cial assistance will be predicated upon enforcement by it, in accor-
dance with the stand-­by agreement with the IMF, of policies necessary 
to keep open the free dollar market at a rate of exchange requisite to 
achieve at least an overall balance between demand for and supply 
of dollars.
B. Acceptable progress on the collection of counterpart should be 
a condition of use of United States balance of payments assistance in 
FY 1959.
C. We should attempt to obtain Bolivian agreement to legislation 
permitting the dismissal of surplus labor. If legislation is found polit-
ically impractical, we should continue to explore with the Bolivian 
Government other means of achieving displacement of surplus labor.
D. We should begin now to recruit a top-­grade fiscal expert for the 
financial mission to Bolivia, to serve as an assistant to the head of the 
mission (who is also Executive Director of the Stabilization Council) 
and to replace him during periods of absence.
E. Although petroleum development offers the best long-­term 
prospect for Bolivian economic progress, mining will continue to be 
the country’s principal export producer for the immediate future and 
must also continue to play a major role in the economy in the long run. 
Reorganization, rationalization and re-­capitalization of this industry 
are therefore urgently needed. As the government mining corporation, 
COMIBOL, constitutes by far the major portion of the industry, and as 
its present inefficient operations are a chief source of Bolivia’s deficits 
we should strongly urge the Bolivian Government to implement the 
recommendations already made in this regard, including negotiation 
of a final settlement on compensation for the nationalized properties. 
The possibility of a management contract for COMIBOL with private 
mining interests might also be explored.
III. Additional Assistance for Bolivia
A. The full $17 million FY 1959 special assistance program contem-
plated in the Congressional presentation should be made available to 
Bolivia. In view of the decline in Bolivia’s export earnings and the com-
mitment to help Bolivia meet its balance-­of-­payments problem made at
