3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
471
handful of racists there who were trying to drown in blood the national
liberation movement in Rhodesia. Of course it was up to the United
States to act as it saw fit, but time in any case was working against the
racists. He believed the President would appear in a very good light if
he took a stand in support of the local people in that area. That would
be a major noble act on his part.
As for Namibia, Gromyko believed the situation there to be some-
what similar. At long last he had seen a representative of Namibia in
the United Nations, whereas he still did not know what a Rhodesian
looked like. In Namibia the racist South African regime was trying to
crush the liberation movement by staging farce elections. What was the
purpose of all that? It was clearly flouting the will of the United Na-
tions and yet, the countries friendly to South Africa kept silent. Re-
garding Namibia, too, Soviet policy was the same as with regard to
Rhodesia—not to interfere in any way other than to make Soviet views
known publicly in the United Nations or from Moscow. He thought
that if the Soviet Union and the United States could act together, all
these problems in Rhodesia and Namibia could be resolved promptly.
The whole world would only thank us, and the only ones displeased
would be the small groups of local racists in both these countries, who
were engaged in exploiting the local population.
CTB
Gromyko noted that the CTB negotiations were indeed moving
forward, but rather slowly. The main thing he would want to point out
was that whenever the situation at these negotiations appeared to im-
prove, US representatives would introduce new proposals that threw
cold water on the whole process. There was a time when the United
States had argued in favor of a five-year term for a CTB treaty. At that
time the Soviet Union was more in favor of a three-year term, although
it did not oppose five-years. It simply thought that it was easier to work
out a three-year treaty. Then, quite suddenly, in the United States
various officials began to assert that five years was too long, that such
duration would interfere with certain national plans for testing nuclear
weapons, while a three-year term would not. That position was hardly
convincing. The Soviet Union had finally expressed agreement to the
five-year term, but then the United States changed to three. All these
zigzags were most perplexing and difficult to understand. The Soviet
Union would take this into account in the future. For their part, the So-
viets could also talk about national plans, but they stand on a different
position. Things would be very difficult indeed were they to reply in
kind. Nevertheless, since the United States had changed its position,
obviously the Soviets would have to take this into account, because
there were two other parties to the negotiations. Basically, they would
like to see this agreement completed. It would be a limited agreement,
