ILLEGAL TAXATION
Various treaties between China and the foreign powers have put a limitation
upon the taxation of imported goods, without regard to their nature. Any
taxation levied in excess of those provided for in these treaties is therefore a
violation of the said treaties. The first exception to this principle appears in
the Washington Agreement in the provision that has been made for the
levying of a tax on luxuries. It therefore applies that any violation of treaties
by the illegal taxation of any article of commerce jeopardises the principle
established by treaty and would further establish a precedent which might
be extended to all importations.
Under the treaties, when goods are imported into China they may be
shipped from treaty ports to the interior under transit pass, the payment for
which exempts goods from all other taxation. This however, has been a
point in dispute between the Chinese Government and foreign powers, the
Chinese claiming that when goods reach their destination they are subject to
additional taxes. This position has been strongly contested by the various
Legations and the maintenance of the spirit of the treaties has been insisted
upon although the Government in Peking does not successfully exercise its
authority over all the provinces.
Under the provisions of the treaties providing for the use of the transit pass
the shipper is given the option of either using the transit pass or shipping his
goods to the interior without a transit pass, paying instead the local taxes.
When the tax is paid by the use of the transit pass the funds are put into the
regular Customs revenues which are hypothecated for certain purposes.
Taxes paid in this form do not directly reach the provincial Governments or
any other branch of the Central Government than the Customs. Certain
provinces, however, have fixed the local taxes at such rates as would induce
shippers to forward their goods without transit passes thus benefiting the
particular locality. The effect of the treaties has therefore been to make the
cost of the transit pass the limit of taxation on any article of commerce
shipped into the interior. The treaties also provide that trade in the treaty
ports be free from taxation so that the only taxes a merchant has to consider
are those levied upon his goods when they leave the treaty port. But in spite
