1006 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement stand long term at air launching sites and truck or rail transportation. Also the development of the interior case insulation for the first stage to protect it against heating. (b) Development of the swivel nozzles for the first-stage engine which will survive the erosive action of hot gases and will control the direction of the thrust. (c) Development of a miniaturized inertial guidance system which will not only be accurate enough but will remain so after years of sitting in the hardened sites, with the gyroscopes running all the time. It is my considered opinion that all these problems will be eventu­ ally solved. The provision of more money could speed up the development somewhat, but not much however, because a number of problems must be solved consecutively and because of limitations on the technical tal­ ent available. (d) In a different class is the problem of the correct design of the overall weapon system. It has already been demonstrated that the Minuteman missile can be launched from a hole in the ground (“In-­Silo” launch) and this is not of serious concern. However, the planning of the communications and command structure for the Minuteman force is still in preliminary stages and shows a tendency to grow in complexity so that the overall costs of the system tend to increase. Thus a year or two ago the estimate was $0.5M per mis­ sile. The latest figure I heard was $1.5M per missile and it is likely to inflate further. G.B. Kistiakowsky 241. Memorandum of Meeting with the President1 Washington, February 17, 1960, 3 p.m. PRESENT General Goodpaster 1. I presented to the President the draft Record of Actions of the Special Meeting of Friday, 12 February. The President approved it with minor amendments to paragraphs 3 and 7. I had called the 1 Source: Nuclear stockpile levels, possibility of disciplining Taylor. Top Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Meetings With the President. Drafted on February 19.
