The territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica is understood to be about nine
thousand square miles in area and to have a population of between thirty and forty
thousand. It belongs to the desert region of the Pacific coast. There are some mineral
resources but these do not appear to be extensive. The valleys proceeding from the
mountains on the east give opportunities for agriculture. In one of these valleys lies the
city of Tacna, which was the capital of the Peruvian province of that name. The city of
Arica, the capital of the other Peruvian province mentioned in Article 3 of the Treaty of
Ancon, is a port on the Pacific ocean about forty miles from Tacna, with which it is
connected by railroad. Arica is the terminal of the railroad running to La Paz, Bolivia,
and has commercial importance.
At the time of the signing and ratification of the Treaty of Ancon, Chile was already in
possession of the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, here in question, as a
result of the War of the Pacific. By the terms of the Article it was agreed that she
should continue in possession of this territory for a period of ten years and that during
this period it should be “subject to Chilean laws and authority.” It was further agreed
that “after the expiration of that term” a plebiscite should be held to decide whether the
territory should “remain definitely under the dominion and sovereignty of Chile” or
should “continue to constitute part of Peru,” i. e., whether the territory should be
permanently Chilean or permanently Peruvian. The paragraph then goes on to provide,
“that country of the two” to which the provinces of Tacna and Arica “remain annexed”
shall pay the other ten million Chilean pesos or Peruvian soles. Finally, the Article
provides for the negotiation by the two countries of “a special protocol” which will
prescribe, first, “the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out” and second,
“the terms and time for the payment of the ten millions.”
The question whether a plebiscite shall or shall not be held depends upon the question
whether the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon are still in
effect. If these provisions have not expired by lapse of time, if they have not been
abrogated or discharged by the conduct of the Parties so that performance can no
longer be demanded, the plebiscite should be held because that is the agreement. If that
agreement for any reason is no longer binding, then the plebiscite should not be held
unless a new agreement for that purpose is made.
As the question thus relates to the construction, operation and obligation of this part of
the treaty, the province of the Arbitrator is more narrow than the range of the arguments
which have been presented. It is neither the duty nor the privilege of the Arbitrator to
pass upon the causes or the conduct of the War of the Pacific, or upon the justice of the
terms of peace, or upon the relations of either Party to the Republic of Bolivia, or upon
the wisdom of the provisions of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, or upon the economic
effects of the treaty, or upon alleged general equities of the present situation, or upon
any questions whatever which are aside from the meaning and efficacy of the
agreement itself.
