Stalemate: January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 326. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Israel, Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia and the Consulate General in Jerusalem1 Washington, January 5, 1980, 0137Z 3230. For the Ambassadors and Consul General from Amb Linowitz. Subject: Approach Toward the Negotiations. 1. (Secret-entire text) 2. I want to outline my present thinking about the negotiations in which we are engaged to give you an opportunity to challenge my approach or improve on it.2 3. My basic concern is that we seem to be trying to back our way into the critical issues. I do not think we can succeed in this way, and I fear that we are spending valuable time on peripheral issues which will in any case defy resolution until the fundamental questions are resolved. 4. An example of this is the number of representatives for the transitional authority. It seems to me that Egypt wants it to “look” like a legislature—this may be possible—but only if Israel is first convinced it will not “act” like a legislature. The issue here is not the number but the powers. Once we have established the latter, the former may more easily fall into place. 5. I think similar arguments can be made on the other key issues which remain outstanding on modalities: East Jerusalem and the electoral system. Frankly, it would not discourage me in the slightest if we were to mark time on modalities while we focused almost exclusively on powers and responsibilities. 6. In the area of powers and responsibilities, I am also concerned about our approach. We seem to be gearing up for a yet another cloning process of creating sub-groups as a substitute for a clear idea of what we are trying to achieve. The conventional wisdom seems to be that in 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880145–0665. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Walker; cleared in NEA and by Calvin Konner (S/ S–O); approved by Linowitz. Printed from a corrected copy. 2 Responses were received from Amman, in telegram 79, January 7; from Jerusalem, in telegram 55, January 9; from Cairo, in telegram 698, January 11; from Tel Aviv, in telegram 763, January 12. All telegrams are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 4, Autonomy Talks: 1/80. A response from Jidda was not found. 1063
