Costa Rica  445
“We are going to need Costa Rica one day and I do not like the 
growing feeling here that they are being neglected, and the half-­jokingly 
expressed view, which may one day become seriously held, that the 
way to get cooperation from the United States is to play hard to get. 
Considering the great tactical and psychological advantage of having 
Costa Rica on our side in Latin American problems, such a result would 
be little short of tragic.”
Unfortunately, my expressed fears as to a hardening of Echandi’s 
attitude have been completely borne out, and this attitude has become 
an important factor in his failure to cooperate with the U.S.-­supported 
request of the other Central American countries for an immediate joint 
break of relations with Cuba. (See Embtel 24 of July 11, Embtel 21 of 
July 8 and Managua’s NIACT to Department No. 10,3 end of first para-
graph of cable to Somoza from his Ambassador in San José.)
An attitude that Costa Rica has always been a genuine friend of 
the United States but that this policy has not furthered Costa Rica’s 
own interests; and that in general in Latin America the United States 
is slower to help its real friends than to respond to the threats of an 
unfriendly action, has now spread far beyond Echandi and represents 
a widespread public attitude. It makes no difference really whether 
this appraisal of our policy is justified, when we are considering, as we 
now must, how to obtain the support of Costa Rica in our forthcoming 
showdown about Castro.
I strongly favor an immediate attempt to change this attitude in 
Costa Rica by taking favorable action on Costa Rican economic prob-
lems at once. I recommend this because not only do I feel that Costa 
Rica’s fine international reputation makes it a pivotal country in Latin 
thinking, but because I think that the hopes of successfully changing 
the Costa Rican attitude by things which we can do immediately and 
without great cost to ourselves are considerable, at least as compared 
to the overall problem in most of the other Latin American countries. 
I think that Costa Rica at the moment is hanging on a very delicate 
balance. On the one hand, not only supporters of Echandi, but much 
of the opposition, are ideologically convinced that Castro means com-
munism, and that Cuba today is a real threat to the hemisphere. On the 
other hand, it is an unfortunate fact of political life here that the very 
independence and democracy which gives Costa Rica such an import-
ant stature in Latin American eyes carries with it a psychology which 
3 Telegram 24, July 11, 1960, referred to Echandi’s resentment towards the United 
States for what he considered U.S. neglect of Costa Rica’s interests; in the telegram Willauer 
stated that he believed it necessary to have an “immediate review in search of creation 
better climate for Costa Rican cooperation our policy vis à vis Cuba.” (618.37/7–1160) 
Telegram 21, July 8, 1960, reported that conferences held July 7–8, convinced Willauer it was 
“impossible persuade Echandi at this time to break relations with Cuba.” (618.37/7–860) 
Telegram 10 from Managua, July 8, 1960, is not printed. (613.37/7–860)
