International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
235
72.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the
Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, November 8, 1977
SUBJECT
EPG Meeting on Japan—November 9 at 9:30 AM
The Issues
Attached at Tab A is your agenda memo for the meeting; the more
detailed interagency paper is at Tab B.2 After laying out the underlying
facts, U.S. objectives and Japanese constraints, the papers outline four
policy approaches (detailed in Appendix 1 of Tab B):
—Our option of “assured import shares”.
—Commerce’s proposal that Japan double its imports of manufac-
tures over the next two or three years.
—State’s proposal that Japan achieve a current account deficit in
1979, and adopt precise measures now to achieve that objective.
—A combination of the current account target and increased
market shares for imports.
There is widespread agreement on the two key issues. First, all
agree that the Japanese must move to (a) reduce/or eliminate their
global (not bilateral) surpluses in the short run and (b) make structural
changes to raise the market share of imported manufactured and agri-
cultural goods over the longer run. Hence the eventual package will
have to include both an immediate current account target and a direct
assault on the structural problems, a la one of the first two options.
Second, there is agreement that we here in Washington cannot
judge which means to achieve these goals will be least objectionable to
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten, 1977–1979, Box 1, IM–6 Balance of Payments
1977. No classification marking. Sent through Solomon. Neither Bergsten nor Solomon
initialed the memorandum.
2 Tabs A–C are not attached. No minutes of the November 9 EPG meeting were
found. In the November 9 Evening Report to Carter, Vance summarized the meeting,
which Blumenthal chaired: “We all agreed that our efforts with the Japanese must be
carefully calibrated so that we have maximum chance to achieve our objectives while
keeping faith with your commitments to Fukuda not to ‘shock’ them publicly. Our tenta-
tive thinking is that Mike Mansfield, using the personal relationship that he has built up
with Fukuda, should begin the process with a private and frank talk with Fukuda. We
will send a combined STR–Treasury–State working level group to Tokyo Monday to pre-
pare Mike for his meeting. After that, we should proceed with technical discussions,
which would be followed by a possible visit by Bob Strauss.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 19, Evening Reports (State): 11/77)
