716 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —A national telecommunications control system is required to manage the restoration and reconstitution of the national telecommunications system following an emergency. —All private line and public communications which carry information vital to the national security or which is otherwise important to the national interest shall be protected from exploitation by hostile powers. —The Government will place substantial reliance upon the private sector for advice and assistance in achieving national security and preparedness goals. —Common carrier communications should be used to the maximum extent feasible. Government owned and operated facilities will be used where necessary to ensure availability of vital communications under all conditions in support of functions vital to national security. 160. Letter From the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Macy) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, October 22, 1979 Dear Dr. Brzezinski: In your memorandum of January 26, 1979, to the Director, Federal Preparedness Agency, you requested that he undertake, at the direction of the President, a major review of the Continuity of Government Program.2 This review has been conducted under the guidance of the ad hoc group established in your memorandum and in accordance with the Terms of Reference specified in Colonel Odom’s memorandum of April 24, 1979, to the Ad Hoc Group.3 (C) The initial draft of the review was completed on September 29, 1979,4 and copies were distributed to the Departments of State and Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the members of the ad hoc group for comment. The draft review recommended that the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 16, COG: 7/79–3/80. Secret. Copies were sent to the Ad Hoc Group members, Vance, Harold Brown, Turner, McIntyre, Press, Beaman, Dinneen, and David Jones. 2 See Document 112. 3 Not found. 4 Not found.
