September 18–December 16, 1978
247
tary explained that we had tried desperately at Camp David to have an
operative paragraph on Jerusalem. The parties reached agreement on
such issues as holy places and free access but hit a stone wall on the
question of sovereignty. Therefore we were not able to include it in the
framework.
Fahd urged that it not be neglected.
The Secretary said each of the parties has written a letter stating its
position. These letters will be made public. They will supplement the
framework without attempting to resolve the question.
Fahd noted the question of Jerusalem is important not just to the
Arabs but to all Muslims. The Secretary said we understand this, we
will state our position, which is the historical American position.
Fahd said the whole world expects the United States to be clear
and fair on this position. There was a clear division of authority in Jeru-
salem before 1967. Saudi Arabia would welcome a clear U.S. position.
Fahd said he would ask the Secretary to reserve the discussion of
the situation in South Arabia until he met with Prince Sultan the fol-
lowing day.8
The Secretary said he would like to make two final points. This is
not a perfect agreement. It lacks points we would like to see in it. But if
we don’t seize this opportunity and it slips through our hands it may be
a long time before an opportunity comes again. That is why all of us
must work to make it work.
The Secretary said that secondly he would like to see Fahd’s advice
on the upcoming meeting with Assad. What subjects might interest
him?
Fahd said Assad is wise, honest and discerning. For instance, de-
spite pressure at the Tripoli conference9 he refused to renounce 242.
The Secretary should take time to explain the agreement to him and
show him what is the official outcome of Camp David as opposed to
subsequent rumor. The Secretary should ask him to examine the situa-
tion calmly, noting that there is no overnight solution and that the
United States position is based on deep conviction. The Secretary
8 Vance summarized his September 22 meeting with Sultan in telegram Secto 10038
from Riyadh, September 22. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780387–1166)
9 Arab leaders convened in Tripoli on December 2, 1977, in response to Sadat’s trip
to Jerusalem the previous month. The conference established the Steadfastness and Con-
frontation Front to oppose Sadat’s peace initiative toward Israel. The Front was joined by
all of the attending heads of state, from Libya, Syria, Algeria, and the People’s Demo-
cratic Republic of Yemen, and by leaders of Palestine Liberation Organization factions.
On December 5, Sadat broke diplomatic relations with all countries that attended the con-
ference. (Marvine Howe, “Arabs Meet in Libya On Opposing Sadat; Accord Is Uncer-
tain,” The New York Times, December 3, 1977, p. 1)
