716 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III these new downsized domestic cars receive and on the overall state of the economy. The industry faces three significant problems during this period: —Employment—The level of total domestic sales may be so reduced by the recession, a subsequent sluggish recovery and continued high import penetration that high and regionally concentrated unemployment will continue for some time, both among auto workers and dealers. —Disinvestment—Prior to the onset of the recession, the ability of the industry to complete its downsizing was not in serious question, but the magnitude of the investments (and borrowing) required were large by historical standards. The recession will significantly worsen all the companies’ financial results over the next couple of years. Thus, it is quite possible that some companies will have trouble financing previously announced domestic downsizing plans. The firm of primary concern is Ford, which could elect to reduce its domestic size significantly because of the magnitude of its current and anticipated losses or due to its bleak view of its domestic future. This situation could be exacerbated if, as has been widely reported, the banks are reacting to the Chrysler situation3 and reducing their overall exposure in the automobile industry by cutting back new loans to the weaker manufacturers. —Imports—Imports may hold or even increase their current high share of the market. In order for the industry to weather the intermediate period of transition without relief from import competition, not only must the industry finance its conversion to smaller cars, but the public must also find these cars attractive relative to imports. The success of the new U.S. smaller cars is by no means automatic. Over the past few years, imports have held about a 38 percent share of the subcompact and compact models, compared to a share of less than 5 percent for standard and larger cars. They have increased 3 By the late 1970s, Chrysler Corporation, the third largest U.S. automotive producer, faced a financial crisis. In December 1978, Chrysler representatives broached the possibility of Federal assistance with White House officials. In July 1979, Chrysler publicly announced that it had requested $1 billion in Federal government assistance; the announcement came after the company had suffered a quarterly loss of $207.1 million, its largest ever. Following months of negotiations, on December 21, 1979, Congress approved $1.5 billion in loan guarantees for Chrysler, contingent upon the company’s fulfillment of certain conditions. This represented “the largest Federal rescue plan ever for an American company.” (Reginald Stuart, “Chrysler is Seeking a Billion in U.S. Aid After Record Loss,” The New York Times, August 1, 1979, p. A1; Judith Miller, “Congress Approves a Compromise Plan on Aid to Chrysler,” The New York Times, December 21, 1979, p. A1 (quotation is from this article); Judith Miller, “U.S. Board Approves $1.5 Billion Backing for Chrysler Loans,” The New York Times, May 11, 1980, p. 1) On January 7, 1980, Carter signed the Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act of 1979 into law; for his remarks at the signing, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 27–32.
