1144 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said we are willing. President Sadat said that the Israelis should not want the Soviet Union to be happy, in saying that the U.S. was excluded! Ambassador Linowitz asked if he understood correctly: if we continue as a full partner on the Continuing Committee, and under the Camp David Accords, is this agreeable to Egypt? President Sadat said full partner. . . . There had been two turning points. With the first Disengagement Agreement,4 after the October war, there were hot feelings and emotions. It was a deadlock. The first Disengagement Agreement was a U.S. paper submitted after the deadlock. Also at Camp David, without President Carter and the U.S., Begin would not have signed. We will face this in the future. The fact is that the U.S. is a full partner. The President said he wants to know what President Sadat envisions if we go for Gaza-first. How can we negotiate on one part of the territories only? He can’t see it. Does President Sadat see implementing Gaza first? President Sadat said he had talked candidly with Begin about this at Aswan. Begin was silent. He (President Sadat) had said, let us agree about Gaza and the West Bank first; but he (President Sadat) would have nothing to do with the West Bank, let us start with Gaza first. He said to Begin: “Do you hear?” And Begin replied: “I hear with three ears,” which meant he felt it in his heart, as well. He (Begin) had asked the same question—do you mean agreeing on Gaza only? Does this mean postponing the West Bank? He (President Sadat) had said no. He (Begin) said in Cairo, that we could start with Gaza after agreeing on the West Bank and Gaza together. He (Begin) declared himself. He (President Sadat) proposed to help him (Begin) with problems of the West Bank. Also, why should they keep Hussein as an outsider? The President commented that Hussein is throwing rocks. President Sadat said that when he first proposed this idea to Begin, Begin refused immediately. Then after six months, all the Israelis—including Begin—said that this was a happy solution. There is no threat to Israel from Gaza. On the West Bank, even Israeli editors said that they had misunderstood him (President Sadat). Now they see this as a most happy solution—all the factions in Israel do. At Aswan, he had tried to ease matters for Begin, who heard with three ears, to go to the Cabinet. There was no answer. We need to get his (Begin’s) answer. 4 For documentation on the First Egyptian-Israeli Disengagement Agreement, signed on January 18, 1974, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXVI, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1974–1976, Documents 1–18.
