6  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Governor Carter than asked what Presidential mechanisms there 
were to correlate defense policy with foreign policy and changes in 
Soviet military capabilities. There was a lengthy discussion on this point, 
with the general answer being that what mechanisms did exist had not 
been developed very far. The previous administration’s unhappy expe-
rience with the Defense Program Review Committee of the National 
Security Council was reviewed. Governor Carter indicated that, if nec-
essary and desirable, he would play a direct role in causing the DoD 
budget to go through, a more general review process, in which both 
OMB and the NSC staff would play important roles.
There was then a brief discussion of the Navy and requirements 
for naval forces. Mr. Blechman reviewed developments in Soviet naval 
capabilities and problems in U.S. naval force structure and operational 
patterns.
4. Manpower utilization. There was a brief discussion of problems in 
the efficiency with which manpower was utilized by the Department of 
Defense. Mr. Vance emphasized that more than one-­half of the budget 
went for manpower expenses and that there was lots of room for greater 
efficiency. He put particular emphasis on reforms in the structure and 
utilization of reserve forces. Mr. Blechman reviewed various measures 
that have been suggested for reducing the price of defense manpower 
and the number of people in the DoD workforce, both civilians and mil-
itary. He noted, particularly, savings made possible by increasing the 
length of the average tour of duty, by using manpower more efficiently 
in the military training establishment, by reforming the military com-
pensation system, by consolidating bases, and by eliminating duplica-
tion in logistics and headquarters’ units.
A discussion ensued of the political difficulties involved in mak-
ing changes in manpower policies and practices. Governor Carter 
emphasized that members of the Defense study group should not be 
dissuaded by these obvious difficulties, insofar as he believed that if 
the President took a direct hand in the process, it would be possible to 
overcome many of these obstacles.
5. Overall size of the budget. There was a very brief discussion on 
the overall size of the defense budget and of the trend implicit in the 
administration’s program. The sense of the discussion was that it would 
be difficult to achieve the $5 to $7 billion reduction as phrased in the
