Arms Control and Disarmament 1545 worked to show that delay on our part in tabling an article is a stall and is evidence, together with our introduction of the new data, of our desire to frustrate agreement. They might even have some real suspicion that this is the case. There are two alternative courses. We can table our presently authorized duration article, along with the other draft articles of our treaty, and get away from the accusations and suspicions of stalling by accepting whatever disadvantages there may be in repeating once again our present position on year-­by-­year unilateral withdrawal. The other articles give the Soviets no particular issue since the line they have taken on peaceful uses removes this as a major point of argument. Or we can hold up tabling and continue to follow the line which we have been taking for the past three weeks that control issues should be discussed before the question of duration. I believe that it will be easier to keep the focus on controls if we table the article. There is an immedi­ ate link back to controls since Tsarapkin has promised the list of items on which the Soviets will want unanimity in the Control Commission (that is, veto) as soon as we table a duration article. And tabling of the article does not rob us of any of the arguments we have been using that the control org should in any case be discussed first. These arguments would be harder to use effectively if we do not table and are open to daily charges of stalling and of obstruction. Too much delay may well cause Tsarapkin to refuse to talk controls. I have never asked for a change in the duration article which would base the right of withdrawal upon a Commission finding, such as the text which appears in the last para of Nusup 150. I have thought that such an article, which would remove the target of a year-by-year unilateral withdrawal, might be even more difficult in terms of inter-­ agency feelings and the Congress, than the kind of implicit rather than explicit right of withdrawal which I have supported the UK in asking for. Foster and you are the only ones who can judge whether such a change, to relying on a commission finding, would be either wise or practical. If such a change were possible, it would, I think, make our position on duration publicly unassailable and leave us in a position where the Soviets could not possibly avoid the control issues. I have not talked of such an article with the Brit because I did not want to raise unnecessary difficulties for you, but they, I am sure, would be delighted. And I should say that whether or not there is any change in the duration article, Ormsby-­Gore believes strongly that we should table it immediately since he is [illegible in the original] more convinced than I am that this is the better way to keep the discussions where we want them. I do not think in considering this last suggestion of a change you should be too much influenced by the possibility that the Soviets
