Negotiating Channels
453
JCS
Stuart Eizenstat*
General John Pustay
Henry Owen*
CIA
NSC
Frank Carlucci
Colonel William Odom
Treasury
Gary Sick
Secretary William Miller*
Thomas Thornton
Justice
Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti*
Energy
John Sawhill*
Agriculture
James Williams*
*Domestic Issues Only
**Departed at 9:30 a.m.
***Chaired from 9:30 a.m.
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Domestic Issues:
1. Sanctions. Dr. Brzezinski reported that the President will sign
the Executive Order on sanctions against Iran.2 It will be handled
without fanfare and simply published in the Federal Register. We will
inform the allies and ask them for acts of solidarity. We will not twist
their arms.
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
Secretary Miller noted that the regulations as now drafted call for
U.S. subsidiaries abroad to be included in the Iran sanctions. He thought
this would create problems with a number of our friends who are
concerned with the extraterritoriality question. For example, Ambassa-
dor Brewster in London reported yesterday that the extraterritoriality
issue would cause problems with the UK. There was some discussion
about the pros and cons, and the SCC agreed unanimously that the
provisions should be removed from the regulations and that this would
be consistent with the President’s decision not to expend political capi-
2 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Monday ok.” Monday, February 4. According
to an undated memorandum from Cutler to Carter, which transmitted a draft of the
Executive Order and the related Report to Congress, Cutler wrote: “Because of possible
adverse reaction from our allies, the SCC decided not to apply the sanctions to the foreign
subsidiaries of U.S. companies not engaged in banking. The sanctions would, however,
apply to the foreign subsidiaries of banks.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Country File, Iran 3/80) As to whether the announcement would
be low-key, Carter wrote, in the left margin of the Summary of Conclusions of the
January 29 SCC meeting: “We should impose them & let it be known that they have,
in effect, already been in effect.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Office File, SCC Meeting #263 held 1/29/80) Carter signed Executive Order 12205 on
April 7. See Document 246.
