500.A4e/686: Telegram [Document 646] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State [Paraphrase] PEKING, November 20, 1926—noon. [Received 12:53 p.m.] 566. 1. In informal conversation recently Koo stated to me that he planned shortly to circularize a proposal to the interested Legations that the Tariff Conference be resumed. He requested me to give my opinion regarding the prospects. I recalled that foreign delegations had made their conviction clear at the “informal meeting” held July 23 (for which refer to conference number 51 of July 23, 11 p.m.) that no Chinese governmental entity with which such negotiations could be carried on was in existence. I pointed out quite frankly that the Peking administration has since that time become not only more definitely an agency of faction but by denunciation of the Belgian treaty24 has aroused doubt of its sense of responsibility in regard to foreign obligations. It was urged by Koo that his administration was amply able, except as he said, in certain provinces in the south, to discharge its obligations. Instancing the illegal export and import duties, the imposition of which is being attempted by the Military Governor of Shantung, I asked Koo where in fact his administration could control its own nominal adherents. He replied that levies of these taxes and similar ones on foreign trade were being made by various provinces in the place of the Washington surtaxes. They felt that the latter were being unjustly withheld from them by the powers. He made this remarkable statement: the Foreign Office could not expect to turn the provincial leaders away from so obviously a just action and it was, in fact, not so much as forwarding to them any of the protests which were made against taxes on foreign trade which were levied in contravention of treaties. In reply to my question of what position he took regarding taxes levied in Peking itself on tobacco, he outspokenly upheld such taxes as fully justified so long as the obligations the powers had under the Washington Customs Treaty were not fulfilled. He maintained
