plebiscitary vote has been taken; (b) it keeps door open for negotiations for
settlement, for on one hand it avoids any premature finding on conditions
which might render it difficult, if not impossible, for Chile to entertain
mediation, and on other hand it furnishes Peru with maximum inducement
to consider settlement without a plebiscite.
In regard to Chile I am sure the risks of present situation are fully
appreciated. Views of General Lassiter and of his advisers at Arica on
unsatisfactoriness of existing conditions appear to be thoroughly
understood. If plebiscite goes on and conditions are not improved,
possibility that Lassiter may feel obliged to declare plebiscitary vote void
and certify that decision to the Arbitrator must be considered. In these
circumstances it seems that Chile should make strongest possible effort to
improve conditions in the plebiscitary territory and, at same time, to
continue receptive to diplomatic settlement of question.
(3) In regard to plebiscitary conditions, Chile’s fundamental point of view
has been constantly at variance with that of the president of the Plebiscitary
Commission. From time to time Chile has emphasized idea that her position
as administrator of the provinces in dispute gives her advantages over the
contending party which she is entitled, as a matter of right, to insist upon
and which she is entitled to maintain; the impression has been created that
Chile has tendency to give too little weight to high responsibility,
necessarily imposed upon her by her position as administrator, to see that
conditions are absolutely fair to both sides.
The feeling can not be avoided that if at this juncture Chile would take
vigorous measures on her own initiative to guarantee public order and to
punish offenses against the regulations, matters would be helped
considerably. I can not, of course, at this distance make specific
suggestions. I do not desire Mathieu to feel that I am putting any pressure
upon him to agree to an enlargement without limitation of Arbitrator’s
powers, as such a step is something outside the protocol of submission. This
suggestion did not originate with me but came from Santiago. I have not
consulted the Arbitrator on question whether he would accept unlimited
powers, and anyway he could not accept them unless Peru were willing.
