1979 571 (3) Soviet civil defense can hold these fatalities under the worst of our currently planned attacks to about [percentage not declassified]. (TS) The second brief described the results of the latest RISOP analysis in which Studies, Analysis and Gaming Agency analysts apply Soviet strategic forces in hypothetical strikes against the US. The objectives assumed for the Soviet Union are to defeat “enemy nuclear capabilities,” eliminate the US as a major global power, facilitate Soviet recovery and reconstruction, improve the (postwar) correlation of forces, and be prepared to fight the PRC. (TS) The first “Soviet” attack option considered involved a preemptive attack with both sides on fully generated alert and with counterforce being the dominant objective. The attack employs over [number not declassified] warheads and holds over [number not declassified] warheads in reserve. It places a high priority on destroying the US C3 system in order to disrupt our retaliatory attack. It results in severe damage to [percentage not declassified] the US missile silos, destruction of [percentage not declassified] of the manufacturing value added of the assumed US industrial target base, and fatality levels of approximately [percentage not declassified] for the US and [percentage not declassified] for our European Allies. (TS) The second “Soviet” attack option considered was a bolt-­from-­ the-­blue attack again emphasizing destruction of “enemy” nuclear forces. The Soviets attack [number not declassified] hours into a major Soviet exercise. Some [number not declassified] fewer weapons are available as a consequence of not being on a full alert. However, the damage expectancies achieved in the attack are nearly as high as in the first option. (TS) In closing, the briefer emphasized two points—­first, while their attack plans could not guarantee the destruction of the alert bomber force or the C3 network connecting the NCA to the SLBM force, it might achieve very significant results against these systems if the US response to attack warning was at all delayed or confused. Second, US casualties would be significantly higher than for the Soviets, particularly if the Soviets have had time to evacuate their cities. (TS) The third brief presented the results of a recent JCS examination of the Soviets ability to destroy the connectivity of the C3 system running from our tactical warning and attack assessment systems to the NCA and on out to our strategic forces. (TS) The study was based on the Soviet nuclear attack constructed by the RISOP analysts. The study showed that within [less than 1 line not declassified] of the start of the attack, the Soviets could expect that all of the major nodes (White House, Crown helo, NMCCS, etc.) of the current C3 system except for SAC’s Airborne National Command Post and the Post Attack Command and Control System would be gone. (TS)
