Chapter 7, January–May 1991 1019 thought both U.S. and Soviet forces would look like in 1998, given the sides’ downloading positions. He passed out four charts (attachments 1–4)4 that covered projections for current Soviet forces, Soviet forces under the Soviet downloading scenario, the potential breakout capability for the Soviet side based on that downloading scenario, and for U.S. forces under a downloading scenario. 4. Brooks said that the U.S. side assumed that the Soviet side would retain most of its modern forces; keeping the six Typhoon and seven Delta-­class submarines, continuing deployment of the SS–25 in a mobile mode, and counting the SS–N–18 with three warheads. In the downloading scenario, the U.S. side assumed that there would be no downloading of the SS–18 and, thus, the only systems left for downloading were the SS–24 and the SS–N–20, each of which were shown as having five warheads. Brooks explained the U.S. concerns regarding breakout and why RV OSI would not solve the breakout problem. Brooks then briefly discussed the U.S. forces, saying that the U.S. force levels would be the same under either downloading scheme. Therefore, the U.S. side had much less incentive for breakout in either case, whereas the Soviet side’s incentive would be much greater under the Soviet proposal. 5. The next morning, the Soviet side responded to the U.S. side’s presentation. Unfortunately, rather than providing reciprocal data, the Soviet side copied two of the U.S. side’s charts (attachments 5 & 6)5, adding both sides’ heavy bomber forces and showing the resulting breakout potential. Nazarkin commented on the fact that the U.S. side had left heavy bombers off the charts and said that the Soviet side saw linkage between the B–1 and B–2 with Downloading—­as was agreed in Houston. 6. Ladygin gave the Soviet presentation, saying that, as a representative of the Soviet General Staff, the Soviet side did not go into an agreement with the intention of violating it. He referenced previous remarks by Brooks about the fact that the figures were estimates and emphasized that the charts on both sides were purely hypothetical. From this premise, the Soviet side had preserved the U.S. side’s calculations on ICBMs and SLBMs, including the three warhead attribution for the SS–N–18. He pointed out that, even though the Soviet side was accepting the U.S. side’s totals for the SS–N–18, the Soviet side had, at its peak, only deployed one-­quarter of the SS–N–18 force with seven warheads. Furthermore, it had been more than six months since the Soviet side had had any seven RV SS–N–18 SLBMs. Ladygin also questioned the U.S. side’s entry of 488 “new SLBMs.” Brooks responded by saying that this calculation assumed that both sides would want to 4 Attached but not printed. 5 Attached but not printed.
