700
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
2. Evening August 18 break appeared to take place between
Communist-controlled Tudeh and
Mosadeq
regime.
Apparently
Tudeh partisans began demonstrating on streets without having ob-
tained usual appropriate clearance from Mosadeq and engaged in acts
violence. Mosadeq ordered streets cleared and cessation of demonstra-
tions. For first time in several months serious fighting took place be-
tween security forces and Tudeh.
3. Morning August 19 supporters Shah had arranged pro-Shah
demonstration for purpose of showing sentiment continued exist in
country for him. This demonstration began in small way in bazaar area
but initial small flame found amazingly large amount combustible ma-
terial and was soon roaring blaze which during course of day swept
through entire city. Security forces sent to put down demonstration re-
fused to resort to violence against crowds some joining demonstrators
and others remaining passive. As crowds increased in volume in
various parts city they destroyed offices of those newspapers which
during recent days had been most scurrilous in their attacks on Shah in-
cluding most violently pro-government and pro-Communist organs.
One of first strategic points seized was Office of Posts and Telegrams
which was used in sending messages to stir up whole country. From
center city huge crowds commandeered vehicles of all kinds and
rushed northward engulfing Tehran Radio station. Members of Em-
bassy had good opportunity observe character these crowds at this
time. They were primarily civilians interspersed with members secu-
rity forces some of whom bore arms. Crowds however appeared to be
led and directed by civilians rather than military. Participants not of
hoodlum type customarily predominant in recent demonstrations in
Tehran. They seemed to come from all classes of people including
workers, clerks, shopkeepers, students, et cetera. Crowds seemed to be
imbued with strange mixture resolution and gaiety. Holiday mood
which seemed to prevail did not prevent execution of grim missions
which on at least two occasions resulted in loss life. Defenders radio
station failed to put it out commission. By early afternoon it was effec-
tive means of maintaining high morale of demonstrators and of trans-
forming their enthusiasm.
4. In early part of day attacks made by demonstrators against
house Prime Minister and against General Staff were repulsed with
some loss life. Later in day, however, despite resistance defenders
Prime Minister’s house overrun and gutted. Apparently he had in
meantime, escaped and gone into hiding. Shortly before night-fall Gen-
eral Staff offices fell into possession Zahedi Government and General
Batmanqilich assumed his duties as Chief of Staff. Almost simulta-
neously General Zahedi occupied desk in Prime Minister’s office which
had not been used by Mosadeq.
