1955 297 over his government’s interpretation of word “expeditiously.” Not only had none of these 19 persons been released, but he had refused to tell me anything about their present health and welfare, to confirm whether they had been individually informed of terms of agreed announce­ ment, to say whether and how long they would be permitted to com­ municate with British Charge d’Affaires, or to say whether latter would be permitted interview them. His refusal thus far give me this infor­ mation regarding implementation of agreed announcement increased my concern over these 19 Americans and raised serious question in my mind as to whether his government would permit these persons depart “expeditiously” as provided in agreed announcement. 8. I said that at our 15th meeting he had said he regarded it as “pecu­ liar and regrettable” that I expressed unwillingness to begin discussion of item two before it was clearly apparent that agreed announcement issue under item one was being faithfully implemented. I could not agree with him on this. It seemed to me that when two parties were attempting to settle issues between them, only the faithful carrying out of obligations assumed could establish essential basis of mutual confidence for going on to settle other issues. Surely, it was not going to be possible for us to settle other issues until each of us was satisfied that other party was promptly and effectively implementing undertakings arrived at under item one of agenda. Once his government had, by its action, demon­ strated that it was expeditiously carrying out terms of agreed announce­ ment this would clear path for discussion of issues which each side wished bring up under item two. I hoped that his government would promptly act with regard to this matter so that we could quickly proceed to those discussions. 9. Wang said, first he wished formally inform me that in for­ mal note to his government, Government of UK had said it accepted invitation of Government of US to take care of American nationals in China. In formal reply to Government of UK on September 22 PRC had agreed that UK would assume functions in China set forth in agreed announcement. 10. He said after some 40 days of discussion agenda item one regarding return of civilians we finally reached agreement and this item had now been disposed of. Question now before us was faithful imple­ mentation of agreement by both sides. His government was entirely willing to carry out agreement faithfully and he hoped US Government would do same. After agreement had been concluded both sides respec­ tively invited third powers perform functions provided for. Therefore, for implementation of agreed announcement in future we would espe­ cially rely on government of third powers entrusted by each side.
