166 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement is beginning to show signs of its inability to cope effectively with the problems emerging as a result of Russia’s present stage of economic development. Note the recent decentralization of industrial admin­ istration and the transfer of farm machinery to the collective farms. (For a further discussion of USSR economic problems see Harry Schwartz’s article beginning on p. 145 of the April Conference Board Business Record.) Regarding specific paragraphs of the paper, I would like to offer the following comments: Paragraph 3 (d)—It seems to me that this overstates the problem. We have a tendency in government to blame the people for our own failures. Paragraph 14—The words in brackets, “an appropriate conven­ tional capability”, do not appear to be necessary. It is getting increas­ ingly difficult to define “conventional capability”. For example, does it include non-­nuclear armed missiles? small nuclear weapons? Paragraph 27 c (5)—With respect to economic development aid, we should recognize that here is another competitor for the government dollar. If what is said in paragraph 43, “Sound U.S. Economy”, is to be taken literally, care must be exercised not to go overboard on expand­ ing economic development assistance to other countries, or seek to out­ bid the USSR in every instance. Paragraph 28—This paragraph represents an improvement over existing policies but it does not go far enough. While we should do everything possible to prevent the Communist bloc from subverting or gaining political control of independent states through economic aid, we should not oppose Communist economic aid, per se, to these countries. The US must recognize that the productivity and techno­ logical capabilities of the USSR will continue to grow. These capabil­ ities will be used for one purpose or another. It would seem that the use of Soviet resources in the form of economic aid to independent states offers less of a danger to the security of the US than the use of these same resources for weapons production or for advancing their military technology. Therefore, we should oppose Communist eco­ nomic aid only when there is clear evidence that such aid is being directed towards subverting or winning political control of independ­ ent states. Paragraph 35 a (1)—Here is another good example of the negative approach in this paper. The paragraph talks about giving the peoples of communist nations a clear conception of the true US and the free world purposes and offers as an example only what we are against—­not what we are for. The quote from the President’s Second Inaugural Address is highly pertinent in this connection. Paragraph 35 b—Should be read in conjunction with the first sen­ tence of Paragraph 39. In paragraph 35 b the point is made that we
