852  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
155.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Bush1
Washington, September 15, 1990
SUBJECT
Arms Control Talks in Moscow
Purpose
This memorandum recommends that you send the letter at Tab A2 
to President Gorbachev urging his personal involvement to conclude 
START and CFE by the end of the year.
Background
As Jim Baker agreed with Shevardnadze in Irkutsk,3 Reg 
Bartholomew led an interagency team for September 9–13 talks in 
Moscow4 to resolve remaining differences in START and CFE. These 
talks were a bust. No progress was made on any of the major issues. If 
anything, we lost ground on CFE. Absent dramatic changes in the way 
both sides do business and interact, I am convinced we will not be able 
to sign either treaty this year.
Despite the fact that we are well into the end game, the Soviets 
were not ready to do business during the Moscow meetings. Some of 
their hard line may have been tactical, and there are also indications that 
the Soviets are having real second thoughts about CFE as the Warsaw 
Pact disintegrates around them. But it was clear both from the low-­
level composition of the Soviet team (which was heavily populated by 
General Staff colonels and Foreign Ministry notetakers), and from their 
unwillingness to engage in a substantive give-­and-­take, that the top 
Soviet leadership was not engaged. This must change if we are going to 
wrap up these treaties.
The week of September 23 will be critical to the resolution of the 
remaining issues. Shevardnadze will be in the U.S. for about ten days, 
beginning with the U.N. and ending with the CSCE Foreign Ministers’ 
Conference on October 1–2. Jim is scheduled to meet with him on 
September 26 and will be seeing him again during the CSCE confer-
ence. If necessary, Jim probably could engage Shevardnadze by phone, 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft 
Collection, Special Separate USSR Notes Files, Gorbachev Files, OA/ID 91128–003, 
Gorbachev (Dobrynin) Sensitive 1989–June 1990 [3]. Secret. Sent for action. Copied to 
Quayle and Sununu. A stamped notation indicates Bush saw the memorandum.
2 Attached but not printed. See Document 156.
3 See Document 150.
4 See footnote 2, Document 153.
