Afghanistan had the Soviets followed-up with an invasion of Afghanistan in December, the President’s chances for reelection at this point would be considerably slimmer than they are at present.) (S) In any case, excusing the Soviet invasion or laying the blame for it on the feebleness of our diplomacy and the lack of wisdom of specific actions taken by the President (viz., Tab B)4 undercut the President’s leadership, question his judgment, and are not appropriate analyses from high officials of the Carter Administration. We are not, after all, participating in a graduate seminar. If we lay emphasis on US culpability for the worsening of US-Soviet relations and indicate that this is the prime factor, or at least a prime factor, in the Soviet decision to invade Afghanistan, this takes the Soviets off the hook both in the United States and abroad, undercuts the President’s position both with the US public and with the Allies, and measurably weakens our chances for getting a satisfactory reaction on the part of others to Soviet aggres- The line which should be adopted by all authoritative US officials is the one very clearly enunciated by the President, i.e., that this is an unprecedented event, marks a very grave deterioration of the peace, has extremely ominous ramifications for the future, requires concerted international effort to deal with it, demonstrates the callous insensitivity of the USSR to the ordinary norms of international behavior, and is, in short, the gravest threat to the general peace since the Second World War. In other words, this is no time to be “even-handed” in backgrounding Soviet motivations, nor should we downplay the obvious geopolitical factors which influenced the Soviets to take over Afghanistan in the first place. (C) A Soviet Miscalculation? Other recent background briefings from “high Government officials” have stressed the “miscalculation” that the Soviets have made by moving into Afghanistan.5 According to this line of reasoning, the Soviets are now becoming involved “in another Vietnam” and will not be successful in suppressing the insurgency through military means for years to come. My view, on the contrary, is that the Soviet war aims—to control the population centers, the lines of communication and the major passes leading to Pakistan—will 4 At Tab B, attached but not printed, is a January 22 memorandum from Brement to Brzezinski and Aaron, calling their attention to a Department of State briefing book prepared for Italian Prime Minister Francesco Cossiga’s visit to the United States, which listed a number of issues not directly related to Afghanistan that compelled the Soviet intervention. These included the Theater Nuclear Force (TNF) issue in Europe, SALT II, and Soviet troops in Cuba. Of the Department of State attitude, Brement concluded: “In other words, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan is our fault.” In the upper right corner, Brzezinski wrote: “Agree! ZB.” 5 Not further identified and not found.
