834 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III minimum of $10 billion (1975 dollars) per year for the financing of a global BHN program. The money should be contributed by the US, as many other OECD countries as we can engage in the effort, and by the OPEC countries. 3. The program would need a great deal of technical work before it could be presented in detail. Among the most difficult problems would be: a) The raising of the minimum $10 billion per annum contribution. (Not all would be “new” money. The DAC countries now give close to $14 billion in assistance. The more of these funds that were allocated toward a BHN set of programs, the less “additionality” over present levels.) b) The “conditionality” problem. Northern countries would insist on oversight mechanism which assured that the money was being spent on projects agreed upon. But the LDCs will resist any overt “intervention”. Thus the problem; how to develop a new (or old) mechanism which can receive the funds from the North and distribute them to the South in accordance with agreed-upon ground-rules. c) To work best, Southern countries must be assured that the funds will be available for lengthy periods of years. So the North must be prepared to pledge lengthy automatic commitments just as the South pledges to undertake serious policy reforms to become eligible for the funds. d) In sum, there is the difficulty of striking a major North-South bargain, and of developing a mechanism to receive and allocate funds and monitor expenditures. All of this could be done bilaterally, but, far less effectively. e) Finally, there is the problem of operationalization of such a program. How much does one count on the market system? How much on administrative decision? What kind of “delivery” systems will actually get food, medical care, etc., to the target population? 4. In light of the international political, financial and institutional issues, and the very technical issues about the mounting of a BHN program in any particular country, any US proposal will need to be carefully constructed. Therefore, it is urged that an inter-agency group be assembled immediately under the chairmanship of to develop the appropriate range of options for a major US BHN initiative within the coming six weeks.
