1266 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement from Ambassador Falcon Briceño in Washington. Before Ambassador Sparks had an opportunity to indicate the purpose of his visit, the President said that he was concerned and worried by a report which he had received with reference to a decision by the United States to exempt Canada from the petroleum import control restrictions. He said that Falcon Briceño had told him that a draft letter has been prepared in Washington for President Eisenhower to send Betancourt simultaneously with the announcement of the exemption, explaining the reasons for the action and making clear that conversations would continue in an effort to find a satisfactory hemispheric solution to the general problem.2 Ambassador Sparks said that this had been one of the reasons he had asked for an audience, and then explained the detailed reasoning behind the exemption for Canada. The Ambassador placed primary stress on the integrated defense position of the United States and Canada, and on the impossibility of satisfying Canada that she should be subject to petroleum import restrictions at the same time that our security plans are so completely and indistinguishably intertwined. Ambassador Sparks also gave particular attention to the thesis that in taking this step the United States is actually protecting Venezuela’s market for petroleum in Canada, since we will hope that as a result pressure will be lessened in the Canadian Parliament to authorize the construction of a pipeline from Alberta to Montreal thus excluding imports of Venezuelan petroleum. President Betancourt accepted the logic of these explanations and also said he appreciated the fact that Venezuela’s sales of petroleum in the United States will probably not suffer much because of the exemption for Canada, but he said that this action puts him in a very difficult position public opinion-­wise. As long as the dictatorship was in power, Venezuela had protested the imposition of import controls by the United States, had encouraged delegations like that of the American Chamber of Commerce to go to the United States in protest, and had even threatened retaliation in the form of iron ore export controls. In contrast, Betancourt has not protested the obligatory import control system but on the other hand has adopted a very 2 There were two drafts of the letter. One prepared by Carl Bartch, dated April 24, 1959, which was not sent, and the draft, dated April 27, 1959, prepared by Craig M. Stark of the Bureau of Economic Affairs, which ultimately was used. (ARA Files, Lot 61 D 319, “Petroleum Policy.”) The version which was finally sent, dated April 28, 1958 for delivery April 29, was transmitted to the Embassy in telegram 724. It stated that the forthcoming amendment to the mandatory program would, “improve the operation of the program and serve the interests of the Western Hemisphere. While the relatively small amount of Canadian oil sold in the North Central and Northwestern part of the United States does not compete with Venezuelan oil, this amendment will, we hope, reduce the serious risk of a permanent loss to Venezuela of ts Montreal market. (831.2553/4–2959)
