to the agreement. The Government is doubtless surprised that an impartial
expert should find the property as valuable as it is but this does not appear
to furnish grounds not to carry out its obligations under the contract.
However, in view of the apparent feeling of the Government that the
estimate for repairs is too high, the Department stated in its telegram to the
Legation of February 6, 1 p.m., that it would be disposed to recommend to
the Company to accept $450,000. gold or its equivalent in Dominican bonds
at 90 per cent of their par value in full payment of properties described in
contract which shall thereupon be transferred to the order of the Dominican
Government in their present condition. This was practically the same
settlement that the Department had suggested in its telegram No. 7 to the
Legation at Santo Domingo of March 8, 1923, 3 p.m.,42 before the property
had been appraised and when the bonds were quoted at approximately 85. If
the Dominican Government should wish to settle on this basis it would
receive the property at $83,000. gold less than its appraised value and
telegram No. 8, February 8, 4 p.m., from this Minister would indicate that
the President is giving this matter careful consideration.
However, the Department, in view of your telegram and without awaiting
the President’s reply, has recommended to the Company that it accept the
proposition contained in the penultimate paragraph of the Department’s
telegram No. 2, February 6, 1 p.m., to the Legation. The Company has
therefore made an offer either “(1) to furnish the sum required to pay the
cost of rehabilitation of the properties described in the contract of June 15,
1923, as determined by the experts therein named, provided the Dominican
Government shall put in escrow in the hands of its Fiscal Agent under its
proposed bond issue $951,000. par value of the bonds agreed to be issued
with instructions that the same be delivered to the order of the Liberty Trust
Company of Boston, Massachusetts, simultaneously with the delivery to
said Fiscal Agent by Dwight P. Robinson and Company, Incorporated, of
the certificate provided to be given by said last named company under the
terms of Article 5th of said contract; or (2) accept $450,000. gold, or its
equivalent in Dominican 5½ per cent bonds at 90 per cent of their par value,
in full payment of the properties described in said contract of June 15, 1923,
which shall thereupon be transferred to the order of the Dominican
Government in their present condition.” Mr. Hunt states that the “above
