January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1169
Arab world. Sadat is extraordinarily courageous, strong, and tenacious.
He resists these pressures successfully. He (the President) is also full of
admiration for Prime Minister Begin and Israel for their courage in car-
rying out difficult aspects of the peace treaty, often early. But we cannot
rest on our laurels. There is an equal need for sensitivity, determina-
tion, and courage now. We need to get to determine the status of cit-
izens on the West Bank and Gaza, and the terms under which the Israeli
military government will get out, with adequate security for Israel, and
with its troops in specified security locations. None of these issues are
easy. There were some other points that Prime Minister Begin made—
or would he (Prime Minister Begin) prefer to make them? He (Prime
Minister Begin) is welcome. We are eager for progress in these two
days, and to get continuing negotiations for 40 days. Ambassador Li-
nowitz has proposed Washington; Prime Minister Begin prefers hold-
ing them in the Middle East. We would be happy to host them. Prime
Minister Begin says that there are a number of cabinet members—such
as Khalil—who have other duties. Therefore, Prime Minister Begin says
that we should split the talks with 20 days each in Israel and Egypt.
Prime Minister Begin said that he is deeply grateful for the Presi-
dent’s invitation to come here, for these crucial talks—crucial for the
Middle East, Israel, Egypt, the U.S., and maybe half the world. The
President is preoccupied in all senses with the international situation.
The Iranian situation causes them (Israelis) great pain, as it does the
American families connected with the hostages, with the crisis going
into its sixth month now. Customs that had been sacrosanct for cen-
turies, not just during times of peace but also in wartime, are being
trampled underfoot. Israelis, more than other nations, feel with the
United States in their hearts. Israel has had experience with hostages,
who are killed if it does not submit. Only 10 days before Prime Minister
Begin came here, five children were taken hostage in the middle of the
night.2 Four were saved, but were wounded, and one soldier was killed
and 11 wounded, seven of them seriously. Israel paid with blood to try
saving the four children. Therefore the Israelis feel this situation
deeply. Given his time in Russia—which he did not love!—he should
know them. What would have happened if their embassy had been
seized? Russia would have marched to Tehran, with no concern for its
2 Reference is to the April 7 attack on the Israeli kibbutz of Mishgav Am near the
Lebanese border in which a group of kibbutz children were taken hostage by members of
the Arab Liberation Front, an Iraqi-backed Palestinian group, in a bid to win the release
of Palestinian guerrillas held in Israeli prisons. The hostage siege was broken by the Is-
raeli army the same day, after an earlier attempt failed. (David K. Shipler, “Israelis Retake
Kibbutz Nursery, Kill 5 Terrorists, Free Hostages,” The New York Times, April 8, 1980,
p. A1)
