German Democratic Republic
391
Ambassador Bolen conceded that emigration from the GDR
remained a serious problem. He thought the record had improved,
however, and cited the following figures: 1970—540 family reunifica-
tion cases; 1977—3,500; 1978—4,600. Between 1974 and 1978, he added,
there were 190 family reunification cases involving Americans. The
Embassy had made representations in 118 of those cases, 85 of which
have been resolved positively.
Mr. Christopher conceded that the record might be better than he
knew but said that he still had the impression that it was very difficult
to get out of the GDR. Ambassador Bolen stressed that he talks to the
Foreign Minister personally about humanitarian cases and leaves lists
with the Minister of cases which we wish urgently to have cleared up.
The GDR had made some effort to meet our desires on this score.
In conclusion, Mr. Christopher observed that the important thing
was that our relations with the GDR were on an upward trend—
perhaps only a very gentle rise, but upward nonetheless.
126.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
PA M–79–10210
Washington, May 3, 1979
EAST GERMANY: THE CHILLY WINDS OF SPRING (U)
East Germany recently has initiated a number of repressive measures
against dissident intellectuals, some consumers, and Western correspondents.
The official pretext was unfair treatment by the Western press of such issues
as East German hard-currency shops and the quality of everyday life in East
Germany. The government’s actions were no doubt intended to address more
deep-seated problems, such as its failing ability to manipulate the populace
in support of its policies. And they were further intended to send a message
to West Germany that, detente and ostpolitik notwithstanding, East Germany
has no intention of modifying its foreign and domestic policies. The government
probably felt the need to send such a message to the West because of recent
speculation in the Western press, fueled in part by the statements and travels
of West German Social Democratic parliamentary leader Herbert Wehner,
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job
82T00150R, Production Case Files, Box 6, East Germany: The Chilly Winds of Spring.
Confidential. The memorandum was prepared in the Office of Political Analysis and
coordinated within OPA and the Office of Economic Research. Copies were sent to the
NSC, the Department of State’s INR and EUR Bureaus, and the Departments of the
Treasury and Defense.
