308 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 consultations were undertaken. Treasury will lean on them heavily today and State will assist as required to bring them in line with the others. All agreed that a backgrounder would be desirable on Friday,3 placing emphasis on the less sensitive areas of cooperation which support the dollar (paying only dollars for oil, etc.) but indicating that a package of steps had been accepted. (S) 3. Chapter VII Sanctions. The resolutions will not be presented to the UN before Friday or Saturday, after more consultations are completed. Secretary Vance will make the presentation to the Security Council in person to dramatize its importance. The SCC discussed at some length the President’s decision that we ask the allies to begin implementing sanctions from the moment we ask for them at the UN. The group agreed that the allies would be extremely reluctant to take such action without a vote in the UN, and our initiative could well be perceived as a quick failure. By comparison, the SCC believed it would be much better to put our allies on notice at a high level, at the time we make our official presentation, that we would expect them to institute sanctions if the UN should fail to act. That would give the allies a strong motivation to work hard for a successful vote in the Security Council. The SCC agreed that, with the President’s approval, Secretary Vance will prepare a strong Presidential message along these lines for tomorrow’s meeting.4 (S) 4. Emissary to Europe. The SCC agreed that our efforts to get agreement from the Europeans on technical steps had been successful and the follow-up did not require a high-level official present in Europe. Although the SCC had previously recommended a visit to Europe by Tony Solomon, it now appears that the issues which will need discussion with the allies relate primarily to political decisions surrounding action on Chapter VII, rather than detailed discussions with finance ministers. An alternative would be to send a high-level Presidential emissary for talks with heads of state. Secretary Vance wanted to reflect on the desirability of such a mission. He will make a recommendation to the President this evening.5 (S) 5. Iranian Diplomats. The Iranian diplomats affected by our departure order have been removed from the diplomatic list. They have 30 days to take care of their personal arrangements, which are complicated by the fact that some of them are married to American citizens or are themselves American citizens. 3 December 28. 4 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and initialed in the right margin. 5 In the left margin, Carter wrote “not done.”
