Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  291
39.	
Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, July 29, 1989, 1356Z
6730. Subject: START Negotiator’s End of Round Summary
1. Secret—Entire Text.
2. With little more than a week to go in this round, and most of the 
substantive business behind us, I thought it would be useful to give 
you my personal assessment of the round and of the way ahead.
Round XI Pluses and Minuses
3. We approached this first Bush administration round as a recon-
naissance effort, designed to help us prepare for the future. It served 
that function well. Like all interactions with the Soviets, this round had 
its pluses and minuses. On the plus side:
— The Soviet attitude, from Nazarkin on down, has been busi-
nesslike and non-­polemical. Delegation members with long experience 
have been struck by Soviet willingness to engage in genuine give and 
take, to work language at the table, and to discuss and debate various 
alternatives.
— The round has been more productive than I anticipated in terms 
of improving the text and clearing brackets. Rather than simply react-
ing to our text, the Soviets have been providing us with text of their 
own more frequently than in the past. In many cases, we appear to be 
reaping the benefits of our suggestions laid out in round X and of the 
new, constructive Soviet attitude. The work hasn’t been glamorous, but 
it has been important.
— The Soviets have made a number of minor improvements in the 
text (e.g. working a definition of perimeter and portal continuous mon-
itoring and accepting equal rights for heavy ICBM limits). Although 
they refused to do so this round, there is a chance they will ultimately 
buy our basic approach to the throw-­weight protocol, thus giving us an 
agreed structure for all treaty documents and facilitating attainment of 
a longstanding U.S. goal of codified limits on ballistic missile throw-­
weight. In the most important substantive move, the Soviet’s appear 
to have accepted our demand for equal intermediate levels during the 
reductions period, although their approach still includes some unac-
ceptable elements.
In sum, the pluses are real.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D890653–0453. Secret; Immediate; Exdis.
