948 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement changes to be implemented by the Canal Zone Government/Panama Canal Company in the Canal Zone. Secretary Brucker and Assistant Secretary Roderick presented a 10-point program of proposed action (Tab A)2 which seemed to be satisfactory to the President and he suggested that the Company should move ahead with the proposals (Tab B). You mentioned to the President that the Department had made a careful long-range analysis of the problems attendant on United States-Panama relations and that, after consultation with Mr. Brucker you would like to come back to the President with further recommendations. I recommend that in a meeting, to be scheduled for the near future with Secretary Brucker, attended by you, or Mr. Merchant if you should find it more convenient, you support wholeheartedly the 10-point program of the Army and that you urge its implementation be commenced as soon as it is practicable to do so, with a further recommendation that the benefits be spaced so as to achieve maximum effect.3 ARA believes that while the Department of the Army proposals are excellent measures and will, no doubt, help to improve further our relations with Panama, which presently appear to be on the mend, there are additional short-range changes which should be raised in the projected meeting with Secretary Brucker for discussion and decision to be presented as joint recommendations to the President. These measures, as described in Stage I of the S/P Study on Panama (PPS-1960-1, March 14, 1960, Tab B)4 include the following: 1. Next Appointment to the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal Company should be a State Department Representative The memorandum from the White House dated February 16, 1960 (Tab C)5 recommends that until there is a vacancy, a representative of the Department of State should attend the meetings as an observer. Mr. Merchant is suggested as State’s representative on the Board. It is believed advisable to have the Department represented on the Board, where its director would be in a position to influence decisions which affect United States relations with Panama. The State member would, in effect, be a voting political advisor to the Board. Rather than burden the Under Secretary for Political Affairs or the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs with this responsibility, it is suggested that the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs might be named. In view of a larger role envisioned, 2 Not attached to the source text, but see Document PM–35, footnote 2. 3 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, Secretary of State Herter approved this course of action on April 1. 4 Not attached to the source text. 5 Not attached to the source text.
