Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Nonetheless, given the prestige and educational/career advantages the Mohammadzais enjoy, we anticipate that the eventual successor will have some familial links to the clan. 6. The increasingly prominent political figure is 33-year old Vice- President Abdulilah, himself a Mohammadzai, Daoud’s de facto adopted son, and seemingly the person chosen by the President as his successor. Abdulilah’s chances should improve significantly the longer Daoud remains in office and grooms him as his protege and successor. Abdulilah also needs a few more years under his belt to become more acceptable as a leader in this society where age is respected. 7. Forces of the Right. The reactionary Right poses the greatest immediate and potential threat to Daoud’s regime, as it has to Afghanistan’s previous “reformist” governments. Even though the reactionary religious and landowning elements will probably not supply Daoud’s successor, these factions will affect the outcome of the succession struggle by creating significant obstacles to the accession of a candidate deemed ideologically or politically unacceptable to the mass of the Afghan populace (which is very conservative). 8. At the moment, we discern little support, even among rightist elements, for a restoration of the pre-coup monarchy, headed by exiled King Zahir.5 However, it is conceivable, though not likely, that ambitious, tough, exiled ex-General Abdul Wali (a first cousin of Daoud) could attain power as a compromise candidate with Mohammadzai credentials, or on the shoulders of a semi-royalist military movement. In either case, it would likely be as a “last resort” candidate, called upon by the center or Mohammadzai clansmen, to preclude political chaos or leftist threat. 9. The leftist challenge. The extent to which Daoud temporarily leaned on left-wing forces within and without the military to return to power in 1973 is an important element of any analysis of the post- Daoud period. Although Daoud has virtually eliminated this faction from meaningful positions of influence, these left-wing forces have been very active within and outside the Daoudist “movement” and could still play some post-Daoud role. A few members of this group were, for example, recently appointed to the High Council of the Armed Forces, which could indicate they may still possess an element of power. The recently reorganized pro-Soviet “Khalq” (“Masses”) Party is probably the best organized and most experienced political force in the country even though still very small in numbers.
