Covert and Overt Operations 919 want to be caught unawares again. In addition the Soviet Union is preparing to take advantage of several possible opportunities regarding Iran. It is preparing to move military forces into Iran if anarchy and chaos erupts. Similarly the USSR is preparing to react if U.S. military forces are introduced into Iran in any size, and while awaiting the advent of one of these possibilities, the USSR is busily laying the propaganda groundwork to capitalize on the above and justify a unilateral move on the pretext of countering the alleged presence of counter revolutionary forces operating in Iran against the Government of Iran and the Government of Afghanistan. 3. (TS) Hostage Situation: A. Dispersion outside of the Embassy compound must be accepted as fact; planning must consider multiple targets. Precise locations remain unknown due to tight security and deception measures employed by militants and clerics. During the past month most hostage relatives have received a letter from their loved ones. The letters indicate long periods of small group isolation, very little outside activity, no physical abuse, allowed to receive some mail, and at least three hostages, military and civilian, have implied they plus another 6 to 9 are being held in a prison or prison-like environment. B. Current estimates put upwards of a half probably in Tehran as follows: MFA (3), Embassy compound: Chancery 3–5, warehouse 3–5; prison/jail or villa in northern Tehran (16–18). The balance, according to [less than 1 line not declassified] reporting are apparently scattered throughout the country in groups of 3–5. A 25 Aug CIA assessment listed ten possible locations, this HQ believes the actual number is less than that, probably no more than 3–5 locations at any given time. The typical site is probably a 2-story house within a walled compound located in a quiet residential neighborhood. 4. (TS) Operational Planning. During the review and crosschecking of possible locations we have located at least one potential fixed-wing landing zone within 100NM of each of the more likely hostage detention locations, and at least one active airhead with extraction potential within 12–15 miles. Of all the locations Tehran offers the greatest number of possibilities for insertion and extraction. A. In the city proper both Mehrabad and Doshan Tappeh [Airports] hold possibilities with D/T being within 5–6 minutes driving time of the compound and M/B within 20–25 minutes driving time. B. In the immediate suburbs at least two additional sites have been identified as C–130 capable and two others have been identified within 30 NM. C. Farther out Manzariyeh still holds a potential for use. In addition three fixed-wing capable sites (one C–141) have been identified in the Semman area.
