Negotiating Channels 433 All agreed that we should not make any concessions unilaterally until we have an authoritative interlocutor on the Iranian side. That will almost certainly not occur until after the elections. In the interim, our present negotiating position should be maintained. 164. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Meeting with B and V—the French-based lawyers Friday, January 25 in Hamilton Jordan’s office V said he and B had been very impressed with the seriousness and honesty of the presentation by Jordan and Saunders in London.2 This allowed V and B convincingly and strongly to defend the U.S. position in Tehran. They had argued that while Iran’s point of view had to be listened to, international standards of human rights came first. V and B asked for a sign of similar seriousness and honesty from the Iranian side. (Ghotbzadeh had Richard Cottam call Hamilton Jordan to endorse the talks V and B would have with us.) V said that on arriving in Tehran they had a four hour meeting with Ghotbzadeh, which was adjourned to allow him to report to the Revolutionary Council. They reconvened with him at midnight to hear the Council’s reaction. There were three decisions: —Henceforth the only negotiator for Iran would be the Foreign Minister. All information on the crisis should be conveyed to the Minister, not to members of the Council. (In effect the Council is taking itself out of the decision chain.) —The Foreign Minister will immediately report all developments to Khomeini and keep him thoroughly informed in a timely fashion. —The two leading candidates for the Presidency—Bani Sadr and Habibi—would be kept fully informed of developments by the Foreign Minister until the runoff elections were held. B had later briefed each of them. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 1/11/80–1/31/80. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Precht. The meeting took place at 12:30 p.m. in Jordan’s office at the White House. (Jordan, Crisis, p. 131) 2 See Document 157.
