1956  751
“In recent conversation acting Foreign Minister Ran (repeat Ran) 
told me Thai Government concerned over fact that Thailand Chinese 
becoming increasingly pro-­Chinese communist. He attributed this shift 
primarily to impact U.S.-­Chinese Communist Geneva talks, suggested 
U.S. use all (repeat all) means possible counteract.
“Comment: Chinese Communist star has been rising here as result 
of Geneva talks as well as other developments of which Department is 
aware . . . It is highly unlikely that our explanations can offset impact of 
fact that U.S. is talking with Chinese Communists. Even if talks should 
collapse, it would be most difficult erase effects of developments last 
six months on attitude local Chinese. So long as Chinese Communists 
continue play their propaganda cards as cleverly as they have been 
doing, they stand to hold if not increase gains already made.”
Hong Kong
Letter dated January 23, 1956 from Consul General Everett F. 
Drumright.
“. . . Already the tide is running against us, partly because of our 
own hobnobbing with the Chinese Communists at Geneva and partly 
because of the weak-­kneed attitudes being shown by our allies out 
here. I am afraid the trend of drift to the other side is likely to continue 
and even to be accelerated unless we and our allies dig in and truly con­
vince the uncommitted people out here that we are not seeking accom­
modations with the Communists and that we really mean business in 
pushing back Communist expansionism which has become much more 
dangerous, subtle and varied during the past year.”
Letter dated January 30, 1956 from Consul General Everett F. 
Drumright.
“.  .  .  So long as we continue negotiations with the Chinese 
­Communists, it is going to be impossible to convince people out here 
that we are not seeking some accommodation which will be at their 
expense. In such a climate, no matter how good our information 
­program may be, it cannot be expected to achieve any measurable 
success among those we want to influence.”
Taiwan
Aide Memoire transmitted by Taipei’s telegram of January 26, 
1956. The Chinese Foreign Minister said in part:
“The Chinese Government views with particular concern the offer 
made by the U.S. to enter into a bilateral declaration with the Chinese 
Communist regime concerning the renunciation of the use of force. Such 
a declaration would be tantamount to an admission by the U.S. to equal 
responsibility for the existing situation in the Taiwan Strait, for which 
the Chinese Communists should and must be held solely responsible.
