National Security Policy 1065 with five or six failures; and they had launched fourteen HOT CROSS cruise-­type missiles with an unknown number of failures. Dr. Scoville said our information with respect to the production and deployment of Soviet missiles was poor. Missile engine manufac­ ture was apparently started at Dnepropetrovsk in 1957. Movements between Tyura Tam and Kuybyshev seemed to indicate that production facilities started at the latter place in 1957. Summarizing, Dr. Scoville pointed out that the Russians concen­ trated a tremendous effort on the ballistic field fifteen years ago. Their ballistic missile program proceeded in an orderly manner from short-­ range missiles through long-­range missiles to ICBMs. In conclusion, Dr. Scoville said he believed the Russians had not put any great empha­ sis on missiles which could be fired from submarines. No submarine missile firings had been positively identified but submarines had been observed which were believed to have equipment capable of firing mis­ siles with a 350 nautical mile range. Mr. Allen asked whether the Russians were still using non-­Russians in connection with their missile programs. Dr. Scoville reported that all foreigners working on Russian missile programs had been repatriated by 1951. Colonel White added that Germans had continued to work on the Soviet air defense program until two years ago. Mr. Dulles said the problem of ground-­to-­air missiles was a separate one not dealt with in this report. The Russians had also concentrated great effort on ground-­ to-­air missiles. Concluding, Dr. Scoville said he wished to emphasize the fact that the Soviets had built up a native ballistic missile program and that since the war they had built up from zero an electronic capa­ bility which approached that of the U.S. The National Security Council: Noted and discussed oral summaries of the reports on the subject by the Secretary of Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence, pursuant to NSC Action No. 2137. a. Keeping the NSC Planning Board, the Operations Coordinating Board, the Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs and for Security Operations Coordination and other compo­ nents of the NSC Staff informed of research being done within and outside the Government which has significant bearing upon their responsibilities for national security policy-­making or operations coor­ dination, placing emphasis upon a high degree of selectivity. b. Facilitating appropriate access within the Government to such research. Marion W. Boggs
