Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 more political trust, and for a stable peace, so that the America our children inherit will be even stronger and even better than it is today. We cannot resort to simplistic or extreme solutions which substitute myths for common sense. In our economy, it is a myth that we must choose endlessly between inflation and recession. Together, we build the foundation for a strong economy, with lower inflation, without contriving either a recession with its high unemployment or unworkable, mandatory government controls. In our government, it is a myth that we must choose between compassion and competence. Together, we build the foundation for a government that works—and works for people. In our relations with our potential adversaries, it is a myth that we must choose between confrontation and capitulation. Together, we build the foundation for a stable world of both diversity and peace. [Omitted here is the portion of the address devoted to domestic policy.] A strong economy and an effective government will restore confidence in America. But the path of the future must be charted in peace. We must continue to build a new and a firm foundation for a stable world community. We are building that new foundation from a position of national strength—the strength of our own defenses, the strength of our friendships with other nations, and of our oldest American ideals. America’s military power is a major force for security and stability in the world. We must maintain our strategic capability and continue the progress of the last 2 years with our NATO Allies, with whom we have increased our readiness, modernized our equipment, and strengthened our defense forces in Europe. I urge you to support the strong defense budget which I have proposed to the Congress.3 But our national security in this complicated age requires more than just military might. In less than a lifetime, world population has more than doubled, colonial empires have disappeared, and a hundred new nations have been born. Mass communications, literacy, and migration to the world’s cities have all awakened new yearnings for economic justice and human rights among people everywhere. 3 In his January 22 message to the Congress transmitting the administration’s FY 1980 budget, the President indicated that the defense budget “provides for growth in outlays in real terms of 3% above the current year’s spending.” He noted that the budget also “continues my policy of steady modernization of our strategic forces and improved combat readiness of our tactical forces.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pp. 98) The President signed official copies of the budget at a January 22 ceremony held in the Cabinet Room at the White House. For the text of his remarks, see ibid., pp. 95–96.
