Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
541
more political trust, and for a stable peace, so that the America our chil-
dren inherit will be even stronger and even better than it is today.
We cannot resort to simplistic or extreme solutions which substi-
tute myths for common sense.
In our economy, it is a myth that we must choose endlessly be-
tween inflation and recession. Together, we build the foundation for a
strong economy, with lower inflation, without contriving either a reces-
sion with its high unemployment or unworkable, mandatory gov-
ernment controls.
In our government, it is a myth that we must choose between com-
passion and competence. Together, we build the foundation for a gov-
ernment that works—and works for people.
In our relations with our potential adversaries, it is a myth that we
must choose between confrontation and capitulation. Together, we
build the foundation for a stable world of both diversity and peace.
[Omitted here is the portion of the address devoted to domestic
policy.]
A strong economy and an effective government will restore confi-
dence in America. But the path of the future must be charted in peace.
We must continue to build a new and a firm foundation for a stable
world community.
We are building that new foundation from a position of national
strength—the strength of our own defenses, the strength of our friend-
ships with other nations, and of our oldest American ideals.
America’s military power is a major force for security and stability
in the world. We must maintain our strategic capability and continue
the progress of the last 2 years with our NATO Allies, with whom
we have increased our readiness, modernized our equipment, and
strengthened our defense forces in Europe. I urge you to support the
strong defense budget which I have proposed to the Congress.3
But our national security in this complicated age requires more
than just military might. In less than a lifetime, world population has
more than doubled, colonial empires have disappeared, and a hundred
new nations have been born. Mass communications, literacy, and mi-
gration to the world’s cities have all awakened new yearnings for eco-
nomic justice and human rights among people everywhere.
3 In his January 22 message to the Congress transmitting the administration’s FY
1980 budget, the President indicated that the defense budget “provides for growth in
outlays in real terms of 3% above the current year’s spending.” He noted that the budget
also “continues my policy of steady modernization of our strategic forces and improved
combat readiness of our tactical forces.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pp. 98) The
President signed official copies of the budget at a January 22 ceremony held in the Cab-
inet Room at the White House. For the text of his remarks, see ibid., pp. 95–96.
