Human Rights ticularly IDA and the World Bank. The President has committed the US to an open international trading system but one which does not ignore domestic concerns in the US. He said we were willing to consider negotiation of agreements to stabilize prices of individual commodities, including a common funding mechanism for financing buffer stocks where these are negotiated. 6. Human rights. Since all the signatories to the UN Charter have pledged to observe and respect basic human rights no UN member can claim that mistreatment of its citizens is solely within its own jurisdiction and no nation can avoid the responsibility to speak out when freedoms are eroded anywhere in the world. We acknowledge our own deficiencies, but are committed to deal with them quickly and openly.7 He said US would sign UN Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Covenant on Political and Civil Rights and seek ratification of them along with Conventions on Genocide and on Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. He called for strengthening of the UN human rights machinery, endorsing idea of UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, suggesting that Human Rights Commission meet more often and that it be brought back to New York where its work would receive more publicity. (US did not favor 1972 move of UN’s human rights division to Geneva.) He declared that HR were important in themselves and should not affect actions in other important areas which also had their own importance. 7. Action requested. Posts are requested to call President’s speech to attention of host governments as appropriate at earliest opportunity using the preceding paras as appropriate and drawing on speech more extensively in areas of particular interest to host governments. While governments, drawing on media reports or reports from their UN Missions, may seek to stress one aspect or another of the President’s speech, posts should emphasize that the foreign policy emphases, maintenance of peace, reducing the arms race, a more cooperative international economic system, and human rights will all be pursued with vigor by the administration. 8. For Peking. You may deliver by note. Vance. 7 In his remarks, the President asserted: “The basic thrust of human affairs points toward a more universal demand for fundamental human rights. The United States has a historical birthright to be associated with this process. We in the United States accept this responsibility in the fullest and the most constructive sense. Ours is a commitment, and not just a political posture. I know perhaps as well as anyone that our own ideals in the area of human rights have not always been attained in the United States, but the American people have an abiding commitment to the full realization of these ideals. And we are determined, therefore, to deal with our deficiencies quickly and openly. We have nothing to conceal.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, p. 450)
