Human Rights
71
ticularly IDA and the World Bank. The President has committed the US
to an open international trading system but one which does not ignore
domestic concerns in the US. He said we were willing to consider nego-
tiation of agreements to stabilize prices of individual commodities, in-
cluding a common funding mechanism for financing buffer stocks
where these are negotiated.
6. Human rights. Since all the signatories to the UN Charter have
pledged to observe and respect basic human rights no UN member can
claim that mistreatment of its citizens is solely within its own jurisdic-
tion and no nation can avoid the responsibility to speak out when
freedoms are eroded anywhere in the world. We acknowledge our own
deficiencies, but are committed to deal with them quickly and openly.7
He said US would sign UN Covenants on Economic, Social and Cul-
tural Rights and the Covenant on Political and Civil Rights and seek ra-
tification of them along with Conventions on Genocide and on Elimina-
tion of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. He called for strengthening
of the UN human rights machinery, endorsing idea of UN High Com-
missioner for Human Rights, suggesting that Human Rights Commis-
sion meet more often and that it be brought back to New York where its
work would receive more publicity. (US did not favor 1972 move of
UN’s human rights division to Geneva.) He declared that HR were im-
portant in themselves and should not affect actions in other important
areas which also had their own importance.
7. Action requested. Posts are requested to call President’s speech
to attention of host governments as appropriate at earliest opportunity
using the preceding paras as appropriate and drawing on speech more
extensively in areas of particular interest to host governments. While
governments, drawing on media reports or reports from their UN Mis-
sions, may seek to stress one aspect or another of the President’s
speech, posts should emphasize that the foreign policy emphases,
maintenance of peace, reducing the arms race, a more cooperative in-
ternational economic system, and human rights will all be pursued
with vigor by the administration.
8. For Peking. You may deliver by note.
Vance.
7 In his remarks, the President asserted: “The basic thrust of human affairs points
toward a more universal demand for fundamental human rights. The United States has a
historical birthright to be associated with this process. We in the United States accept this
responsibility in the fullest and the most constructive sense. Ours is a commitment, and
not just a political posture. I know perhaps as well as anyone that our own ideals in the
area of human rights have not always been attained in the United States, but the Amer-
ican people have an abiding commitment to the full realization of these ideals. And we
are determined, therefore, to deal with our deficiencies quickly and openly. We have
nothing to conceal.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, p. 450)
