International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1027
“Without controlling the growth of population, the prospects for
enough food, shelter, and other basic needs for all the world’s people
are dim. Where existence is already poor and precarious, efforts to ob-
tain the necessities of life often degrade the environment for genera-
tions to come.
“It is, of course, up to each nation to determine its own policies, but
we are prepared to respond promptly and fully to all requests for
assistance in population and health care programs. At my direction, the
Department of State and the Agency for International Development
stand ready to cooperate through international organizations, through
private voluntary organizations, or through direct contacts with other
governments.”4
I. General Trends
Whereas current mortality and fertility in the developed regions
are such that net reproduction rates are close to replacement levels, fer-
tility rates in the developing world remain high. On the other hand,
there is evidence that birth rates are beginning to decline in a mounting
number of developing countries, overtaking declines in death rates.
Based on U.S. Bureau of the Census data, the 1976 rate of growth of de-
veloping country population is estimated at about 2.5 percent, if the
People’s Republic of China (PRC) (for which no reliable figures are
available) is excluded. This is a drop from a high of 2.6 percent esti-
mated for the early 1970’s.
About four-fifths of the developing country population lives in the
13 most populous countries, i.e., those whose 1975 population ex-
ceeded 35 million. This includes, in order of size: China, India, In-
donesia, Brazil, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nigeria, Mexico, Vietnam, the
Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, and Egypt.5 Accordingly, these 13 coun-
tries have a disproportionately large impact on average demographic
trends among the developing countries. Ten of the 13 (excluding Brazil,
Nigeria, and Turkey) have adopted population policies and programs
to reduce fertility in the interest of national development, as well as
family health and welfare.
Some successes . . . The most intensive effort in reducing excessive
population growth is probably occurring in the People’s Republic of
China. According to a public report from Peking, the rate of the
country’s population growth has been declining yearly since 1965. Al-
though considerable data have been reported by PRC officials, local
4 See footnote 4, Document 284.
5 The “key 13 countries” mentioned elsewhere in this Report, and in last year’s Re-
port, include 11 of the 13 developing countries listed in this paragraph. [Footnote in the
original.]
