1034 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI wanted notification of flight-­testing of new kinds of strategic offensive arms far earlier than the one year the U.S. side proposed. Brooks answered a series of questions on operational dispersals; Nazarkin said the U.S. proposals made substantive sense but might cause bureaucratic problems. Nazarkin provided a list of outstanding issues; Brooks said he would do the same. Nazarkin implied that there was internal confusion over his role on the delegation given the semi-­permanent presence of deputy minister Obukhov. End summary. 5. Subject summary: Washington responsiveness; inspection quotas; new kinds; Operational dispersals; issues list; and Nazarkin’s role. End subject summary. Washington Responsiveness 6. Brooks, who had just come from a meeting with deputy minister Obukhov, reviewed his discussions with Obukhov, including Soviet complaints about the lack of responsiveness in Washington. Nazarkin asked why Washington was so slow. Brooks said that the remaining issues were technical and complex. As had been made clear during the recent visit by Senators Brown and Lugar, verification issues in the United States had major political overtones. Because of this, thorough review of these technical issues was necessary. Inspection Quotas 7. Brooks reminded Nazarkin of an ad referendum agreement for 15 data update inspections, 10 reentry vehicle inspections, and three formerly declared facility inspections per year. The previous day Colonel Koltunov had argued that, because of the operational burden, the number of reentry vehicle inspections be cut to five per year. Brooks said his delegation had reviewed the Soviet proposal. The U.S. side had already made major concessions by dropping the percentage approach to inspection quotas. Further, ten reentry vehicle inspections per year was a fair compromise between the initial U.S. proposal (five) and the initial Soviet proposal (three). Five inspections per year were too few technically, especially since reentry vehicle inspections were the only method of verifying limits on deployed reentry vehicles. Further, Brooks continued, from the political standpoint five inspections was far too close to the Soviet going-­in position. Brooks urged Nazarkin to tell Moscow that the U.S. side insisted on the full implementation of the ad ref agreement. 8. Nazarkin said that in order to convince Moscow, he needed counter-­arguments. The U.S. side had listened to Koltunov’s arguments but had not explained in any detail the U.S. objections to a lower annual quota. Brooks said he would arrange for those explanations to be given.
