1166 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 279. Annex to JCS comments, JCSM–553–60 (print Document 130)1 JCSM–553–60 Washington, December 9, 1960 ANNEX SPECIFIC JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF VIEWS ON POSSIBLE ­DEFICIENCIES IN THE U.S. POSTURE FOR LIMITED MILITARY OPERATIONS (C) 1. a. Airlift and sealift studies prepared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1959 included the following: (1) Airlift Requirements and Capabilities under Mobilization and Wartime Conditions (FY 1960–1963). (2) U.S. Ocean Shipping Requirements and Availability. These studies, based on actual plans and prepared annually, are coordinated within the Joint Chiefs of Staff and with the Services. They provide the basis for joint guidance on transportation planning matters. b. The above studies used resumption of hostilities in Korea coin­ cident with six months of mobilization as its criterion for limited war capabilities and requirements. (1) In the airlift study, it was concluded that Military Air Transport Service (MATS) capability for limited war, assuming the Civil Reserve Air Fleet (CRAF) is activated, is adequate for passenger and cargo requirements except for shortages during the first 20 days. Approximately three-­fourths of the cargo deficit in this period can be overcome by temporary transfer of capability from the Atlantic area. (a) Since the airlift study was completed additional passenger capability has been allocated to the Civil Reserve Air Fleet to meet the passenger deficits as indicated by this study. (b) The cargo capability situation also has been improved since the study by additional Civil Reserve Air Fleet allocations. (2) The conclusion of the sealift study was that, although there are some shortages of cargo and passenger ships in the first 60 days of a lim­ ited war, sealift is adequate. Shortages in cargo ships could be made up from available foreign flag shipping. Passenger ship shortages could be eliminated by “hot bunking” and use of friendly Allied passenger ships. (3) No airlift or sealift studies have been completed at this time regarding Southeast Asia. New studies on subjects tabulated in para­ graph 1 a (1) and (2) above, dealing specifically with Southeast Asia, are scheduled for completion by May 1961. The effect of the logistic 1 Source: “Specific Joint Chiefs of Staff Views on Possible Deficiencies in the U.S. Posture for Limited Military Operations.” Top Secret. 25 pp. Eisenhower Library, Records of the Office of Special Assistant to President for National Security Affairs.
