556  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Brooks said the discussion had wandered off the Soviet pro-
posal and asked whether his colleagues had additional questions. 
Curtin noted that the Soviet side had accepted the U.S. concept of the 
Deployment Area (DA) but at a size of 160,000 square kilometers rather 
than 90,000 square kilometers as proposed by the U.S. He asked why 
the larger size was necessary. Koltunov replied that the reason was to 
ensure survivability. He stated that hemming in mobiles defeated their 
purpose and made an analogy to the patrol area of submarines. Curtin 
said that the U.S. side thought a DA 300 kilometers on a side was large, 
but that the Soviet side was proposing an area 400 kilometers on a side. 
Brooks added that he could have used Koltunov’s words to defend the 
U.S. position—­the U.S. side agrees with survivability. The U.S. side was 
wondering whether there was a particular reason the Soviet position 
called for a larger area than under the U.S. proposal.
Khromov opined that while the area the Soviet side had proposed 
could be defined on a map, under practical conditions parts of this area 
would be excluded from use, e.g., bodies of water. If the situation was 
assessed realistically, the actual operating area could be even smaller 
than the U.S. proposal for 90,000 square kilometers. This area, however, 
could not be recorded on paper or written into a Treaty.
Brooks asked whether there would be a limit on the number of RAs 
within a specific DA. Koltunov recalled that the original Soviet proposal 
had called for a limit of 5 RAs per Missile Base. This proposal had 
been withdrawn to accommodate the U.S. side which had stated that 
it did not yet know what number of RAs would be associated with a 
DA under the U.S. basing concept. If the U.S. side preferred, this limit 
could be reintroduced. Brooks commented that the situation on the 
U.S. side had not changed, but that it was helpful to know what was 
new in the Soviet proposal and what had remained the same. Brooks 
asked whether the Soviet proposal provides that DAs may not overlap. 
Khromov replied affirmatively noting that if DAs overlapped this would 
complicate verification. He added in response to Brooks previous ques-
tion that the RAs associated with a DA would be listed in the MOU and 
that this should address any problems.
Horn said she understood that in the context of Soviet acceptance 
of the smaller RA, there would be no percentage cap on the number 
of missiles and launchers that could be outside of the RA. She asked 
if the Soviet side could explain further their concept and its relation to 
their deployment plans. Masterkov agreed that under the new Soviet 
proposal there would be no limit on the number of launchers outside 
of RAs. However, he wanted to call attention to the fact that the Soviet 
side has taken into account the U.S. proposal by limiting routine move-
ments and dispersals to within the boundaries of the DA. The Soviet 
proposal aimed to achieve a happy marriage between survivability and
