1088 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 5. I believe that you and your staffs can make a significant contribution through finding appropriate, diplomatic ways of encouraging host countries to be more attentive to this problem. You are in the best position to judge how best this can be done, bearing in mind the laws, regulations, attitudes, and circumstances of the countries where you are assigned. I am sure that you will, nevertheless, be assisted in this regard by having some basic background facts as well as the benefit of knowing what approaches have proved effective in other nations. 6. In preparing such background facts and suggestions and in order that we can all benefit from our various ideas and experiences in the field, I ask for your personal reactions and comments by cable within thirty days of receipt of this message. Christopher 328. Paper Prepared in the International Development Cooperation Agency1 Washington, undated INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AGENCY 1980 Development Policy Statement 1980 will be another harsh year for poor people in the poor countries of the world. Rising petroleum prices, combined with inflation and recession in industrial nations, assure that it will be more difficult than ever for the people of developing countries to obtain food, jobs, 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Boxes 9–10, International Development Cooperation Agency: 2–7/80. No classification marking. Ehrlich sent the paper to the President under a December 31, 1979, letter, noting that the paper “attempts to lay the groundwork of a sound development strategy for the United States in the next decade.” (Ibid.) Owen forwarded both the paper and Ehrlich’s letter to the President under a February 22, 1980, covering memorandum, which Brzezinski initialed, recommending that the President sign an attached memorandum to Ehrlich, dated February 26, requesting that Ehrlich take the lead in several areas relating to development assistance. The President signed the memorandum and added the following handwritten note: “Tom—You are the boss. Act boldly re bureaucratic coordination and efficiency. I’ll back you up. Keep me informed re problems & progress. J.” (Ibid.) Lake summarized the major goals of the IDCA policy statement in a January 9, 1980, memorandum to Vance, noting that the policy statement “is a good one.” (National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 6, TL 1/1–15/1980)
