the original draft. The Article then will read as follows:
“Nothing in the present Treaty shall be construed to limit or
restrict in any way the rights, privileges and advantages accorded
to the United States or its nationals or to Austria or its nationals,
by the Treaty between the United States and Austria establishing
friendly relations, concluded on August 24, 1921.”
A corresponding provision is contained in the Treaty with Germany (Article
XXX) and in the Treaty with Hungary (Article XXIV).
Article XXV. Duration and termination of treaty
Article XXV deals with the duration of the treaty and modes of terminating
it. It is deemed wise to fix the initial period of operation at ten years in
regard to all matters with respect to which the Contracting Parties have a
permanent policy and to require one year’s notice of termination.
The reservation made by the Senate when giving its advice and consent to
the ratification of the Treaty with Germany that the fifth paragraph of
Article VII and Articles IX and XI of that Treaty should be terminable at
the end of one year was referred to in instruction No. 527 of December 1,
1926. It is necessary that provisions in treaties which this Government may
conclude with other countries corresponding to that paragraph and those
Articles of the Treaty with Germany shall likewise be made terminable at
the end of one year. No provisions similar to the fifth paragraph of Article
VII or Articles IX and XI of the Treaty with Germany were contained in the
draft originally submitted to Austria. The new paragraph of Article VII
suggested on page 3 of instruction No. 527 is, as pointed out in that
instruction, the same as the fifth paragraph of Article VII of the Treaty with
Germany and the sixth paragraph of Article VII of the treaty with Hungary,
enlarged so as to relate to exportations as well as importations. In its
enlarged form it is contained in the Treaties with Estonia and Salvador as
the fifth paragraph of Article VII. In all of these treaties the provision is
terminable at the end of one year.
If the paragraph quoted on page 3 of instruction No. 527 be accepted by
Austria and included in Article VII, it should be made terminable at the end
