1956  1189
up artificial barriers preventing mutual contacts and not Chinese 
Government which doing so. They would look forward to removal by 
US of such barriers so that peoples our two countries could contact each 
other freely and benefit from such contacts by learning from each other, 
and thus finally promote relations between two countries.
21. I just wanted to say it difficult to persuade me or my govern­
ment that experiences of hundreds Americans who had lived under 
jurisdiction his government were brought about by friendly feelings on 
part his government toward US or Americans or to persuade US these 
respectable Americans who never encountered difficulty elsewhere 
were criminals.
22. I said with regard resolving disputes between us it US that 
proposed as first step we make it clear there would be no hostilities 
between us. It US which proposed it be made unconditionally clear 
this covered most serious dispute between us. It his government that 
still refused this simple basic proposition. It his government which still 
threatened use force. These were facts that could not be obscured and 
which readily understandable by all.
23. Wang denied that they had in course these negotiations rejected 
any reasonable proposals I had made. They did not judge proposals on 
their appearance but on substance and content. They could not accept 
proposal such as I had made that seemed say what is mine is mine 
and what is yours is mine. Any such proposal could not be considered 
by his side. He hoped my side would give favorable consideration to 
proposal he had made this morning for removing barriers to mutual 
contact and cultural exchange—as well as to lifting of embargo—and 
he looked forward to any result of such consideration. At time when 
peoples of different countries were exchanging more and more visits 
for US arbitrarily to set up artificial barriers to such exchange simply 
not reasonable. They regretted that up to now peoples of China and US 
could not have normal uninterrupted exchanges.
24. Wang recalled some time ago commemorative conference held 
in Peking in honor American poet Whitman and they had extended 
invitation to number outstanding representatives American literature 
and arts but regrettably these persons had been denied passports to 
come China take part that conference. Despite opposition American 
Government against visits of American journalists to China there still 
great number journalists who desired come their country and who 
making every effort break through barriers. Wang recalled that Peking 
Opera Company had already signed contract with American theatri­
cal company for exchange visits but due US Government intervention 
contract could not be realized. During performance Chinese acrobatical 
troupe here in Switzerland acrobatic company received inquiries from 
US and requests for tickets so that American tourists who came here
