1354 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX influence in Lebanon). Since these are essentially regional issues, they are not rpt not susceptible to bilateral solutions. —The U.S. commitment to the Camp David process as the context for negotiations will continue to limit our ability in the near term to address Syrian interests in a manner sufficiently forthcoming to alter Syrian estrangement from the U.S. The one exception may be on Lebanon where Syrian and U.S. interest in maintaining stability and preventing partition continue to coincide. B. Assad regime’s future and probable successors: —Though no one can predict how long the Assad regime will survive, it is clear that it is dying. Barring assassination, the transition process is likely to be a lengthy affair and the dynamics involved in Assad’s struggle to hang on will strongly circumscribe his ability to respond pragmatically or positively to areas of primary interest to the U.S. In any case, we cannot count on Assad to act with the originality and pragmatism which characterized his rule in earlier years. —In order of likelihood successor regimes would probably be: (a) a regime dominated by the Alawite hierarchy, but without the Assad brothers, (b) an Alawite/Sunni coalition, (c) a Sunni-dominated regime. A radical Muslim seizure of power is a remote possibility. C. Implications for U.S. interests: —From the standpoint of U.S. interests none of the anticipated successors would be preferable to Assad. —Among them, however, an Alawite-Sunni coalition would probably be preferable and enjoy the best prospects for stability. It would stand the best chance of restoring confessional peace by redressing Sunni majority grievances while protecting minority Alawite/Christian interests. It would probably pursue the most moderate policies among the potential successors. —An Alawite succession would be the most dangerous. A post- Assad Alawite regime would be ideological, tough, and have the strongest ties to the USSR among the potential contenders for power. A Sunni regime might well move to reduce Soviet influence. It would, however, meet resistance from the Alawite and Christian minorities in seeking to redress Sunni grievances at the expense of Alawite privilege. These tendencies would be accentuated to the degree that a Sunni regime found itself beholden to the radical Muslim Brotherhood for support. D. U.S. policy —The best posture for the U.S. at this time with respect to the succession struggle is one of neutrality and non-involvement. Despite a clear preference for Assad, it is unlikely that the U.S. can affect his staying power. At the same time, although we believe that a Sunni/
