318
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
food, disagreement over the extra-territoriality (i.e., whether or not
U.S. laws can be applied to U.S. firms in third countries), and the
applicability of sanctions to a joint venture company in which five
tankers fly the British flag and five fly the Iranian flag.
A third group of countries are the non-aligned, who are trying to
find a two-stage approach. Instead of immediate sanctions, they would
propose formalizing the Secretary-General’s mediation efforts, calling
on him to visit Tehran and warn them that if they did not act by a
given time, the Security Council will impose sanctions. This may be
attractive to the Soviets, Czechs and Kuwaitis, but he thought not.
Bangladesh may be in the same position as the Soviets, but it is not
entirely clear. The Bangladesh ambassadors in New York and Washing-
ton have urged us to press the President of Bangladesh at a high level
to cooperate. Nevertheless, he thought that Bangladesh would abstain.
It will take a number of days to get agreement on the list of sanc-
tions, which will put us into January. With a high expenditure of
political capital, including personal intervention by the President by
telephone, he thought we could get nine votes after the first of January.
The President summarized the membership of the Security Council
as three groups composed of: (1) Soviets, Czechs and Kuwaitis who
will oppose sanctions and probably abstain; (2) the Norwegians, British,
French and Portuguese who will support us; and (3) Jamaica, Bangla-
desh, Gabon, Bolivia, Nigeria, China and Zambia.
Ambassador McHenry said after January 1, Nigeria will be replaced
by Nigeria [Niger], Gabon by Tunisia, Kuwait by the Philippines,
Czechs by East Germany and Bolivia by an empty chair.
Dr. Brzezinski thought that we would come out about the same.
Ambassador McHenry thought he could possibly get more votes
by going to a two-stage process in which we would continue to get
sanctions while also meeting desires for an interim period. The resolu-
tion would deplore the failure of Iran to comply with the UN, direct
Waldheim to go to Iran by a given date, and state that if the hostages
had not been released by a certain date the Security Council would
take action under articles 39 and 41.3 We would need the interim period
in any event to negotiate sanctions, and this would put that period
to use.
Secretary Vance said the British had dumped these changes on us
suddenly yesterday.
The President wondered if we could get them to back off?
3 See footnote 3, Document 87.
