September 18–December 16, 1978
511
trend is likely to complicate rather than facilitate our task when we
start negotiating with them on the West Bank and Gaza in the weeks
and months ahead. They are likely to think that they can go back on
what they consented to and water it down systematically as we pro-
ceed from one stage to the other. This would be quite a regressive de-
velopment as it would confront us with a situation no one would ben-
efit from even though the Israelis do not seem to be aware of that.
Our common experience has thought (sic) us to be very specific on
every point if we are to guarantee any real movement.20 We should do
all what (sic) we can to eliminate the causes of controversy or misun-
derstanding in the future as we are engaged in a continuous process
which is likely to reach full fruition within a few years. Therefore, I sug-
gest that we stick to your original idea of an exchanged letter between
Egypt and Israel witnessed by the United States as our full partner.21
The letter can be meaningful and significant only if it includes a time-
table22 for the basic steps:
A) Beginning the negotiations for establishing the elected self-
governing authority (not the administrative autonomy the Israeli Gov-
ernment is talking about these days) as well as defining the powers and
responsibilities of that authority;23
B) Holding the elections for the self-governing authority;24
C) Inaugurating that authority, abolishing the Israeli military gov-
ernment together with its civilian administration, and effecting the
withdrawal of Israeli forces and the redeployment of the remaining
forces into specified security locations.25
An Egyptian presence in the Gaza strip is vital to the success of our
plan, not only in the strip but also in the West Bank.26 It is only fair to
deduce that the Israelis are not acting in good faith when they oppose
the presence of some Egyptian police units or frontier guards in Gaza
during the interim period. First of all, they had previously consented to
this very idea as they realized that it would be quite useful. In a reversal
of their position, they contend that such presence would be inconsist-
20 Vance underlined this sentence.
21 Vance underlined and highlighted this sentence. He wrote: “exchange of letters”
in the right-hand margin next to it.
22 Vance underlined “includes a timetable.”
23 Vance underlined this sentence with the exception of the parenthetical clause.
24 Vance underlined this point.
25 Vance underlined “Inaugurating that authority, abolishing the Israeli” and “ef-
fecting the withdrawal of Israeli forces and the redeployment of the remaining forces into
specified security locations” and put brackets around “abolishing.”
26 Vance underlined and highlighted this sentence. He wrote: “Egyptian presence?”
in the right-hand margin next to it.
