Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976 main faithful to our own basic ideals. We must learn to live with diversity, and we can continue to cooperate, so long as such political parties respect the democratic process, uphold existing international commitments, and are not subservient to external political direction. The democratic concert of nations should exclude only those who exclude themselves by the rejection of democracy itself. Our people have now learned the folly of our trying to inject our power into the internal affairs of other nations. It is time that our government learned that lesson too. While it is too early to appraise the ultimate result of the weekend’s elections in Italy, and though the outcome is a source of some relief since the Communist Party failed to obtain the plurality, it is clear that Italian political problems have been caused by the underlying social malaise of the country.6 Coping with this continuing malaise will require not only a major act of will on the part of Italian political leadership, but patient and significant assistance from Italy’s Western European neighbors, as well as from the United States. We must give our most alert and sympathetic consideration to such needed assistance. On Mutual Security The second area of increased cooperation among the democracies is that of mutual security. Here, however, we must recognize that the Atlantic and Pacific regions have quite different needs and different political sensitivities. Since the United States is both an Atlantic and a Pacific power, our commitments to the security of Western Europe and of Japan are inseparable from our own security. Without these commitments, and our firm dedication to them, the political fabric of Atlantic and Pacific cooperation would be seriously weakened, and world peace endangered. As we look to the Pacific region, we see a number of changes and opportunities. Because of potential Sino-Soviet conflict, Russian and Chinese forces are not jointly deployed as our potential adversaries, but confront one another along their common border. Moreover, our withdrawal from the mainland of Southeast Asia has made possible improving relationships between us and the People’s Republic of China. With regard to our primary Pacific ally, Japan, we will maintain our existing security arrangements, so long as that continues to be the wish of the Japanese people and government.
