3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
43
As for the Soviet medium bomber code-named by you Backfire,
we have given official data about the range of this aircraft (2200 km)
and expressed readiness to enter into the records of the negotiations
this data as well as our intention not to provide this aircraft with capa-
bilities to operate at intercontinental distances—all this on the condi-
tion that the issue of Backfire is completely and totally withdrawn from
further negotiations. We confirm that position of ours.
The issue of mobile launchers for ballistic missiles of interconti-
nental range naturally should find its solution in the agreement in
question. Earlier we proposed to agree that over the period that agree-
ment remains in force the sides should refrain from deploying land-
based mobile ICBM launchers.
Our approach to the question of a possibility for subsequent reduc-
tions of the USSR and US strategic forces is set forth in my letter of Feb-
ruary 25.3 I repeat that we shall be ready to proceed to the discussions
of this issue immediately after the signing of the agreement. However,
it is necessary that account should be taken here of those factors which I
already wrote you about on February 25, i.e. such factors as differences
in geographic positions of the sides, the presence of the US forward
based nuclear systems and aircraft carrier aviation in the proximity of
the USSR territory, the possession of nuclear weapons by the US NATO
allies and other circumstances which cannot be discarded.
Having in mind these factors and the above mentioned consider-
ations regarding cruise missiles, it could be possible not only to limit
the levels of strategic nuclear delivery vehicles for the sides (2400 and
1320) but also to consider the number of such delivery vehicles to be re-
duced even before the expiration of the agreement being worked out.
The above considerations represent our position of principle
which we intend to adhere to in the forthcoming talks with Secretary
Vance. The additional questions which are mentioned in your letter,
Mr. President, also undoubtedly deserve attention. We shall be pre-
pared to set forth our preliminary considerations on those matters. On
those of them, where a prospect appears for finding mutually accept-
able solutions special negotiations would be conducted. If progress is
achieved, appropriate agreements could be signed simultaneously
with the strategic arms limitation agreement.
In conclusion I would like to note, Mr. President, that I do not quite
understand the meaning of your reference to the tone of my letter of
February 25. Its tone is usual—business-like and considerate. If you
have in mind the direct and frank way in which it expounds our views,
then I proceeded and do now from the premise that a dialogue of that
3 See Document 12.
