500 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV in practice by the communications technicians (as in WMCCS) and the sensor technicians (as in DSP and the Special Air Force). They should be but servitors of the “command” function (with “control” as its nether side). Command—­how the forces are directed to fight—­is a matter of strategy, doctrine, training, battle assessment and planning. It is a very cerebral and people-­oriented function. (C) Hans Mark relates the story that, at Trafalgar, Nelson sent up two signals: “Engage the enemy,” and “England expects every man to do his duty.” A very simple C3 scheme sufficed because he had strategized, planned, trained, and fought with his captains to the point where they knew how to conduct operations with little guidance, even in the face of the unexpected. We are vulnerable to getting lost in a technological swamp at the other extreme: sensors that can see everything, communications from the President to the foxhole. Strategy itself determines what we wish to see and what we wish to communicate to forces. If it fails to do that, the technicians will have no limiting criteria against which to build their systems or we will be left with pre-­canned fire plans for World War III (SIOP and its lessor bretheran). (S) As we move down the evolutionary path of doctrinal reform, we shall discover that defining requirements for communications, ADP, and sensor technology is as vital as defining force requirements. This task will have to be taken out of the hands of the C3I technicians and placed in the hands of these strategic planners now almost entirely preoccupied with force structure. This may require organizational change in OSD, the JCS, and the Service staffs. More than any other single phenomenon, grappling with the strategic C3I problem will force us in the direction of a general staff.9 (C) Furthermore, if we properly subordinate sensor, data processing, and communications technology to strategy, we shall find that the “people problem” of command (the commander and his battle staff) has reappeared on center stage, where it has always been in Soviet doctrine. Are the people, from the NCA down, who must make the command decisions that implement strategy and who must advise on those decisions trained, exercised, survivable? [8 lines not declassified] (S) In considering the DOD targeting and SRF studies, we shall first of all, be concerned with redefining basic strategy for various levels of conflict, and, second, with the likely implications for force posture and programs. We must also, however, raise organizational questions. What does a more open-­ended approach to operational planning require in the way of command structure and staff support in war? How should 9 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the margin to the left of the last three sentences of this paragraph.
