1250 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement of the Free World and to the development of weapons with greatly reduced radioactive fall-­out. The President said that it has always been his policy only to autho­ rize such nuclear tests as were indispensable to develop United States nuclear weapons systems for the defense of the Free World. With the completion of this summer’s tests, very great and flexible nuclear deterrent strength will be available, and the President now sees no early need for further United States nuclear testing. Research will continue in our laboratories, since there can be no cer­ tainty that the long impasse in disarmament negotiations will be ended and in view of the promising applications of nuclear explosions to peaceful uses. It is the President’s understanding that if a resumption of U.S. testing is in the interest of the free world, much of any such testing could be con­ ducted underground, so that no radiation would enter the atmosphere. It is the President’s hope that this public announcement of his intentions will improve opportunities for negotiation of an effective safeguarded international agreement to reduce the dangers of surprise attack and to control and reduce military force. Extensive studies of radiation effects in the United States and other countries continue to support our position that testing adds but an insignificant amount to radiation from other sources and is not dangerous to humanity. The great peril to mankind arises not from nuclear tests but from the growing stockpiles of nuclear weapons and new means for their instant delivery through outer space. Safe­ guarded agreement to control this peril is a main objective of United States disarmament policy. In connection which such an agreement, the United States of course remains willing to enter into inspected international arrangements covering, among other things, the suspen­ sion of nuclear testing. 300. Draft Presidential Statement1 Washington, March 24, 1958 The President of the United States today stated: “As the American people well know, the danger to all the people everywhere as the result of a nuclear war has weighed upon my mind and my heart for many years. 1 Source: Announces upcoming nuclear test at Eniwetok. Confidential. 4 pp. Eisen­ hower Library, Whitman File.
