Human Rights 425 Charter and other international obligations of the U.S.”, to run or support conferences and seminars, to provide assistance for the publication of books and displays of art suppressed for political reasons, carrying out research and studies, assisting NGOs which support victims of political persecution and their families including the provision of legal aid. Such assistance can only be with the consent of the recipient and must be provided openly. If activities are carried out in a foreign country, they must be consistent with the laws of that country. One approach could be to try to restrict the Institute to informational activities, including arranging for conferences, and research on human rights, and even of publication or display in the U.S. of books and art banned abroad, but eliminate funding for organizations, individuals, and activities abroad which would provide the greatest chance of seriously embarassing our foreign policy. The sponsors of the legislation are likely to resist such constraints strongly, however, since one of their principal motivations is to assist the legal defense of individuals and groups imprisoned or arrested on human rights grounds abroad. Possible Options 1. Support the Fascell/Fraser Bill. Pro —Such an entity can be helpful in supporting efforts to improve human rights conditions abroad and in expanding our knowledge and understanding of human rights issues. —Places the USG in support of a Congressional human rights initiative. —The Institute will be a key mechanism to support those private NGOs in the human rights field and our support will be viewed favorably by that constituency. —Will expand U.S. influence with human rights constituencies overseas. Con —Some countries may object to activities of the NGOs which are supported by the Institute and blame the USG because of our funding of the Institute. —There would be no control over the Institute’s activities by the Department of State so that activities it undertook could cause difficulties in our bilateral relations with repressive regimes. 2. Support the legislation but endorse amendments to increase the State Department’s role in the direction of the Institute’s activities. Pro —It would place the USG in support of the general human rights thrust of the bill.
