International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1007 I. Goals fo the Study —To survey and inventory current U.S. government activities in the area of International Health including legislative authorities, budget allocations, policies and programs. —To examine present goals and philosophies which currently guide our International Health activities, and to assess their effectiveness and relevance to the health needs of the world today. —To examine the extent to which International Health is integrated with other governmental activities including the formulation of foreign policy, domestic health policy, development assistance as well as commercial and trade policy. —To review the relationship between the U.S. Government’s International Health programs, private voluntary agencies and multilateral organizations including international financial institutions. —To review present mechanisms for interagency coordination and for long range planning and goal setting of International Health programs. —To recommend organizational, programmatic and legislative actions that would improve the existing use of current resources and create a sense of a new Carter initiative as a concrete manifestation of the commitment to meeting global basic human needs. II. Findings The United States interests in International Health involve the following: the elimination of the remaining major infectious diseases afflicting mankind (being primarily the product of poor sanitation and malnutrition, and involving for the most part the developing world), the provision of access to a basic minimum level of health care for people everywhere, the pooling of knowledge and fostering of collaborative research activities to advance medical science, the use of medicine as an instrument to form a common bond outside traditional political channels with countries we wish to draw closer to us, and the development of markets overseas for products of the American health industry. —22 Federal agencies are involved in International Health, spending $522 million in FY 1976, under more than 100 separate legislative mandates. —Involvement in International Health while traditionally thought of as exclusively an aspect of foreign aid, includes not only development assistance, but commercial, diplomatic, and environmental considerations with the majority of U.S. Government expenditures currently being made outside the developing world. —There is no government-wide coordinating mechanism to establish overall policy, goals or programmatic priorities. Extraordinary re-
