International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1007
I. Goals fo the Study
—To survey and inventory current U.S. government activities in
the area of International Health including legislative authorities,
budget allocations, policies and programs.
—To examine present goals and philosophies which currently
guide our International Health activities, and to assess their effec-
tiveness and relevance to the health needs of the world today.
—To examine the extent to which International Health is inte-
grated with other governmental activities including the formulation of
foreign policy, domestic health policy, development assistance as well
as commercial and trade policy.
—To review the relationship between the U.S. Government’s Inter-
national Health programs, private voluntary agencies and multilateral
organizations including international financial institutions.
—To review present mechanisms for interagency coordination and
for long range planning and goal setting of International Health
programs.
—To recommend organizational, programmatic and legislative ac-
tions that would improve the existing use of current resources and
create a sense of a new Carter initiative as a concrete manifestation of
the commitment to meeting global basic human needs.
II. Findings
The United States interests in International Health involve the fol-
lowing: the elimination of the remaining major infectious diseases af-
flicting mankind (being primarily the product of poor sanitation and
malnutrition, and involving for the most part the developing world),
the provision of access to a basic minimum level of health care for
people everywhere, the pooling of knowledge and fostering of collabo-
rative research activities to advance medical science, the use of medi-
cine as an instrument to form a common bond outside traditional polit-
ical channels with countries we wish to draw closer to us, and the
development of markets overseas for products of the American health
industry.
—22 Federal agencies are involved in International Health,
spending $522 million in FY 1976, under more than 100 separate legisla-
tive mandates.
—Involvement in International Health while traditionally thought
of as exclusively an aspect of foreign aid, includes not only develop-
ment assistance, but commercial, diplomatic, and environmental con-
siderations with the majority of U.S. Government expenditures cur-
rently being made outside the developing world.
—There is no government-wide coordinating mechanism to estab-
lish overall policy, goals or programmatic priorities. Extraordinary re-
