Non-Proliferation
1009
We have been unable to persuade these countries and India, South Af-
rica and Israel to accept fullscope safeguards.
Nations with the most advanced nuclear power programs (in Eu-
rope and Japan), which are not of proliferation concern, resent our ef-
forts to impose stringent requirements on them which have resulted in
uncertain nuclear supply. They now see us as insensitive to their crit-
ical energy needs. They have not agreed to condition exports, or even
new export commitments, on the recipient’s accepting full-scope safe-
guards or foreswearing national enrichment or reprocessing facilities.
While the reduction in the growth of nuclear electric power supports
U.S. arguments that reprocessing, thermal recycle and breeder com-
mercialization can be prudently deferred, it has put governments com-
mitted to nuclear power and their nuclear industries on the defensive
and as a result spirited defenses of these options have been mounted.
II
Our approach to non-proliferation has been too single-minded. In-
adequate consideration has been given to linkages between prolifera-
tion and other foreign policy and security interests. In particular, where
other interests have appeared to conflict with non-proliferation con-
straints—in the Tarapur and Pakistan cases, for example—the former
have appeared to prevail (although our actions in these cases were sup-
portive of or consistent with our non-proliferation interests).
U.S. non-proliferation consideration led to legislative and policy
constraints of general application, including a highly restrictive export
policy, disregarding the fact that proliferation risks vary greatly from
one country to another, and that the energy security requirements of
other major industrial nations differ from America’s. We should adopt
a more balanced approach which recognizes the motivations which
lead nations to acquire nuclear explosives. No system of export con-
straints can substitute for elimination of these motivations, by resolu-
tion of international disputes, security guarantees and reduction of the
prestige value of nuclear weapons.
III
There are only five states of near-term proliferation concern—
India, Iraq, [less than 1 line not declassified], Pakistan and South Africa—
with perhaps a half dozen others of concern in the longer term. While
as a matter of general policy accepted international practice calls for
equal treatment for all states, distinctions where risks are gravest are
the only way to achieve the support of major Allies and other nuclear
suppliers in coping with proliferation risks effectively.
We need more flexibility in dealing with close Allies on export, re-
processing and retransfer requests, and in nuclear cooperation negotia-
