Human Rights
519
160.
Paper Prepared by the Global Issues Cluster of the National
Security Council Staff1
Washington, undated
For Dr. Brzezinski Only
Since your remarks to me2 a week ago about how our human
rights policy has ruined our relations with Chile, Brazil, Argentina and
Uruguay, I’ve been ruminating on how we got where we are now. I
don’t think that the policy has ruined these relations, or even that they
are ruined, but I do think that we have a very serious problem.
Most of it arises from trying to implement ill-advised Congres-
sional directives, particularly, the human rights provisions that have
been attached to OPIC and Ex-Im legislation. (As you may remember, I
argued that we should oppose each of these as strongly as we could,
and in the OPIC case, I later urged that NSC take the lead in directing
State to use the most limited interpretation of the law in implementing
the human rights amendment.) The crux of the problem is that we have
been consistently unsuccessful in defeating these Harkin amendments
on the Hill, and I think the reason for that is that you cannot lead from
behind.
The only way for the Administration to influence Congress
towards more responsible action is for Congress to perceive the Ad-
ministration as exercising leadership on this issue. Instead Congress
sees itself as the promoter and defender of human rights concerns.
They believe that if they were to stop pushing, the Administration
would assign a drastically lower priority to human rights or abandon
the policy altogether. Recent examples such as the Uganda trade em-
bargo and the Human Rights Institute only serve to illustrate the gen-
eral pattern that in most cases Congress has led and the Administration
has followed. The statement on Cambodia is the only small exception I
can think of.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 7–8/78. Secret. Brzezinski
added the following notation in the upper right-hand corner of the page: “Credits were
not a Congressional decision.” Attached to the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s August 22
evening report to Brzezinski. (Ibid.)
2 Reference is to Tuchman Mathews.
3 Presumable reference to the President’s April 21 statement on human rights
abuses in Cambodia, which reads, in part, “The American Government again condemns
the abuses of human rights which have occurred in Cambodia. It is an obligation of every
member of the international community to protest the policies of this or any nation which
cruelly and systematically violates the right of its people to enjoy life and basic human
dignities.” (Department of State Bulletin, August 1978, p. 38)
