Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX practice. While the FRG’s CDU/CSU2 opposition may seek to turn all this into a political issue in the 1980 campaign, even the conservatives have made only perfunctory statements of condemnation. The return to active political life after the summer lull may, however, spark opposition protests. (C) Prospects The irony of the GDR’s political situation, on the eve of its 30th anniversary (October 7), is that—more than most other East European states—it is still a regime with few options in creating a legitimizing formula. With 400,000 Soviet troops, the GDR can hardly move far from Soviet control. Moreover, the political use of German nationalism would raise the specter of reunification and run against the regime’s efforts to create a separate socialist national identity. Recurrent, somewhat halfhearted, attempts to portray the GDR as the repository of all “progressive” aspects of the German past have yet to win out with the population over the allure of pan-German nationalism. With “consumerism” on the decline, there is nothing left to fill the vacuum. For the time being, coercion appears to be an effective compensation for the social maladies and political liabilities. The Honecker regime, while weakened in comparison with a few years ago, remains in control; there are no signs that the Soviet are ready to dispense with Ulbricht’s successor. A continuing economic deterioration, however, could heighten frustrations that might lead to sporadic strikes by workers and other demonstrations by students and disillusioned consumers. Also, it could very well be that a blowup elsewhere in Eastern Europe might have a “domino” effect in the GDR, acting as a catalyst to latent discontent. In such a context, Moscow would be forced to make some hard choices on whether to retain Honecker and whether to provide new subsidies to a sagging East German economy. All in all, it will not be a particularly festive 30th anniversary in the GDR. 2 Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union. [Footnote is in the original.]
