Nicaragua  847
It was notable that members of the political opposition spoke 
quite freely and unrestrictedly to Dr. Eisenhower concerning the 
Somoza Government. On the first day, when Dr. Eisenhower visited 
the Bi-National Center, a small crowd carried posters denouncing the 
Government in various forms and General Somoza himself translated 
these signs for Dr. Eisenhower. Similarly, during the meeting with the 
University graduates, one of them, Dr. Zelaya, made a sharp attack on 
United States policy paralleling the Communist Party line. At first, it 
was alleged that he was speaking on behalf of the University graduates, 
but this was subsequently denied. Considerable reference was made 
by these same opposition groups not merely to alleged United States 
support for the Somozas but also to similar alleged support for other 
dictators.
Among the points raised by the Nicaraguans were what they 
believed to be unfair competition regarding the marketing of cotton. 
Complaints similar to those encountered in other Central American 
countries were made regarding the instability of the coffee market and 
the low prices thereof. Some belief was expressed by Nicaraguan busi-
nessmen that the United States because of its enormous wealth could 
absorb the financial cost of lost cotton markets. Again there appeared 
the belief that the United States fixes industrial and agricultural prices. 
Some feeling was also expressed that through Marshall aid the United 
States had stimulated coffee production in Africa which was competi-
tive with Central American coffee.
Business and other private sectors expressed concern regarding the 
great increase in the Government’s expenditures without correspond-
ing increase in the country’s productive capacity. Recognition was given 
of technical and other assistance rendered by the United States. These 
same circles complained that the persistent fear of Government inter-
ference, increases in taxes, bureaucracy, and scarcity of credit facilities, 
greatly hamper the economic growth of the country. The agricultural 
production which is the basis of the country’s economy was suffering 
severely from depressed international prices. Some complaint was 
made of the size of the military budget and President Somoza on two 
separate occasions referred to the fact that he had been able to reduce 
military expenditures on two occasions due to the cooperation of his 
brother who was the Commander of the National Guard.
Coffee growers of Nicaragua presented a special memorandum 
to Dr. Eisenhower relating to the problems of coffee which earned 
approximately half of Nicaragua’s foreign exchange.3 There are some 
4,800 plantation owners out of a population of nearly a million and a 
half. In the opinion of these coffee growers, the present difficulties were 
3 No memorandum matching the description here was found in Department of 
State files.
