510 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 manpower of these elements (estimated 20,000). [1½ lines not declassified] Conditions in South Iran, attitude of the Iranian Army and neighboring tribes, status of an Iranian rump government or government in exile, the political attitudes of the tribe in question, and degree of our support in time of Tudeh control have a bearing, however, on the tribal will and ability to conduct resistance activity. [4½ lines not declassified] (4) Reception points in the Tehran and Tabriz area and in South Iran where supplies and personnel can be clandestinely introduced into Iran are in the process of being established. [2½ lines not declassified] (5) [1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified] (6) Representatives of CIA and the British Intelligence Service met during the latter part of February to consider joint activities in Iran in the event of a Tudeh coup.7 The report of this meeting has not yet been received, but the discussions included the following topics: (a) Potential resistance groups. (b) Conditions under which assistance will be offered. (c) Extent and nature of assistance. (d) Supply channels to resistance groups. (e) Maintenance and establishment of liaison and communications. (f) Establishment of advance supply bases outside of Iran. Responsibilities for Future Planning 3. In the preparation of the plans for specific military, economic, diplomatic and psychological measures required by paragraph 5–a of NSC 136/1, the Working Group has agreed that responsibilities for future action in this regard will be as follows: a. State: (1) Recommendations as to possible levels of direct financial assistance to Iran under Conditions I and II. (2) Plans for the Shah’s escape from Tehran in an emergency. (3) Plans for the handling and exploitation in U.N. of an Iranian appeal for diplomatic and military support. (4) Negotiations with the Saudi Arabian Government for the use of Dhahran as a transit point for U.S. supplies to Iran. (5) Plans for discussions at the appropriate time with Turkey, Iraq, and Pakistan re joint action in support of the Iranian Government under Conditions I and II. (6) In coordination with the JCS, plans for early political-military discussions with the British Government re joint action in support of the Iranian Government under Conditions I and II. 7 See Document 158.
