National Security Policy 983 5. That, with respect to services overseas and to foreign countries, commercial augmentation airlift procurement policies and practices be better adapted to the long-­range Department of Defense requirements, so as to encourage and assist in sound economic growth, development, and maintenance of an increased air cargo capability; that there be explored the feasibility of (1) (a) increasing the around of MATS cargo airlift moving on a common carriage basis with certificated carriers and supplemental carriers, [and (b) requiring that all cargo [illegible in the original] be so moved;]8 (2) entering into longer term contracts for MATS traffic; and (3) giving preference in the movement of MATS traffic to those commercial carriers (a) who are effectively committed to the Civil Reserve Air Fleet (CRAF) program, (b) whose facilities and equipment are most advantageous to the emergency needs of the Department of Defense, or (c) who are demonstrating a willingness and ability to acquire uncompromised cargo aircraft; and that legislation be sought if necessary to permit accomplishment of any of the foregoing considered desirable. (It is understood that this recommendation will be reviewed after receipt of the report by the Air Force as to the feasibil­ ity of the steps outlined above.) 6. That since the development of long-­range, economical turbine-­ powered cargo aircraft is essential to MATS modernization and to long-­ range evolution of a modern civil cargo fleet, suitable arrangements should be made for Defense and industry participation in the costs of such development. 7. That purchase loan guarantee legislation, if proposed, contain provisions to insure the immediate availability of cargo aircraft covered thereby to meet military and mobilization requirements. 8. That consideration be given to equipping certain Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard units with transport aircraft that might be available from MATS excesses as augmentation forces for MATS in time of emergency. (It is understood that this recommenda­ tion will be reviewed after receipt of the above-­mentioned report by the Air Force.) 9. That the role of CRAF be re-­examined with the objective of insuring optimum effectiveness and responsiveness of commercial air­ lift services to the Department of Defense under all conditions. 8 Defense proposes deletion. [Footnote and brackets not delineating illegible text are in the original.]
