Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX JCS White House Lt. General John Pustay, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Asst. to the Chairman Chairman Justice NSC John Shenefield, Acting Asst. Paul B. Henze, Notetaker Kenneth Bass, Office of Legal Counsel *Present only for first portion of meeting. **Present only for second portion of meeting. The meeting was called to review proposals for improving broadcasting to Muslim audiences. The Chairman opened the meeting by stressing the urgency of the problem and the President’s concern about it. He said that events of the past year had highlighted serious deficiencies in this area but efforts to correct them had been proceeding too slowly. He cited delayinimplementing anearlierdecisiontoinaugurateAzeribroadcasting over VOA as an unfortunate example. The Deputy Secretary of Defense noted that the United States would be allocating billions of dollars to set up quick reaction forces and was even now spending sums far greater than the cost of broadcasts to keep naval task forces steaming around the Persian Gulf. The Chairman suggested that our defense outlays would not have to be so high if we had not neglected effective communication with key groups such as Muslims. There was general agreement among all present that urgent steps were needed. (U) Before reviewing specific proposals of VOA and BIB for Radio Liberty, the group reviewed the present status of Persian-language broadcasts over the VOA. VOA was praised for having already expanded Persian but there was unanimous consensus that what was now being done—1½ hours per day in total broadcast time—was inadequate for a crisis situation which was likely to continue for months if not years. After discussion of personnel recruiting, transmitter allocation, possible reduction of lower-priority languages and the significance of VOA English-language broadcasts for Iranian and other Muslim audiences, it was decided that the specifics of how to expand Persian broadcasts as soon as possible would be taken up by the SCC Radio Working Group which will report back to the SCC as soon as possible. The aim will be at least to double VOA’s capacity to communicate in Persian, both in terms of program content and transmitter power. (C) VOA’s paper offering five option “packages” for expanding broadcasting to Muslim audiences was then discussed.2 2 Dated December 4. (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence
