effect, and in discussing what interpretation may be put to [upon] that
convention in the future.
17. I mentioned earlier that this question was broader than the action of
France alone and I earnestly beg you to consider the consequences implied
in the acceptance of the French thesis that their action does not violate the
convention. Warning has already been served by certain states which
implies that they will consider the decision as to France as a precedent and
as I endeavored to make clear before, this matter must not be considered
alone but as a precedent by which any state which is embarrassed on
economic grounds by importation may set up a machinery by way of
internal regulation by which it may act in harmony with the convention and
still against its purposes. It seems to me, gentlemen, that this is one of the
most vital questions with which the Conference has been confronted
because we must decide not a simple question of one exception, but a
question of principle by which we establish a precedent which may save or
wreck the future operation of this convention. I most earnestly hope that
this question will be examined in the broadest spirit and with the fullest
comprehension of the dangers which lie in acquiescing in the French
contention.
18. I cannot reach my conclusion without again paying tribute to the spirit
of loyalty which animated the French Government in bringing this matter
before the Conference. If anything that I have said has raised a shadow of
doubt as to my belief in the sincere good faith in which the French
Government has acted, I can only assure you that nothing could have been
more remote from my intention than to [carry] such an implication. The
French Government said, “Although these measures cannot be described as
prohibitions within the strict meaning of the convention”. My government
is not prepared to agree with the French Government even as to this
contention, in which the French Government itself seems to have
considerable doubt, but leaving aside for a moment the question of strict
interpretation, I beg you will not consider this affair merely as one of strict
legality but on a broader and more comprehensive basis and one calculated
to accomplish the broad purpose for which we have written this convention,
namely, to increase the facilities of international trade.
