North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
1099
349.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Muskie1
Washington, September 8, 1980
IMF and IBRD Reaction to the Chairman’s Text on
Procedures Governing Global Negotiations
As you requested I spoke this afternoon to Bob McNamara and
Jacques de Larosiere, Managing Director of the IMF, about the draft
text on procedures to govern global negotiations.2
McNamara indicated that he despaired about global negotiations.
If it follows past practice in ECOSOC and elsewhere in the UN, it will
lead to rhetoric rather than results. UN and ECOSOC resolutions have
not gotten in the way of tangible progress so far, but he did not want it
to get in the way in the future. He plans to push ahead with those im-
provements in the Bank’s funding and programs which he considers
important. He indicated that a negotiated “package” involving Bank
activities would be “impossible” and he relies on the good sense of
American officials to keep any attempt to negotiate a package deal in
New York from deflecting or delaying desirable changes in the Bank’s
activities. He indicated that he was not entirely clear what global nego-
tiations would mean for the World Bank, but he would find totally un-
acceptable any attempt to negotiate on such items as capital increases
or the Bank’s gearing ratio.
De Larosiere indicated, after having read and reflected on the text,
that he does not like it at all. He singled out especially the phrase indi-
cating that the conference would be “the forum for . . . conducting ne-
gotiations”. He said that for the UN to give instructions to the IMF on
matters under its competence, such as disposition of its gold, and SDR
link to foreign aid, or modifications in its voting procedures, would dis-
rupt the IMF as a result of conflicting pressures. He acknowledged that
formally the IMF is fully protected by its charter but to have such in-
structions come from the UN would be politically very awkward and
disruptive. De Larosiere volunteered that he thought he was not ade-
quately protected by the provision in the text calling for consensus on
important matters. He said that the General Assembly would decide by
majority vote which matters are important, and this itself would be-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
81D134, Box 7, E—Memoranda of Conversations, Jan. 1980–June 1980. Confidential; Eyes
Only. Copies were sent to Christopher and Secretary of the Treasury Miller.
2 See Document 348.
