Dominican Republic  499
weeks. [text not declassified] fearful that Castro or someone committed 
to Castro will come into power soon thereafter. We have no moderate 
substitute for Trujillo available. [text not declassified] considerable merit 
in getting Trujillo out of the country and trying to make a transition to 
some other government.
Mr. Herter also thought that on the whole course of events favored 
by Mr. Clark seemed worth trying. He said we should not offer Trujillo 
asylum in the U.S.
The President said that if Clark takes a part in this, he should not 
say that he has any authority from the President, or has even seen the 
President lately. [text not declassified]
[text not declassified] The President said the project might go ahead. 
It should be kept secret, and that Clark would be acting on his own. 
[text not declassified]
DR–18.	
Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and 
Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1
 
Washington, March 25, 1960.
SUBJECT
Intelligence Note: Dominican Republic—Political Situation
A rising tide of discontent—­the first serious threat to the rule 
of Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo—­has been spreading through the 
Dominican Republic’s influential commercial, professional and intel-
lectual classes for several months, and has even begun to penetrate the 
urban and rural lower class, heretofore a Trujillo stronghold. Arising 
largely from an economic crisis caused by low export prices and the 
tremendous drain of foreign exchange into Trujillo’s frantic arms-­
purchase program, this discontent is reinforced by a virtually complete 
lack of civil liberties. Opposition feeling came to a head in January with 
the exposure of a conspiracy to assassinate the Generalissimo and seize 
power. He retaliated with a wave of political arrests, totaling in the 
thousands, which still continues. Concentrated chiefly in the influential 
middle classes, the repression has left virtually no Dominican family 
of any prominence untouched. The arrests have stiffened opposition 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.00/3–2560. Confidential.
