August 8–September 17, 1978 191 48. Memorandum of Conversation1 Camp David, September 13, 1978, 10:20–11:15 p.m. PARTICIPANTS AMERICAN SIDE Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary, NEA William Quandt, National Security Council Samuel Lewis, Ambassador to Israel ISRAELI SIDE Prime Minister Menachem Begin Foreign Minister Moshe Dayan Minister of Defense Ezer Weizman Prof. Aharon Barak, Member Israeli Supreme Court and Prime Minister’s Legal Advisor Dr. Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor to Foreign Minister Major General Avraham Tamir, Director, Army Planning Branch Mr. Elyakim Rubinstein, Assistant Director General, Ministry for Foreign Affairs Ambassador Simcha Dinitz Brigadier General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister Mr. Dan Pattir, Advisor to the Prime Minister for Public Affairs SUBJECT Israeli Discussion of U.S. Paper on Sinai Secretary Vance and Ambassador Lewis went to Foreign Minister Dayan’s cabin to deliver to the Israelis the draft framework agreement2 on the Sinai which had been discussed briefly earlier in the evening3 by the President with Mr. Barak. Dayan looked it over quickly, asked Defense Minister Weizman to come over to the cabin to join him, and initiated a discussion about problems he immediately saw in the document concerning the use of airfields and the provisions for stationing of UN Forces at Sharm el Shaikh. He was also concerned about the language on withdrawal of all Israeli personnel and the immediate establishment of the exercise of Egyptian sovereignty. A confused discussion with Weizman then ensued about definitions of the various zones in the paper, interrupted by a telephone call from Begin to Dayan. Dayan said that the President was sitting with Begin and Barak at the present mo- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David Memcons, 9/78. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Lewis on September 14. 2 The specific draft of the Sinai Framework agreement is not further identified. See footnote 55, Document 28. 3 See footnote 52, Document 28.
