1028 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI during reentry vehicle inspections. Brooks reminded Nazarkin that, immediately before the break, Nazarkin had said that he had convinced Moscow to accept hard covers. Based on this, Brooks continued, Washington was prepared, with modest modifications, to accept the agreement the sides had reached on reentry vehicle inspections. Brooks was anxious to know the true Soviet position, since a report of yet another Soviet reversal of position could derail the good impression made in Washington by the many forthcoming Soviet actions since negotiations had resumed. 5. Nazarkin said that it was good that the two were having this discussion in order to avoid misunderstanding. Nazarkin could state categorically that Zaytsev was not instructed to say that the Soviet side insisted on soft covers. Admittedly, Nazarkin continued, Zaytsev was not instructed to accept hard covers at this particular meeting. Nazarkin could assure Brooks, however, that the issue would be resolved as part of an unspecified “package.” 6. Brooks said that he took Nazarkin’s words as confirmation that Nazarkin had been successful in convincing Moscow of the utility of hard covers. Nazarkin said Brooks was correct. Nazarkin then pulled from his briefcase a thick document which he described as his instructions and said that he wished to be absolutely certain of what he had just said. After consulting instructions, Nazarkin confirmed that, as part of a package, hard covers would be accepted. Brooks said he appreciated this insight. 7. Nazarkin apologized for his frequent inability to meet with Brooks during the past few days. The Soviet side was consumed with internal organizational issues, Nazarkin confided. There was significant disagreement over who in the Soviet delegation was responsible for which issues. These organizational matters had consumed a good deal of Nazarkin’s time, especially given the absence of Ambassador Masterkov. 8. Brooks asked if the Soviet side would be prepared to discuss PPCM the following day. Nazarkin said he anticipated such a discussion would occur, but that he was uncertain in what forum Deputy Minister Obukhov would wish to conduct the dialogue. It was clear, Nazarkin continued, that Obukhov wished to keep control of the PPCM issue himself. Brooks said that, while he would work in whatever forum was most effective, it would be helpful if U.S. technical experts could be involved in any discussion of production units. Nazarkin said he understood. 9. Brooks reminded Nazarkin that the two had agreed to determine when and where the issue of right of refusal SSI should be discussed. Nazarkin said, that at least initially, he would prefer to keep discussion on this subject at the Brooks–Nazarkin level, rather than in the working
