Human Rights 609 The last two issues are related. I’m not familiar with the details of either problem but suspect both relate to HA’s adversarial relationship with much of the building and the consequent reluctance of many to become more directly involved with the human rights policy. We can’t force human rights assignments, or training, on unwilling officers. 3. HA priorities. —Strategy papers for problem countries (with particular emphasis on how to promote human rights in violating countries with which we have security relationships). The results were disappointing when we and others tried a few examples earlier in the administration. The strategy paper concept may be overly rigid. —Senate Ratification of International Human Rights Treaties. We agree this should remain an Administration priority and you will recall it is also on Roberts Owen’s priority list for L. —Better US human rights performance. We agree with Patt that a mechanism to permit effective response to complaints about US domestic performance would be useful, especially for the Madrid CSCE review conference. You may want to ask whether there is any mechanism for this at present. We’re less sure what she has in mind with the recommendation for closer cooperation with the NSC to coordinate activities of, and promote acceptance by, domestic agencies of the human rights policy. You may want to explore this. —A “more creative” human rights approach at the UN. We believe HA already has an adequate voice in such decisions. —Full funding of the Inter-American Court. We aren’t sure what’s involved here, and HA’s memorandum arrived too late for us to try to find out. —CSCE. This will indeed be a major HA concern for the next year. We agree on the need to appoint an Ambassador promptly as does EUR and we assume Patt is aware of the state of play. Questions for Discussion You might want to explore the following questions with Patt and her colleagues:10 —Does HA perceive that it has an adversarial relationship with the rest of the building? If so, what might be done about it? —Can specific examples be cited of what country strategy reports might enable us to do better? —What military assistance decisions does HA think would have been different had the procedural changes they recommend in the 10 Christopher placed a check mark in the left-hand margin next to this sentence.
