448
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
94.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
Washington, August 15, 1978, 3:50–5:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
U.S.-Soviet Relations: Policy Implications of Interaction of Political Trends in Key
Regions with Soviet Conventional and Strategic Buildup
PARTICIPANTS
The President
CIA:
The Vice President
Admiral Stansfield Turner
State:
White House:
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. Hamilton Jordan
Defense:
Secretary Harold Brown
NSC:
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
ACDA:
(notetaker)
Mr. Paul Warnke
JCS:
General David Jones
The meeting started with Brzezinski making the point that the pur-
pose of the meeting is to examine the implications for U.S. policy of the
interaction of political trends in key regions with the Soviet strategic
and conventional buildup. He then suggested that the President call
upon Stan Turner to initiate a discussion in regard to the three regions
mentioned in the agenda given in the recent NIE.2
Turner: The Soviets are more assertive because of their power; be-
cause they feel that the U.S. is not as competitive. They are aware of the
limitations of their power but they see detente as permitting effective
competition. Moreover, their increasing war fighting capability gives
them greater confidence. They are buoyed by their experience in Africa.
Moreover, abroad the perception is one of change in the balance of
power.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File,
Meetings File, Box 1, NSC Meeting: #11 Held 8/15/78, 8–11/78. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted
by Bartholomew. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The
President initialed the top right-hand corner of the minutes. Brzezinski sent the minutes
and a separate memorandum on action items deriving from the meeting to the President
under an August 16 memorandum requesting the President’s approval. Brzezinski indi-
cated that he did not plan to circulate the minutes but asked Carter if there was “anyone
in particular that you would want to have read” the minutes. Carter responded: “Those
who were there.” He also instructed Brzezinski to follow up on the action items. (Ibid.)
2 NIE 11–4–78, “Soviet Goals and Expectations in the Global Power Arena,” May 9;
see footnote 6, Document 85.
