3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
111
with the well-known incident involving the Soviet aircraft in Japan.
This was not even a matter of the pilot, although they did not believe
one word of the version spread in the West about the pilot. It was a
question of the aircraft itself. Did the strategic services of the United
States think they would improve their strategic situation by disassem-
bling the aircraft? Did they really see an advantage to be gained here?
Their actions were a blow at the spirit of confidence and trust in the re-
lations between our respective governments, and had poisoned the
general climate. Gromyko would tell the Secretary directly that the So-
viet leadership had been amazed and surprised how these two factors
could be likened. Could familiarization with this aircraft by the Japa-
nese and Americans change the strategic situation between our coun-
tries? “Nonsense. Utter nonsense.” Supposing the Soviet Union had an
opportunity to dismantle a US plane, say a Phantom, could disman-
tling it and crawling all over it improve the strategic situation of the So-
viet Union? “Nonsense.” In that case, why was it necessary to poison
the relationship between us? It had seemed like a small matter, but in
fact it was a major one. This was what the Soviets wanted the new US
Administration to know, as something to be borne in mind in the fu-
ture. He did not think that this had increased confidence.
The Secretary said he had taken note of the Minister’s statement. He
understood that this matter had been raised with President Ford, and
followed by a subsequent exchange of correspondence between the
President and General Secretary Brezhnev.
ADVANCE NOTIFICATION
The Secretary said that, as Gromyko knew, President Carter had
communicated to General Secretary Brezhnev his desire to see if we
could enter into an agreement about advance notification of missile
firings. The object of this was to be a confidence-building arrangement.
It would further the objectives of the Measures Agreement12 and would
be a simple and constructive move. What we had in mind was notifica-
tion, some 24 hours in advance, of dates and times and places of ICBM
launchings. We believe this would prevent misinterpretation of test
launches during periods of tension.
Gromyko said he had asked his colleagues whether this question
had been raised earlier. He ascertained that it had not been discussed
with US representatives previously. The USSR announces all launches
which land in areas outside of its territory. The Secretary knew this,
surely. As for launches of strategic missiles within limits of national ter-
12 The Accidents Measures Agreement of September 30, 1971, provided that the
“Hot Line” would be used for urgent communication pertaining to nuclear weapons. See
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXII, SALT I, 1969–1972, Document 197, footnote 3.
