Yugoslavia
769
241.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense
(Duncan) to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Military Sales to Yugoslavia (U)
(S) I have reviewed, as have Secretary Brown and General Brown,
the interagency study of US Arms Transfers to Yugoslavia.2 We have
concluded that a policy of moderate expansion of US arms sales to
Yugoslavia, generally as described by Option III of the study, best
satisfies US and Yugoslav interests. A policy based on Option II would
serve these interests less satisfactorily. The choice of either Option I or
Option IV, as stated in the study, currently is not warranted.
(S) US interests in Yugoslavia are centered on preserving its inde-
pendence and territorial integrity and fostering its professed role as a
nonaligned nation. The possibility of Tito’s death in the near future
makes the risks to US interests more imminent. An expanded US-
Yugoslav arms sales relationship will assure the Yugoslavs of US sup-
port and enhance the position of those Yugoslavs who wish to look to
the West for support against Soviet pressures. US sales diminish to
some degree the heavy Yugoslav dependence on the Soviet Union for
military equipment, and they develop a framework which would be
the basis for greatly expanded support should we choose to respond
to a Yugoslav request for major assistance.
(S) In addition to the factors noted in the study we must assure
ourselves that the Yugoslavs will not make unauthorized transfers of
US equipment and that Yugoslavia will assume a truly nonaligned
role. The manner in which our policy is carried out should make clear
its connections with these factors.
(S) Implementation of an increased military sales program should
give proper consideration not only to the expansion of the relationship
but also to the constraints which exist. Specific US transfer actions
would of course require evaluation on a case-by-case basis in considera-
tion of the guidelines of PD–13, the security and proper use of US
equipment, and US force requirements. In general, materiel should
come from excess stocks or from production, utilizing existing lead-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977. Secret.
2 See footnote 3, Document 240.
