782 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement We showed Ambassador Bonhomme a draft press release3 the Department has prepared for possible use in clarifying the dollar amount of United States aid to Haiti in Fiscal 1960 and 1959 and the 10-­year period 1950–59. The Ambassador commented that this press release may be missing the point Haiti has tried to make: i.e, what has this aid accomplished? He referred to the $3 million loan for a private sugar mill as an example, as well as the $300,000 road study loan. We pointed out that although the sugar mill loan has not been used, it is nevertheless a legitimate example of United States efforts to help. We observed that much time and effort by United States officials went into getting the loan approved in view of the high priority given in by the GOH. We mentioned that, as the Ambassador knew, there had been great interest show by the Haitian Government in getting this done including telegrams from President Duvalier. Failure to use the funds is not the fault of the United States Government nor of the Haitian Government but appears to be due to the efforts of the borrower to transfer his interest in the loan to a third party. The present status of the road study loan was also discussed briefly, with the Ambassador apparently puzzled and frustrated by previous and present delays. Mr. Warner said he thought that the DLF would be disposed to proceed rapidly with this loan once the Artibonite problem were cleared up. This prompted the Ambassador to make more general comments about Haiti’s relations with the DLF. He complained that Haiti makes an application and then a long time after, often many months later, is informed that the application is not in proper form, is not in English, or that it lacks supporting data. He still is not sure whether applications should go through USOM in Haiti or go directly to the DLF. He understands that the USOM represents the DLF with regard to DLF disbursements in the Artibonite valley, but he doesn’t know if USOM represents the DLF in all other matters in Haiti. In any event, some applications have been submitted through the USOM and have gone on to the DLF but subsequently they were found to be faulty. Ambassador Bonhomme wondered why the USOM could not immediately have told the Haitian Government about the inadequacies of the applications prior to sending them on to the DLF with consequent administrative delays. Ambassador Bonhomme recalled that in the latter stages of the Magloire Government (1956), he had witnessed a similar hesitancy in going through with United States assistance. He said he had found out later this had been due to the expectation by the United States that the Magloire Government was not going to last. He said that all sorts of 3 Not found.
