Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
391
“I am troubled by the fact that the Soviet Union has been engaged
in a sustained and massive effort to build up its conventional forces,
particularly in Europe, to strengthen the concentration of its forces on
the frontiers of China, to maintain a vitriolic worldwide propaganda
campaign against the United States, to encircle and penetrate the
Middle East, to stir up racial difficulties in Africa, and to make more
difficult a moderate solution of these difficulties, perhaps now to seek
more direct access to the Indian Ocean.
“This pattern of behavior I do not believe is compatible with what
was once called the code of de´tente, and my hope is, through patient
negotiations with us, but also through demonstrated resolve on our
part, we can induce the Soviet leaders to conclude that the benefits of
accommodation are greater than the shortsighted attempt to exploit
global difficulties.”
Following several questions related to Africa and Brzezinski’s trip
to China (see footnote 21, Document 62), the interview returned to the
topic of the Soviet Union. Referencing the list of Soviet actions Brzezin-
ski had described, one of the journalists then asked Brzezinski if he
would be in favor of linking U.S. trade and technology transfers to So-
viet behavior. Brzezinski commented:
“First of all, I don’t think it was a string of horrible things. It was a
list of actions undertaken apparently in a combative or competitive
spirit in order to gain political advantage in relationship to us. This is
the kind of conduct we wish to transform, to moderate.
“Our response to it does operate on many levels. On the one hand
we try to negotiate with the Soviets where it is mutually useful to nego-
tiate—for example, the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. On the other
hand, we are trying to strengthen ourselves where it is necessary, and
we have done a great deal, for example, in regard to NATO.
“Beyond that we are trying to develop stronger relationships with
various regional powers which do feel threatened by the Soviet Union
and which, if encouraged and supported, can themselves help to pro-
vide overall global stability. Last but not least, we are enhancing our
own long-term relationship with the People’s Republic of China as a
contribution to global stability.
“I don’t believe we are wringing our hands. I think we are trying to
respond responsibly to a complicated and difficult challenge.” (Depart-
ment of State Bulletin, July 1978, pages 27–28)
In his memoirs, Brzezinski noted that President Jimmy Carter ex-
pressed concern over his appearance on “Meet the Press.” On the
morning of May 29, the President informed Brzezinski that he “went
too far” in placing blame on the Soviet Union. Brzezinski recounted:
“He went on to say that my comments might even threaten de´tente
and he was wondering whether he shouldn’t write a letter to Brezhnev
