1190 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI beginning of the atomic age. For many years, this goal was elusive, as the number and potency of such weapons continued to increase. Earlier attempts at limiting such arms managed only temporarily to slow their increase. On June 29, 1982, the United States and the Soviet Union began the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks in Geneva. The announced U.S. goal was to achieve deep reductions in the most destabilizing systems of strategic offensive arms. The U.S. sought a verifiable agreement that would enhance stability and reduce the risk of war. With various interruptions, the talks continued for the next nine years, supplemented by several ministerials at Geneva, Washington, Houston and Moscow, and Summit meetings in Geneva in 1985, Reykjavik in 1986, Washington in 1987, Moscow in 1988, Malta in 1989, and Washington in 1990. On July 31, 1991, the Treaty was signed at the Moscow Summit. In addition to the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the Department of State, representatives of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Intelligence Community, the Department of Energy, and the Department of Justice all played important roles in its development. Throughout the negotiating process, the United States consulted and worked extensively with its NATO allies in preparation of its positions in the negotiations. The Senate has also been regularly advised on U.S. goals and objectives in strategic arms reduction and the progress of the negotiations. CENTRAL LIMITS At the core of the Treaty is the obligation undertaken to reduce and limit ICBMs, ICBM launchers, SLBMs, SLBM launchers, heavy bombers, ICBM warheads, SLBM warheads, and heavy bomber armaments, such that, seven years after entry into force of the Treaty, the aggregate numbers of each of the Parties do not exceed: 1600 for deployed ICBMs and their associated launchers (including 154 for deployed heavy ICBMs and their associated launchers), deployed SLBMs and their associated launchers, and deployed heavy bombers; and 6000 for warheads attributed to deployed ICBMs, deployed SLBMs, and deployed heavy bombers; including 4900 for warheads attributed to deployed ICBMs and deployed SLBMs, of which no more than 1100 can be attributed to deployed ICBMs on mobile launchers of ICBMs, and no more than 1540 attributed to deployed heavy ICBMs. The Treaty provides for the reductions to take place in three phases—36, 60 and 84 months after entry into force of the Treaty— with separate aggregate limits for the first two phases, culminating in achievement of the full limits by the end of the third phase. (As you
