Human Rights presently responding adequately to communications in the human rights area and need to develop a means of obtaining assistance of experts from other Federal agencies and the private sector to respond to questionnaires and other requests for information as well as individual complaints alleging violations of human rights. Ideas explored include contracting for expert assistance with individuals, developing a working relationship with the international law and criminal justice human rights committees of the American Bar Association, and establishing formal relationships with other Federal agencies under which they will agree to provide responses for the Department of State to forward to the UN. It was also agreed that we need to investigate the establishment of a more effective means of monitoring U.S. compliance with the human rights conventions. 13. It was recognized that U.S. human rights initiatives will be inevitably undermined by the U.S. failure to ratify most of the existing human rights conventions. It was agreed that a paper should be developed to urge the administration to make ratification of the Genocide Convention an immediate priority for the next Congress. 14. We decided that the U.S. should participate fully in the 30th anniversary commemoration of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. A prominent U.S. citizen active in the U.S. civil and human rights movement will be invited to deliver the U.S. address during the commemorative meeting that will be presided over by the Secretary General to celebrate the 30th anniversary in December. We will submit U.S. nominees for the award of the UN human rights prizes in connection with the commemoration, and will be participating in the 30th anniversary seminar on national and local institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights in September. Plans for an appropriate national commemoration, possibly involving the President, are being developed. 15. This summary of the decisions taken regarding possible human rights initiatives at our August 9th meeting to review the human rights scope paper is provided for your information and comment only and does not constitute instructions to pursue the initiatives discussed. Specific instructions will be developed and sent following receipt of your comments and the preparation of the final draft of the scope paper containing the final decisions on human rights initiatives. Christopher
