1955  391
283.	 Letter 12 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 12
Geneva, October 13, 1955
Dear Walter:
Yesterday I received your letter of October 10. This will be a very 
short note as I have little to add to what I have already said.
Peter Colm has arrived and I am very glad to have him. He seems 
like a good man.
Received my instructions this morning for 21st meeting and again 
feel that they are excellent. I greatly appreciate your getting them to me 
in time to ponder a little before the meeting.
I do not plan to tie my presentation on implementation to their 
newspaper articles or broadcasts. I have avoided this as it simply 
opens the door for Wang to throw USIS and American newspapers 
at me, and he can almost always find something to quote to serve his 
purpose. In any event the articles so closely follow his presentation 
in the meetings that there are ample statements by him to which I 
can tie.
I am a little concerned by the questions it is suggested that I ask 
him, if necessary, under paragraph 5 of the Department’s 870. It seems 
to me that I should avoid any implication that such multilateral sub­
jects as Chincom and U.N. resolutions could be discussed here, or 
that these are matters within the control of the U.S. However, I think 
the idea of asking the questions is very good but will try to formulate 
something along these lines for use, if necessary, which avoids what I 
believe are the undesirable implications of the questions as presently 
framed.
I fear that the presentation of unaccounted for military personnel 
at this stage would fuzz my position on priority for renunciation of 
force, and I am, therefore, reluctant to make it at tomorrow’s meeting. 
On the other hand, I don’t want Wang to so freeze his position on this 
that he is obliged to reject the lists when I hand them to him. Therefore, 
I will play it by ear and make the decision at the meeting as to what I 
will do.
Chincom people have been very helpful in giving me infor­
mation on their present negotiations in Paris. Certainly the present 
moment would be the worst possible time to release the Chincom 
controls, but I can see that the pressures are extremely strong. What 
I have trouble thinking through is how effectively to relate what 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
