74 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 1. You will have seen statements by President Carter and Secretary Vance5 making clear that a firm commitment to the promotion of human rights is an integral part of US foreign policy. Posts have also received texts of Deputy Secretary Christopher’s March 7 testimony on human rights.6 You should, of course, draw on them in discussions of this issue. 2. The Soviet Union and some other countries have attacked our recent expressions of concern over human rights violations as interference in their internal affairs. Soviet reasoning has no basis in international law—emphatically do have the right to make these statements. Posts may, as appropriate, draw on following to counter claims that USG statements on human rights constitute interference or intervention in internal affairs in other countries: —As President Carter said in his March 17 speech to the UN,7 “All the signatories of the UN Charter have pledged themselves to observe and respect basic human rights. Thus, no member of the United Nations can claim that mistreatment of its citizens is solely its own business. Equally, no member can avoid its responsibilities to review and to speak when torture or unwarranted deprivation of freedom occurs in any part of the world.” —The UN Charter legally obligates UN members as well as the organization itself to promote “universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion” (Articles 55 and 56). 5 Presumable reference to remarks made by Vance at his January 31 press conference; see footnote 3, Document 18. During his February 4 press conference, Vance commented: “Sometimes we will speak out in public, believing that to be the most appropriate and forceful way to make our position clear. In other cases, as I have indicated before, we will use quiet diplomacy, and it will be a mixture that will have to be determined by us on a case-by-case basis.” (Department of State Bulletin, March 28, 1977, p. 277) In response to a question asked during his February 23 press conference (see footnote 3, Document 19) regarding assistance to victims of political repression, the President noted: “So, I think that we all ought to take a position in our country and among our friends and allies, among our potential adversaries, that human rights is something on which we should bear a major responsibility for leadership. And I have made it clear to the Soviet Union and to others in the Eastern European Community that I am not trying to launch a unilateral criticism of them; that I am trying to set a standard in our own country and make my concerns expressed throughout the world, not singled out against any particular country.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, February 28, 1977, p. 245) 6 See footnote 4 above. The text of Christopher’s testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee’s Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance is printed in Department of State Bulletin, February 21, 1977, pp. 289–291. A February 18 Policy Planning Staff draft narrative outline on human rights, which Vogelgesang prepared in advance of Christopher’s appearance, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff— Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 2/16–28/77. 7 See Document 26.
