74
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
1. You will have seen statements by President Carter and Secretary
Vance5 making clear that a firm commitment to the promotion of
human rights is an integral part of US foreign policy. Posts have also re-
ceived texts of Deputy Secretary Christopher’s March 7 testimony on
human rights.6 You should, of course, draw on them in discussions of
this issue.
2. The Soviet Union and some other countries have attacked our re-
cent expressions of concern over human rights violations as interfer-
ence in their internal affairs. Soviet reasoning has no basis in interna-
tional law—emphatically do have the right to make these statements.
Posts may, as appropriate, draw on following to counter claims that
USG statements on human rights constitute interference or interven-
tion in internal affairs in other countries:
—As President Carter said in his March 17 speech to the UN,7 “All
the signatories of the UN Charter have pledged themselves to observe
and respect basic human rights. Thus, no member of the United Na-
tions can claim that mistreatment of its citizens is solely its own
business. Equally, no member can avoid its responsibilities to review
and to speak when torture or unwarranted deprivation of freedom
occurs in any part of the world.”
—The UN Charter legally obligates UN members as well as the or-
ganization itself to promote “universal respect for, and observance of,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language, or religion” (Articles 55 and 56).
5 Presumable reference to remarks made by Vance at his January 31 press confer-
ence; see footnote 3, Document 18. During his February 4 press conference, Vance com-
mented: “Sometimes we will speak out in public, believing that to be the most appro-
priate and forceful way to make our position clear. In other cases, as I have indicated
before, we will use quiet diplomacy, and it will be a mixture that will have to be deter-
mined by us on a case-by-case basis.” (Department of State Bulletin, March 28, 1977,
p. 277) In response to a question asked during his February 23 press conference (see foot-
note 3, Document 19) regarding assistance to victims of political repression, the President
noted: “So, I think that we all ought to take a position in our country and among our
friends and allies, among our potential adversaries, that human rights is something on
which we should bear a major responsibility for leadership. And I have made it clear to
the Soviet Union and to others in the Eastern European Community that I am not trying
to launch a unilateral criticism of them; that I am trying to set a standard in our own
country and make my concerns expressed throughout the world, not singled out against
any particular country.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, February 28, 1977,
p. 245)
6 See footnote 4 above. The text of Christopher’s testimony before the Senate For-
eign Relations Committee’s Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance is printed in Depart-
ment of State Bulletin, February 21, 1977, pp. 289–291. A February 18 Policy Planning Staff
draft narrative outline on human rights, which Vogelgesang prepared in advance of
Christopher’s appearance, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—
Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL
2/16–28/77.
7 See Document 26.
