256
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
82.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the President’s Assistant
(Watson)1
Washington, December 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Foreign Economic Policy Coordination
I have just learned that in September the President asked Mike Blu-
menthal to work with Jim Schlesinger, Charlie Schultze, Dick Cooper
and others on a review of the US balance of payments situation.2 Subse-
quently, Mike, Charlie and Cy Vance sent the President separate
memos outlining possible policy responses for dealing with our trade
and current account deficit.3 I did not receive these memos and so did
not have an opportunity to comment on important policy recommen-
dations. The President then met with a group on November 23 to re-
view the situation.4 I only became aware of this exercise because Cy
Vance’s memo of December 1 was routed to the NSC for action.
Foreign economic policy, including trade and monetary matters, is
an important aspect of overall US foreign policy. I would like, in the fu-
ture, to receive copies of all memos going to the President on these sub-
jects, so that I can have an opportunity to comment on them. I would
also like to have Henry Owen, who is working on this range of issues
with me, to be invited to attend meetings, such as the one that took
place on November 23.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 16, Economic Assistance Strategy: 10/77–5/78. No classification marking. Sent to
Brzezinski for his signature under cover of a December 9 memorandum from Owen, who
wrote: “As we discussed on the phone, we have prepared memos for your signature to
Jack Watson, Rick Hutcheson and Tim Kraft asking that they take appropriate steps to as-
sure that you (1) receive copies of all memos sent to the President concerning foreign eco-
nomic policy and (2) are invited to meetings where such policy issues are discussed.”
(Ibid.) The December 12 memoranda to Hutcheson and Kraft, initialed by Brzezinski, are
attached but not printed. (Ibid.)
2 Not further identified, but see Document 66.
3 Blumenthal’s memorandum to Carter is Document 66. Schultze presented his
views in a November 15 memorandum to Carter entitled “Secretary Blumenthal’s Memo
on the U.S. Balance of Payments and Proposed Measures to Reduce It.” Vance offered his
views to Carter in a December 1 memorandum entitled “The U.S. Balance of Payments.”
Eizenstat and Schirmer also submitted a memorandum to Carter on the issue, dated No-
vember 19 and entitled “Analysis of Blumenthal Memo: Balance of Payments.” All three
memoranda are in the Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presi-
dential File, Box 60, 11/23/77 [1].
4 No minutes of this meeting, which took place from 11:35 a.m. until 12:05 p.m. in
the Cabinet Room, were found. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily
Diary)
