170 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement BL–14. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1  Washington, October 24, 1958. SUBJECT Attempted Rightist Coup in Bolivia Facts: On October 21 the rightist Bolivia Socialist Falange Party (FSB) attempted a revolt at La Paz. Armed units attacked public buildings and the homes of some high government officials and leaders of the National Revolutionary Movement (MNR), the Government party. Some Carabinero (police) units apparently were involved in the abortive coup and the chief of the Carabineros is under arrest. Three persons were reported killed and several injured, but no American citizens were hurt. President Siles decreed a nation-­wide state of siege, and the Congress authorized its implementation. Since the revolt, MNR civilian militias have been patrolling the streets of La Paz. The Minister of Government subsequently announced that over 100 persons were under arrest, and both students’ and teachers’ federations are threatening to strike if their members under arrest are not released. There are reports that last minute efforts to postpone the revolt were successful in all but one suburb of La Paz. The Communists and Lechín, head of the mine workers, claim the Government is responsible for the discontent which the reactionaries tried to utilize. Lechín has organized “emergency committees” for the “defense of the working classes.” La Paz and the rest of the country appears to be quiet and censorship imposed on October 21 ended two days later. Background: The FSB, the second strongest party in Bolivia, consists of extreme right wing elements and finds some support among the middle class and the military and police forces. It has been plotting to overthrow the Government since the MNR’s assumption of power in 1952, and as recently as last May it staged an unsuccessful uprising. Recently, the FSB has become associated with a loose coalition of small opposition 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Bolivia 1958.” Confidential. Co-­drafted by Ernest V. [illegible in the original], Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs, and Henry L. Pitts. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
