North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
999
most certainly require some form of direct U.S. contribution to the
Fund. We should only take a firm position on this issue, however, after
Congressional consultation (which we would undertake immediately
after passage of the aid bill) has given us some view as to the chances of
Congressional ratification.7
7 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation and wrote: “See H Owen
Memo. J.”
315.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, August 18, 1978
A Possible Orientation to North/South Issues in 1979
This memorandum suggests a possible orientation for the Carter
Administration to North/South issues in 1979. It concentrates on two
issues, and does not purport to be comprehensive.
Since 1974 we have been on the defensive in the North/South de-
bate. To a great extent this is inherent in the character of the debate,
since the G–77 are the demandeurs, and we are the defenders, if not of
the status quo at least of the essentials of the existing international eco-
nomic system. By any historical standard this system has served most
countries—including most developing countries—exceedingly well.
Nonetheless, it would be desirable for us to regain the initiative. To
do so, we should play from our strengths. Apart from our economic
size and our military might, traditionally the two strongest elements of
the American position in the world, as seen by others as well as by our-
selves, have been our leadership in moral and humane values (in par-
ticular, our commitment to freedom of the individual and our defense
of his rights against the state and other large impersonal entities) and
our technological prowess. The President’s early emphasis on the im-
portance of human rights as an element of American foreign policy,
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
81D134, Box 3, E Memorandum’s from RNC to Secretary, Deputy Secretary, 78. Confi-
dential. A stamped notation at the bottom of the first page reads: “CV.” Vance underlined
portions of the memorandum.
