936
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
for Begin and his admiration for Begin’s political courage, interspersed
with admonitions that we should not harass Begin in present circum-
stances. He said that even on issues where they disagreed, Begin was
amiable but seemed fatigued. They had not agreed on a specific time
for a next meeting, Sadat said, but he had invited Begin to stop in Egypt
on his way back from the U.S. in November and Begin had accepted the
invitation. Sadat spoke in glowing terms about his reception in Haifa
by both Jews and Arabs, describing Haifa as a model for coexistence in
the region.5
4. In discussing the future, Sadat made several points which he de-
scribed as important and asked that we note carefully. Saying that he
and Begin had not reached any agreement on the basic issues of full au-
tonomy and Jerusalem, Sadat said, “until now I have built bridges with
Begin; now is the time for the United States to take over.” At another
point, he asked us to note carefully his comment on Israeli television
that “instead of conflict, we now have differences of opinion.” Sadat
said he and Begin agreed that Camp David and the peace treaty are the
cornerstones for comprehensive peace and should be “consolidated
every day.” He said he had told Begin, “let us agree that, no matter
what, we will stick to Camp David and the Peace Treaty; we cannot go
back.”
5. Toward the end of the meeting, stressing that we should note
this carefully, Sadat said: “I ask you to resume your full partnership
role. You should start convincing Begin, but you should not press him.”
Sadat said that as our friend and partner, he advised us to try to help
Begin. We should ease Israeli suspicions. It is necessary, Sadat said, to
give directives to the delegations in the autonomy talks so that they can
make progress by the end of the year. Begin had said, though “not in an
aggressive way”, that he was not yet ready for this and in any case the
negotiations have until next May to achieve results. Sadat said that he
and Begin alone cannot agree on such directives, but this could be ac-
complished if the United States would help Begin. The United States,
he said, must put forward its plans; the time had come for the United
5 In telegram 18883 from Cairo, September 15, Atherton reported two additional de-
tails of the September 9 Strauss-Sadat meeting. Atherton noted that during the meeting,
Sadat said he had told Begin in Haifa that once Israel had withdrawn to the interim line,
travelers from Gaza to Egypt would no longer need the Red Cross to serve as an interme-
diary in facilitating travel. Sadat also described a conversation with Weizman while
passing over Qalqilya during his flight from Haifa to Ben Gurion airport. Weizman,
Sadat said, had “pointed out the narrow strip of Israel between Qalqilya and the sea as an
example of Israel’s security problem with respect to the West Bank. Sadat commented to
Strauss that Weizman was right; ‘You can throw a stone from Qalqilya to the sea.’ Sadat
then commented that minor rectifications of the border are possible under Resolution
242, and this area is mainly where such rectifications should take place.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 43, Robert Strauss, Middle
East, 9/9–15/79)
