December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 653 on the language in Article 6–5 on ad referendum basis. Later Foreign Minister Dayan said that this meant the Egyptian-Israeli treaty prevailed over other treaties. Once this was said, Egypt raised questions and pointed out that this was contrary to the negotiating history. Therefore, they asked for an interpretive note. Prime Minister Begin: This is unacceptable to us. It interprets away what is written. What is written is that if there is conflict between the obligations under this treaty and other obligations, this treaty would be implemented and binding. This is the weakest of all the formulations, but it must be included. This note would let Egypt join any war against Israel. They would reserve their right to interpret what is aggression in the case of an Israeli war with any Arab country. This is not a matter of legal formulations. Mr. Rosenne: We reached agreement with Mr. Atherton on the note26 of a legal opinion that would be given to the Israeli Government, but Egypt did not agree to that note. We did not see your note to them. Some thought that this could solve the problem. Prime Minister Begin: I prefer that both letters be nullified. We should not have letters from the United States which contradict each other. The letter to Israel is contradictory to the letter offered to Egypt. The United States should be careful not to do this. This is my advice as a friend. President Carter: They are not in contradiction. Secretary Vance: I would not sign such letters. Prime Minister Begin: It is better to forget both letters. Egypt should hear that the letter you gave them is null. Secretary Vance: On paragraph 2 of Article 6, an attempt was made to find language to indicate that all of this is part of the search for a comprehensive peace. This was not made to nullify this treaty or to give any party a right to do so. The language that is there does not do this. Mr. Rosenne: In our second meeting at Camp David, different language was put forward. The draft27 now presented is identical to the December 13 Egyptian proposal. It was unacceptable to us then. Secretary Vance: I have been trying to find a way to help. I have been breaking my back doing so. We made changes in this draft, and you rejected all of them, so I came back to this draft without making any special reference to paragraph 2 of Article 6. I thought this might help. I have run out of ways to help. You have rejected everything. 26 See footnote 3, Document 169. 27 See footnote 5, Document 182.
