El Salvador 629 ES–32. Memorandum of Discussion at the 466th Meeting of the National Security Council1  Monday, November 7, 1960 [Here follows discussion of agenda items 1–4, concerning outer space programs, Cuba, significant world events affecting U.S. security (Sino-Soviet clash, Laos El Salvador), and Algeria. Portions printed below are from the merged discussion of items 3 and 4.] Dealing next with El Salvador, General Cabell said that the Communists and pro-Castro forces were making a strong bid for power. Ex-President Osorio, who had used these forces as a means of getting back to power, had appointed pro-Communists and pro-Castro individuals to the Cabinet and other posts. Osorio thought he could control these elements but they have moved quickly to reinforce their position. They have appointed Communists and pro-Communists to second and third echelon positions in the government and were moving in on information and propaganda media. They are also demanding removal of all Osorio’s supporters. Osorio hopes to rule El Salvador indirectly until the 1952 elections. He says that he cannot consider plans to restrict the extreme Left because he needs their support to get action on certain reform measures. The army was apprehensive and a group of officers had plans for salvaging the dominant position of the military. They must act quickly, however, if their action is to be effective. General Cabell suggested that control of El Salvador by pro-Castro elements would pose a series threat to Guatemala. [Here follows discussion of possible Soviet intervention in Algeria.] Secretary Merchant went on to point out that the U.S. had not yet recognized the new government in El Salvador although we are considering the matter on a 24-­hour basis. We had thought it unwise to recognize the government in view of the possibility of a counter-­coup by conservative elements in the army. This was a difficult choice. The question was whether recognition would strengthen the reasonable elements in the government despite the fact that Leftist elements were honeycombing the government. Secretary Merchant expressed the view that Osorio may well have been double-­crossed. He said that a decision would be needed within the next 24–72 hours. If we waited too long and there was no counter-­coup, we would lose our ability to influence those who are our friends in the existing government. 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Eyes Only. This memorandum was prepared by Robert H. Johnson, Director of the NSC Planning Board Secretariat, on November 8, 1960. The source text contains a list of 27 attendees.
