Afghanistan tion if these recur. In public comment, the Pakistan Government officially denies that it is arming or assisting insurgents in Afghanistan, although it acknowledges that it cannot effectively control movement across the border by Afghan tribals. Zia has asked our Station Chief in Islamabad to inform Washington that he does not intend to raise “sensitive intelligence cooperation projects” during his visit. We suggest that during your private meeting with Zia, you simply indicate your admiration for his willingness to support the Afghan insurgents and our intention to continue cooperation in ways and at a level agreeable to him and that you not go into details.4 Stan Turner’s people will be standing by in the event that any detailed discussions are necessary. 4 See Document 326. 323. Interagency Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 [memorandum number not declassified] Washington, October 1980 [Omitted here are a title page, cover page, table of contents, preface, and a photograph.] KEY JUDGMENTS The USSR’s invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 provided a rare opportunity to test the efficacy of the US warning system in situations involving substantial movements of the Soviets’ armed forces outside their borders. Moreover, it afforded a chance to examine the behavior of the Soviet military in preparing for such an undertaking and to determine what implications this might have for the Intelligence Community’s capacity to provide warning in other situations, especially one involving a Warsaw Pact move against NATO. [classification marking not declassified] 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, History Staff Files. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. The preface to the memorandum notes: “This Interagency Intelligence Memorandum was commissioned by the Director of Central Intelligence in response to a request by the National Security Council for an assessment of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan to determine if there were any general implications for the US warning system or any particular implications for the system’s ability to warn of a Warsaw Pact move against NATO.”
