721.2315/169: Telegram
[Document 287]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
WASHINGTON, February 27, 1925—4 p.m.
5. Your 5, February 26, 4 p.m. Department officially advised by Brazilian Chargé that
he has instructions to sign Procès Verbal. Chargé also informed by his Government that
it is telegraphing this information to Brazilian Chargé in Lima. You will please advise
President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of above. Peruvian Ambassador has received
telegram from his Government saying it has been advised from Rio that he (Velarde)
has accepted Procès Verbal and asking explanation. In order to avoid any possible
misunderstanding please endeavor to have Brazilian Chargé accompany you to
President and Minister for Foreign Affairs and advise them that his Government has
instructed Brazilian Chargé in Washington to sign the agreement. Cable when this is
done.
Your last paragraph. Peruvian Ambassador called on Secretary of State on December
12, 3 p.m.,10 and stated that difficulty had arisen with respect to the boundary
explaining that Brazil had taken exception to Peruvian-Colombian treaty on the ground
that it affected her rights. He stated that Peru was very desirous that the whole matter
should be harmoniously adjusted and knowing the wish of the Government of the
United States to do all in its power to promote friendly relations in Latin America the
Ambassador asked if the Secretary would look into the question and see if some
suggestion could be made which would provide a harmonious solution. The Secretary
of State said that he greatly appreciated the Ambassador’s suggestion; that the
Government of the United States did not desire to interfere in matters in which it was
not concerned, but that the Government was always desirous to aid by its friendly
offices in the settlement of differences when other governments so desired. The
Secretary said that he would look into the matter with which he was already to some
extent conversant and that within a short time he would ask the Ambassador to come in
and talk it over. The Ambassador expressed his appreciation.
The Colombian and Brazilian Governments formally requested this Government’s good
offices11 and on the basis thereof the proposal was made which is now before the
Peruvian Government.
The Peruvian Ambassador today confirmed the above statement, as made under explicit
instructions from his Government. This Government is therefore much surprised at and
