Non-Proliferation
963
Since 1977, the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE),
which you initiated, and bilateral discussions have provided us and
others with better perceptions of both the problems and possible
solutions.
Several things have become clear:
1. We are seen to be an unreliable supplier and ambivalent about
nuclear power.2 Alternate suppliers are emerging and our influence
over nuclear trade and programs is becoming increasingly limited. Our
influence over reprocessing and plutonium use is particularly limited
in that we lack consent rights regarding EURATOM countries and
cannot politically treat Japan less favorably than Europe.
2. While for domestic reasons many nuclear programs have been
slowed in recent years and the proliferation dangers inherent in pluto-
nium based fuel cycles are now better perceived (in large part as a re-
sult of U.S. efforts), breeder and advanced reactor options are still per-
ceived to be of great importance by major countries in Europe and
Japan. These programs will continue even if we do not agree; their im-
portance is affirmed by INFCE. To the extent U.S. policy attempts to in-
terfere with these programs, it is seen to threaten these countries’ en-
ergy security.3
3. The NPT regime is the foundation of nonproliferation policy but
is increasingly attacked by countries who see nuclear suppliers as not
keeping their part of the bargain—“fullest possible exchange . . . for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.” U.S. policy is singled out as particu-
larly damaging.
4. We need to develop a joint strategy with the major suppliers
(our allies with the most advanced nuclear programs—UK, France,
FRG, Japan) to (a) improve the nonproliferation regime and (b) agree
on criteria for plutonium uses and related reprocessing.
5. We need also to make NPT or equivalent (Tlatelolco) obligations
more attractive, provide greater supply assurances to countries ac-
2 Vance underlined the phrase “an unreliable supplier and ambivalent about nu-
clear power” and wrote in the left-hand margin next to this paragraph: “You need to tell
us whether we are unreliable because of Exec. branch policy, because of Cong. legislation
or both—Being unreliable may not be as bad as giving materials which lead countries to
have capabilities without safeguards.”
3 Vance underlined the words “their importance is affirmed by INFCE” and “inter-
fere” in this paragraph. In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Vance wrote “in
preparation for this meeting you need a brief summary of INFCE conclusion and a com-
ment as to why we were not successful in convincing people of our views on the dangers.
This summary could either be a TAB, or if short enough in the talker. Do we now accept
the INFCE conclusion? Do we accept that interference threatens their energy security?”
An unknown hand wrote “in part.”
