1979  709
156.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National  
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy 
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, September 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Strategic Aircraft Programs (U)
With the M–X decision process completed, the next big strategic 
force posture issue is the future of the air-­breathing leg of the Triad. It 
ranks along with strategic C3I in importance and dependence on basic 
decisions about doctrine. By contrast the future of the SSBN force is not 
so pressing. In the early 1980s we shall have to decide on Trident II and 
the possible need for a smaller SSBN. But we should not enter the 1980s 
without a firm planning concept for strategic aircraft. (C)
The questions being asked now include the following:
—We shall definitely need a follow-­on to the B–52 as a cruise mis-
sile carrier. But when and what design?
—Do we need a new manned penetrator? When? What design?
—What are the tanker implications?
—Should we design advanced strategic aircraft to accomplish 
other missions, like conventional bombing, sea-­control, and bomber 
defense? (C)
The timing of fiscal constraints and technological opportunities is 
of concern. By 1984, M–X will be eating up a large piece of the strate-
gic budget and there is some incentive to load a new strategic aircraft 
program into earlier years. This argument has been used on behalf of 
the FB–111 B/C and derivations of the B–1 design. On the other hand, 
living a bit longer on the B–52’s may permit us to exploit newer tech-
nology for the strategic aircraft fleet of the 1990s, especially interesting 
because the penetration problem is expected to get very severe. (C)
It is clear, whatever the course and timing chosen, we’ll want high-­
performance airframes. Base-­escape requirements and the possibility of 
very long-­legged Soviet air defenses2 probably rule out the application 
of a wide-­body commercial design as the cruise missile carrier for the 
late 1980s and 1990s. The Air Force can be expected to push for the 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 6, B–1: 7/77–9/79. Confidential. Outside the System. Sent for information.
2 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to the portion of this para-
graph that begins with “It is clear” and ends with “long-­legged Soviet air defenses.”
