Human Rights
37
11.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, February 8, 1977
PARTICIPANTS
Rep. Donald Fraser (D-Minn)
Lucy Wilson Benson—T
Robert Boettcher, Fraser’s Staff
John Salzberg, Fraser’s Staff
Ann Swift—H
SUBJECT
Human Rights and Security Assistance
Mrs. Benson called on Rep. Donald Fraser at his request to discuss
the security assistance program and human rights. After a brief discus-
sion of Mrs. Benson’s new responsibilities, the conversation turned to
the Carter Administration’s ongoing consideration of security assist-
ance levels.
Rep. Fraser agreed that the Administration was making a good
start in the human rights field; but voiced his concern that unless
human rights concerns are somehow institutionalized into the system,
the initial momentum of the new Administration will be lost and the
bureaucracy will return to its old habits.2 It is easy to talk about human
rights, but many of the decisions stemming from human rights con-
cerns, such as program level cuts, are very hard to make. Officers at the
lower levels of the Department must be willing to push human rights.3
Rep. Fraser said he would like to see the Administration take a
zero-base-budget type of approach to the security assistance levels. He
suggested that since country figures submitted in the CPD are not firm
anyway, that a CPD could be submitted with only an overall request
and a statement that the new Administration was reviewing the secu-
rity assistance program levels with several considerations in mind, in-
cluding human rights, and that country levels would be set after these
determinations had been made.
Mrs. Benson discussed generally the Administration’s commit-
ment to human rights and said she would like to see the development
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
1976–1977 Human Rights Subject Files and Country Files, Lot 80D177, PGOV—Congres-
sional. No classification marking. Drafted by Swift on February 10. The meeting took
place in Fraser’s office in the Rayburn House Office Building.
2 An unknown hand underlined the portion of this sentence that begins with “of the
new Administration” and wrote in the margin: “I resent!”
3 An unknown hand underlined this sentence.
