Now the invitation extended to Germany by the United States cannot be construed in any light other than as a confession that the traditional American policy as to China was merely a pretense and that the conference at Washington was only a selfish association for the purpose of division of special interests and rights. The Nine-Power Treaty contains but a general statement of principles for China’s liberation, while in the Sino-German agreement in which these principles are carried out in fact, China has recovered her complete freedom. Therefore the American invitation to Germany, which is difficult to understand, is nothing less than encouragement to Germany to put China into further bondage and opposition to China’s recovering her absolute freedom. This step by the American Government is tantamount to completely reversing their traditional policy for more than ten years and by it the United States is placed among those powers which are endeavoring to fetter the free development and liberation of China. For a power known as the exponent of justice and right this is surely inadvisable. If Germany adheres to the Nine-Power Treaty there is no question that it will amount to a nullification of the Sino-German agreement and, solely because of this invitation which the United States extended, the equal and reciprocal agreements between Germany and China will go overboard. What is to become of the earlier boasted international right, morality, and justice. The friendly sentiment of the Chinese people will be surely lost to the Americans, and, without it, American trade in China is certain to sustain a serious setback. Therefore, in the interest of Americans themselves there should be a most careful and serious reconsideration of the whole matter. 3. Wang has evidently deemed it opportune, in the absence of reply to his formal representations, to begin his agitation at the moment we are receiving some adverse criticism because of an altercation Sunday at a skating carnival when two marines of the Legation Guard not in uniform exchanged blows with certain Chinese. The incident itself was trivial except as a basis for agitation. However, there is among students and in certain
