Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
215
African reality is incredibly diverse. But out of this diversity comes
a general fact of great importance: Africa has an enormous potential—
in human talent, in resources to be developed, in energy to be
harnessed.
Let us consider how this is true in terms of our own national in-
terests; for Africa’s potential is tied to our own.
—The success or failure of the search for racial justice and peace in
southern Africa will have profound effects among the American
people. And our participation in that search is based on the values of
our own society.
—The role of the African nations at the United Nations, and in
other multilateral bodies, is pivotal. One-third of the U.N. member
states are African.
—Africa’s mineral and agricultural wealth already provides a sub-
stantial portion of our imports of such commodities as copper, cobalt,
and manganese for our industries, and cocoa and coffee for our homes.
And Africa supplies 38 percent of our crude petroleum imports.
—Our direct investment in sub-Saharan Africa has increased
nearly sixfold over the past 15 years; our trade now is almost 12 times
what it was then. And the pattern of our trade with Africa includes an
even larger share for black Africa. Trade with South Africa in 1960 was
39 percent of our commerce with Africa; now, our trade with Nigeria
alone is double the value of that with South Africa.
—Beyond these political and economic ties that bind our futures,
there are the social and cultural links from which we have benefited
greatly. Our society and culture are enriched by the heritage so many
Americans find in Africa. We experience this enrichment every day—in
our literature, our art, our music, and our social values.
During the past few months, as we have considered the specific
policies I will discuss today, a number of broad points have emerged.
They define the general nature of our approach.
First, the most effective policies toward Africa are affirmative policies.
They should not be reactive to what other powers do, nor to crises as
they arise. Daily headlines should not set our agenda for progress. A
negative, reactive American policy that seeks only to oppose Soviet or
Cuban involvement in Africa would be both dangerous and futile. Our
best course is to help resolve the problems which create opportunities
for external intervention.
Second, our objective must be to foster a prosperous and strong Africa
that is at peace with itself and at peace with the world. The long-term success
of our African policy will depend more on our actual assistance to Af-
rican development and our ability to help Africans resolve their dis-
putes than on maneuvers for short-term diplomatic advantage.
