Afghanistan 813 meeting you indicated that it didn’t matter whether the Paks would like the idea of our consulting with Congress with the attendant leaks. It could matter very much if the Paks found it necessary to repudiate the position that we had taken with the Congress. We don’t need another affair like that. (C) 8. DOD is supposed to come in with a pricing for the military equipment package that State postulated. (See my comment on the general pricing question, below.) Press State on the question of rapid funding in an emergency—especially if the Saudis are uncooperative. (C) 9. Make sure that contingency planning proceeds apace between State and DOD—chaired, if necessary, by Odom.5 (S) 10. Perhaps the single most important specific thing you can do for US- Pakistani relations at this meeting is to raise the issue of price quotations on F–15s.6 (You will have to raise it; State won’t.) The Paks have asked us how much 40 or so F–15s would cost. State is unwilling to tell them (or if so, to tell them in a negative way) on the grounds that by quoting prices we are conveying a willingness to sell. That is nonsense, if we make ourselves clear to the Paks. They need data for planning purposes and if we want to be seen as a credible friend to them, this is the minimum we can do. The country director, just returned from a trip to Pakistan, underscores this as the most important single item pending with Pakistan. (S) 11. Further to the question of whether to tell Zia where the Persian Gulf is: According to a CIA report, Zia told the Chinese that “The US appeared to be interested in the security of the Persian Gulf but not of Pakistan.” This reflects his apparent assumption that Pakistan is not included in the US security perimeter. (S) Attachment List of Recommended Actions7 Washington, undated Suggested Follow-up Actions 1—State and DOD refine the paper on intermediate level contingencies and diplomatic/military responses. 5 Thornton placed a star in the left margin beside this paragraph. 6 Thornton placed a star in the left margin beside this sentence. 7 No classification marking.
