3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
662
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
thing was viewed with a certain lackadaisical attitude, as if this was
simply a minor social or diplomatic matter. After all, if one took an ob-
jective look at everything achieved in Vienna, particularly the treaty
signed in Vienna which was of enormous importance, this present
matter would appear in true perspective as a tiny bug, moreover as a
tiny bug presented in an incorrect light.
Gromyko said he could understand that certain domestic consider-
ations might have influenced the Secretary’s actions but he would ask,
how did this concern the Soviet Union? It was a different country, after
all. The Soviet leadership preferred to view all these matters from a
statesmanlike perspective and from the perspective of the relations be-
tween the two major powers in the world. If we were to embark upon
the path of trying to adjust to each other’s domestic political squabbles,
tendencies, and trends, then both countries would lose control of for-
eign policy and the ship of Soviet-American relations would surely
flounder on the rocks. That could have gloomy and dangerous conse-
quences indeed. Why proceed in that manner? We need to keep our re-
lations on an even keel, and not seek to create entirely unnecessary
complications.
Gromyko said that just before leaving Moscow he had a conversa-
tion with Brezhnev, in the course of which Brezhnev had spelled out
very clearly and lucidly the thoughts Gromyko had just presented, and
had asked that these views be conveyed to President Carter. Gromyko
would emphasize again that the Soviet Union had no malicious inten-
tions toward the United States and would ask where any individual
could be found who was so naive or myopic as to believe that a small
training unit was a grave threat to the security of the United States. In
the Soviet Union, at least, there were no such people.
At the same time, Gromyko wanted to use this opportunity to
convey Brezhnev’s best wishes and regards to the President and to the
Secretary personally, and Gromyko would join in presenting his best
wishes and regards.
The Secretary said he would convey this message to President
Carter. He would now want to respond to the substance of Gromyko’s
remarks. First, he would explain very clearly just how we had come
upon this matter and how we had acted. He wanted to make it crystal
clear that there was no ulterior motive on our side in raising this issue.
It cannot help us in any way; it can merely hurt both of us. The Secre-
tary repeated this and stressed that it could only cause a severe deterio-
ration in the relations between our two countries, which he believed
were as important to the Soviet Union as they were to us. Secondly, in
his judgment, if we did not resolve this matter satisfactorily, it would
kill the SALT treaty. We believed, as the Soviet Union did, that the
SALT treaty was a major, historic achievement of fundamental impor-
