240
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The Secretary said this is correct but that the agreement provides a
mechanism for admitting displaced persons in an orderly way. This is
to assure that they will have means of support rather than having to go
to refugee camps.
Fahd asked if the number of persons permitted to return is to be
limited.
The Secretary replied that the limit would be imposed by the com-
mission which would determine how many could return each year. He
read Fahd from the agreement:
“During the transitional period, representatives of Egypt, Israel,
Jordan, and the self-governing authority will constitute a continuing
committee to decide by agreement on the modalities of admission of
persons displaced from the West Bank and Gaza in 1967, together with
necessary measures to prevent disruption and disorder.”
Fahd asked if this provision applied only to the refugees of 1967.
The Secretary said there was another provision for earlier refugees.
He quoted the relevant paragraph:
“Egypt and Israel will work with each other and with other inter-
ested parties to establish agreed procedures for a prompt, just and per-
manent implementation of the resolution of the refugee problem.”
Fahd asked if all 1967 refugees have the right to opt to return.
The Secretary said yes, but the committee will determine the
number to return each year. The Secretary continued that he should
add that President Carter had made clear in his speech to the Congress
that all this should be in accordance with relevant United Nations
resolutions.
When the Palestinian authority takes over in the West Bank and
Gaza the Israeli military government is to be withdrawn, lock, stock
and barrel. The thousands of Israeli military personnel in the cities and
towns will be withdrawn. In our view, if the Palestinian authority con-
ducts itself responsibly this would set into motion an evolutionary
process which will enable the Palestinians to govern themselves.
The Secretary continued that we fully believe that this process,
once started, will be irreversible. At the end of five years an outcome
which meets basic Arab requirements will be almost inevitable. The
great advantage of the way this is structured is that it deals with the
West Bank and Gaza in their totality rather than talking about parti-
tioning the West Bank or Gaza.
The Secretary continued that in this document the Israelis have
recognized the “legitimate rights” of the Palestinians. The implications
of the acceptance of this principle are great and obvious. For years Is-
raelis have had trouble accepting this concept. Now they have signed a
document saying, “The solutions from the negotiations must also rec-
