International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 253 a.) This report would merely recommend that the IRS study the possibility of reducing guideline life. b.) Different industries now had different useful lives for their equipment so that there would not be an impact on other industries by changes here. c.) Reasonable assurances of modernization by the industry would help give a justification for reducing the guideline life. 2. EDA Revolving Fund of $215 million—As you are aware, OMB had significant problems with the use of a revolving fund since they correctly believe that this is contrary to good budget management and simply guarantees continuing loan guarantees with little oversight. Indeed, OMB in 1973 essentially stopped the use of this revolving fund. After a good deal of discussion it was agreed that the report would simply mention, without a dollar figure, the general use of EDA loan guarantee authority. This would permit the use of existing authority and the regular appropriations process, rather than a revolving fund.15 3. Joint Venture-Merger Guidelines—Treasury has accepted the revised language which has been drafted by the Antitrust Division of the Justice Department. There are now no disagreements in this area. 4. Tripartite Committee—You had questioned this.16 This had been suggested by the Department of Labor. Barry Bosworth was not terribly favorable to it but no one had strong objections. Tony Solomon made an excellent point that since his draft report has leaked with this recommended committee in it,17 it might seem odd to pull back on such an innocuous recommendation. 5. Other Points—You also had question marks by several of the recommendations on community and labor assistance. The $20 million from EDA is for planning grants to combat unemployment in the affected steel communities and is generally consistent with our recommendations in the trade adjustment assistance area. The recommendation regarding communities and/or worker takeover of abandoned steel facilities is merely a commitment to evaluate the results of a study proposed by certain Church groups in Youngstown and involves no commitments of funds by the Task Force.18 15 Carter wrote “Loans should be sound” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. He also underlined the last five words in the paragraph, “rather than a revolving fund,” and wrote “good” in the adjacent margin. 16 Not further identified. 17 On November 30, for example, The Wall Street Journal printed an article on the unreleased Steel Task Force report that referred to the formation of a joint labor/management/government committee. (David Ignatius, “Carter Weighs Plan to Revive Weak Steel Mills,” The Wall Street Journal, November 30, 1977, p. 2) 18 Carter underlined the words “no commitments of funds” and wrote “good” in the adjacent margin.
