Negotiating Channels
501
spare parts for military equipment, settling claims and attachments
after assets are unfrozen, Iran’s efforts to repatriate the Shah’s assets,
U.S. visas for Iranians (particularly students) and by the perception of
U.S. policies in the region, e.g., Arab-Israel, defense relationships and
the U.S.-USSR confrontation. Underlying these issues will be the ques-
tion of “acceptance of the Iranian revolution”—an Iranian psychological
need which we are unlikely to satisfy in the near term.
Steps the U.S. and Others Can Take
—Open a dialogue with Iran on outstanding bilateral issues, ini-
tially through the operation of a Joint Commission or indirect contacts.
—Work closely with the Congress and the press to create a climate
in the U.S. which recognizes the strategic importance of Iran and en-
ables the U.S. to disentangle post-hostage issues such as assets and
release of previously purchased spare parts with a minimum of friction.
—Use the Joint Commission as a forum for a political dialogue on
the Soviet threat and U.S. responses to it in the area, including our
activities in the Gulf and with Pakistan. Exchange intelligence assess-
ments on area problems such as Afghanistan.
—Encourage our allies to take a forthcoming approach to Iran on
economic and political ties with Iran, including provision of military
equipment and oil field technology.
—Make clear to the Soviets our interest in Iran’s integrity and in
non-intervention by external powers.
—Develop a dialogue with Iraq, either directly or through others,
which emphasizes our mutual interest in a stable and secure Iran.
—Strengthen our relations with Gulf states in ways that lessen
their vulnerability to revolutionary waves from Iran (e.g., dealing with
corruption, meeting legitimate needs of ethnic minorities).
—Maintain discreet relationships with a variety of Iranians who
might provide future leadership in Iran without encouraging their anti-
revolutionary activity. Avoid contact with émigré groups that have
little or no political future in Iran.
—Encourage the development of democratic forces in Iran that
will permit groups favorable to us to survive.
These last points will have a critical impact on improvement in
bilateral relations. It is important that we maintain access to possible
alternatives to the present revolutionary structure in Iran. However,
to the extent that the Iranian authorities believe that we are supporting
these dissidents or potential dissidents, it will be virtually impossible
to build a constructive relationship with the revolutionary government
