912 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement adequately protected; (d) should an attack emergency arise prior to the availability of the hardened sites, the various agencies’ relocation staffs will relocate to the OCDM underground facility at High Point, under the “Interim Plan,” to carry on essential headquarters functions under the direction of the respective agency heads or officials designated to act for them; and (e) those relocation forces at High Point will include the member and advisory agencies of the NSC (with the exception of Defense and JCS [text not declassified]—although Defense will have 3 liaison representatives at High Point under the “Interim Plan”). 4. Substantive provisions of the Emergency Relocation Plan for the NSC, which are recommended by the Planning Board, are as follows: Paragraph 2, page 1, would be revised to reflect that the wartime composition of the NSC would be statutory members and advisers with flexibility reserved to the President as to the designation of additional participants in the policy advisory function of the NSC in wartime. There is no change proposed in the presently approved concept that the President would use the NSC as his key policy advisory body under wartime conditions. The revised language proposed for paragraph 3–­b reserves com­ plete flexibility as to the relocation site to which the Vice President would proceed (and the Planning Board understands that the emer­ gency relocation site of the Vice President would most likely be one other than that to which the President might proceed). Paragraph 3–­c would be revised to reflect that NSC members and advisers would proceed to the relocation sites of their selection; and the footnote to this subparagraph refers to the Cabinet paper which reflects approval of the new Interim Emergency Relocation Plan for the Executive Branch. Also, under this paragraph, the NSC staff relocation site would be changed [text not declassified]. At that site would also be the Planning Board members, advisers, and designated observers, or their alternates. However, the Chairman of the JCS has recently recommended to the Sec­ retary of Defense that the current allocation of 22 spaces for the Planning Board and NSC Staff at the AJCC be withdrawn. If this recommendation is approved by the Secretary of Defense, provision would then have to be made for the NSC Staff and the Planning Board to relocate to the OCDM High Point site. 5. JCS views, received just prior to this meeting, take issue with para­ graph 3–­d and 3–­e of the proposed revision of the NSC Plan under which the NSC Staff and Planning Board members, advisers, and designated observers (or alternates) would relocate to the [text not declassified]. In lieu of such provision, the JCS recommend that the Plan call for (a) the NSC Staff to be relocated to the OCDM protected site [text not declassified] and (b) the Planning Board members, advisers, and designated observ­ ers to relocate to their respective agency sites and remain available on call by the Chairman of the Planning Board at such place as he might
