660 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 caching the fuel. At the same time, we are looking at the place where the Otter landed to see if that operation could be simplified. He then went on to describe the Otter landing—the fact that they had encountered three trucks, but concluding that it was a much simpler, easier operation than had been anticipated. Admiral Turner said that one of the members of the team with the Otter reported that he was on the road and could not see the Otter which had landed 100 yards away. He said that the Major who conducted the operation was confident that we could get away with it. He said that we would have to stop traffic on the road during the actual operation, but they had been successful in laying out an airstrip for the C– 130s. However, he thought the option of caching the fuel and using only helicopters was a much better option because it avoided the C– 130 overflights of Saudi Arabia. The Chairman continued by saying that we will worry most about any tip-off during the 24-hour waiting period. If we got such a tip-off, we could just go in after our people or lift ourselves out to an isolated area where we could once again recover them with the C–130s. He said he did not want to be optimistic, but if our planning looks good and our training demonstrates that the operation could be conducted, he would like to come back and seek a decision on the possibility of caching the fuel. The President asked how soon we could cache the fuel? The Chairman said in about a week, but we would like to aim for the 24th as a rescue date. Dr. Brzezinski asked, if we are inclined to do this, what would be the actions we would take afterwards? Americans might be seized. He thought we would have to threaten severe reprisals if any remaining Americans in Tehran were harmed. Dr. Brzezinski also thought that we need a post-failure plan. Again, a massive retribution would be required if we wound up with a large number of our people killed or captured. Failure, he added, would have massive international consequences. The Chairman said that they believe the possibility of a disastrous outcome is probably small, primarily because we are building in failsafe points along the way. There is a much higher probability, however, that we would have to pull out without having conducted the rescue. Dr. Brzezinski said that if we are inclined to do this, then we do not want to go ahead with mining or the military threats. We want the vigilance of the Iranians to remain at a low point. The Vice President asked the Chairman what his judgment was of the likelihood of being detected on a scale of 0–100. The Chairman replied that it was well above 50%. The Vice President asked, if we were detected, what is the likelihood that we could get out? The Chair-
