658 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement credit. Those favorable factors can mitigate the effect of lowered coffee receipts; but coffee remains of critical importance to the economy, accounting for about 75 percent of exports and over a fifth of government revenues. Moreover, it contributes to the prosperity of the urban business community from which Ydígoras draws significant strength. 26. Over the longer term, the prospect is problematical. The present population (3,500,000), which is growing at a rate of about three percent a year, is largely engaged in subsistence agriculture. It may rapidly shift to urban employment if jobs become available. To keep pace with population growth and to sustain the present level of economic activity, the government must continue to promote economic expansion. Careful planning will be required to prevent urban development from becoming a burden on the agricultural sector, as it has elsewhere in Latin America. In the event of a further decline in coffee prices, or of a substantial decline in foreign aid after 1958, maintenance of the present high rate of public investment would confront the government with a growing budgetary deficit and an acute foreign exchange problem. The one development which might relieve this situation would be the discovery of oil in commercially exploitable quantities in northern Guatemala (Petén). Major U.S. companies are now engaged in intensive exploration of the area. External Relations 27. Good relations with the U.S. will continue to be the cardinal element in Ydígoras foreign policy, if only because of the importance of continued U.S. assistance to the success of his administration. The president will seek advice and assistance from the U.S., possibly including increased military aid, but will do his utmost to avoid being charged with subservience. While adopting a more independent attitude toward the U.S. than did Castillo, Ydígoras will probably cooperate on most international issues. There is little chance that diplomatic relations will be established with the Soviet Bloc, or that currently negligible economic ties with the Bloc will be expanded. 28. Ydígoras will endeavor to develop closer relations between Guatemala and its neighbors, and to enhance Guatemala’s prestige through more active participation in the Organization of Central American States (ODECA), the Organization of American States, and the United Nations. In the current climate of Central American politics, the trend toward improved relations begun under Castillo is likely to continue. 29. For domestic political reasons, Ydígoras is likely to intensify Guatemala’s demands for recognition of its claim to British Honduras. The discovery of oil in northern Guatemala would give additional
