658  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
credit. Those favorable factors can mitigate the effect of lowered cof-
fee receipts; but coffee remains of critical importance to the economy, 
accounting for about 75 percent of exports and over a fifth of govern-
ment revenues. Moreover, it contributes to the prosperity of the urban 
business community from which Ydígoras draws significant strength.
26. Over the longer term, the prospect is problematical. The pres-
ent population (3,500,000), which is growing at a rate of about three 
percent a year, is largely engaged in subsistence agriculture. It may rap-
idly shift to urban employment if jobs become available. To keep pace 
with population growth and to sustain the present level of economic 
activity, the government must continue to promote economic expan-
sion. Careful planning will be required to prevent urban development 
from becoming a burden on the agricultural sector, as it has elsewhere 
in Latin America.
In the event of a further decline in coffee prices, or of a substan-
tial decline in foreign aid after 1958, maintenance of the present high 
rate of public investment would confront the government with a grow-
ing budgetary deficit and an acute foreign exchange problem. The one 
development which might relieve this situation would be the discov-
ery of oil in commercially exploitable quantities in northern Guatemala 
(Petén). Major U.S. companies are now engaged in intensive explora-
tion of the area.
External Relations
27. Good relations with the U.S. will continue to be the cardinal 
element in Ydígoras foreign policy, if only because of the importance of 
continued U.S. assistance to the success of his administration. The pres-
ident will seek advice and assistance from the U.S., possibly including 
increased military aid, but will do his utmost to avoid being charged 
with subservience. While adopting a more independent attitude 
toward the U.S. than did Castillo, Ydígoras will probably cooperate on 
most international issues. There is little chance that diplomatic relations 
will be established with the Soviet Bloc, or that currently negligible eco-
nomic ties with the Bloc will be expanded.
28. Ydígoras will endeavor to develop closer relations between 
Guatemala and its neighbors, and to enhance Guatemala’s prestige 
through more active participation in the Organization of Central 
American States (ODECA), the Organization of American States, and 
the United Nations. In the current climate of Central American politics, 
the trend toward improved relations begun under Castillo is likely to 
continue.
29. For domestic political reasons, Ydígoras is likely to intensify 
Guatemala’s demands for recognition of its claim to British Honduras. 
The discovery of oil in northern Guatemala would give additional
