936 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement PM–34. Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Mallory) to the Secretary of State1  Washington, March 3, 1960. SUBJECT Panamanian Situation. The anti-United States demonstrations reportedly planned for March 1 in the Canal Zone area never materialized largely because of the flexible attitude displayed by Governor Potter. On February 29 Governor Potter had crossed United States and Panamanian flags placed on the light poles along that part of the route which would be used by Carnival parade through the Zone. This move elicited favorable comments from many Panamanians, even from such super-­nationalists as Aquilino Boyd and Ernesto Castillero, who played a large role in previous anti-United States demonstrations. Although three USIS library windows were broken and one Panamanian marched into the Zone to plant a flag, these were isolated incidents. We have authorized the presentation of a pro forma note of protest concerning the window breaking. It appears that the Governor’s gesture bucked up the Panamanian Government. The Guardia National performed well on March 1 and was particularly helpful in that it rounded up known agitators and kept them from participating in the Carnival parade. Moreover, the Foreign Office issued a statement on February 29 which urged the public to foreswear violence. This statement said that, contrary to rumors, the United States is still seriously considering the formal Panamanian request for a showing of its flag in the Zone. On March 2 the Acting Secretary sent a telegram to Ambassador Harrington commending him for his part in forestalling a demonstration, and asking that he express to Governor Potter and General Gaither the Department’s appreciation for helping create a situation which minimized the chances of a march on the Zone.2 Now that March 1 has passed without a major incident, it is possible we will have time to work out a new policy with respect to Panama without being subjected to further pressure tactics by the Panamanians. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.1913/3–360. Confidential. Drafted by C. Allan Stewart, Director of the office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. 2 The Acting Secretary of State conveyed this message to Ambassador Harrington in telegram 329 to Panama City, March 2. (719.00/3–260)
