56 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 of actions in three categories: (1) what we will ask the state governors to do when they are called in within the next week; (2) steps we would ask the public to take; and (3) steps the government would initiate. The first two relate primarily to conservation measures. Steps under consideration for government action include: improvements of the crude oil allocation system; modification of gasoline allocation regulations to prevent the distortions of last summer; better management of fuel stocks to prevent a precipitous run down; and acceleration of coal conversion. DOE is looking at a possible two-stage rationing proposal: first, a windshield sticker keeping each car off the road one day per week; and secondly, a backup coupon rationing plan. A small interagency group under DOE is looking at specific steps. It was agreed that any legislative steps should be carefully orchestrated to prevent getting bogged down in a lengthy debate on the Hill. The Governors of the IEA will meet in Paris next Monday and we will need to consider what we ask of them. (C) 5. Demonstrations. Justice will recommend that Interior revoke the automatic permit previously granted to a group of Iranian militant students to demonstrate in Washington. We expect the students to challenge this in the courts. State and Justice are working together on this and believe there is a decent chance that the revocation will be sustained. (C) Political-Military Issues: 1. Investigation/Trial of the Shah. Ramsey Clark is to talk to Professor Falk to persuade him to drop his efforts at an international tribunal. All agreed that a show trial was unacceptable as a means of seeking release of the hostages. (S) 2. Eilts Mission. Hermann Eilts will arrive in Washington this afternoon. Instructions will be drafted immediately following the meeting in preparation for the President’s meeting with him.8 (S) 3. Fluor. The SCC agreed that it would be best to permit the negotiations between Fluor and the Iranians for departure of their personnel from Isfahan to proceed without public comment for the moment. It was felt that drawing public attention to the issue would risk hardening the Iranian position. Fluor is now down to 25 people. They may be required to remain for another week to coordinate turnover to the Iranians and other foreign nationals. (S)9 8 No record of a meeting was found. For Eilts’s report on his mission, see Document 43. 9 Carter wrote in the margin: “Prepare for me a statement to be made if/when Fluor people are detained.”
