764 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II In question five, you refer to private investment in low income countries, and in the last sentence of the first paragraph of your covering letter you call for participation of the private sector.4 This is, of course, elemental, for most of the applied agricultural technology is held in the private sector and the ability to efficiently apply that technology is peculiarly within the private sector. The problem, of course, is that the risks and the potential for return are disproportionate. In a world that is largely capital and technology short, under present circumstances private sector leadership feels compelled to apply their limited resources in areas more likely to bring returns to the shareholders to whom they are responsible. Here, again, a clear, sharp, powerful commitment by the political leaders at the very highest level in the countries that are most desperately in need is necessary. Assurances that commitments made will be met, and that support committed will be forthcoming, and that cooperation, up and down the line, is assured, are necessary. Such has seldom been forthcoming, with commitments frequently breached, although solemnly entered into. I believe it can be fairly said that most multinational agribusiness companies wish to invest in less developed countries and recognize their responsibilities to contribute to the world hunger problem. Attention should therefore be given—carefully and methodically—to the conditions under which they are able to meet their responsibilities to their shareholders and still involve themselves in the hunger problem in the developing countries. For some years I have been advocating that there should be somewhere a cadre of highly experienced and competent business political leaders who have had experience and credibility at the highest levels, in both public and private sectors. Such professionals could play the part of “honest brokers,” identifying opportunities in developing countries, and notifying companies who have the technology and knowhow to meet that need. They must, of course, be able to reach leadership at the very highest level in both government and the private sector. By definition, their credibility must be the highest, so that they can bring about a thorough examination of the potential on both sides of the project in question; i.e., in government and by multinational agribusiness companies. Once the possibilities are called to the attention of top leadership in both private and public sectors, the negotiations, looking to results, will take care of themselves. Attention might also be given to some effective backing by the US Government or an international organization so that the kind of protection that has been ex- 4 The fifth policy area listed in the attachment, Trade and Investment, posed the question: “How can U.S. trade and investment policies facilitate access of the poor to food?” (Ibid.)
