764
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
In question five, you refer to private investment in low income
countries, and in the last sentence of the first paragraph of your cov-
ering letter you call for participation of the private sector.4 This is, of
course, elemental, for most of the applied agricultural technology is
held in the private sector and the ability to efficiently apply that tech-
nology is peculiarly within the private sector. The problem, of course, is
that the risks and the potential for return are disproportionate. In a
world that is largely capital and technology short, under present cir-
cumstances private sector leadership feels compelled to apply their
limited resources in areas more likely to bring returns to the share-
holders to whom they are responsible. Here, again, a clear, sharp, pow-
erful commitment by the political leaders at the very highest level in
the countries that are most desperately in need is necessary. Assur-
ances that commitments made will be met, and that support committed
will be forthcoming, and that cooperation, up and down the line, is as-
sured, are necessary. Such has seldom been forthcoming, with commit-
ments frequently breached, although solemnly entered into. I believe it
can be fairly said that most multinational agribusiness companies wish
to invest in less developed countries and recognize their responsibil-
ities to contribute to the world hunger problem. Attention should
therefore be given—carefully and methodically—to the conditions
under which they are able to meet their responsibilities to their share-
holders and still involve themselves in the hunger problem in the de-
veloping countries.
For some years I have been advocating that there should be some-
where a cadre of highly experienced and competent business political
leaders who have had experience and credibility at the highest levels,
in both public and private sectors. Such professionals could play the
part of “honest brokers,” identifying opportunities in developing coun-
tries, and notifying companies who have the technology and knowhow
to meet that need. They must, of course, be able to reach leadership at
the very highest level in both government and the private sector. By
definition, their credibility must be the highest, so that they can bring
about a thorough examination of the potential on both sides of the
project in question; i.e., in government and by multinational agri-
business companies. Once the possibilities are called to the attention of
top leadership in both private and public sectors, the negotiations,
looking to results, will take care of themselves. Attention might also be
given to some effective backing by the US Government or an interna-
tional organization so that the kind of protection that has been ex-
4 The fifth policy area listed in the attachment, Trade and Investment, posed the
question: “How can U.S. trade and investment policies facilitate access of the poor to
food?” (Ibid.)
