International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
613
happy to be able to report to you that I had a truly friendly, informal
meeting with President Carter.2 Thanks to the truly personal effort of
the President it was a success.
Through the meeting with President Carter, we were able to reach
a meeting of minds as to how best to manage U.S.–Japan relations. This
I find personally gratifying, and gratifying to the Japanese people. It is
my firm determination to do my utmost to work toward improved rela-
tions. I ask for your understanding of this effort. We have some
pending issues remaining. But a direction and framework has been
achieved for solving these; we would like to solidify this direction and
framework so that we can pave the way for improved relations.
I look forward to taking advantage of so many influential eco-
nomic leaders, to hear very candid and frank advice as to what Japan
should do, etc. We have with us some representatives of our more col-
orful Ministries—you may have heard of the conservative nature of the
Finance Ministry, the notoriety of the MITI, the obstinacy of the Foreign
Ministry. (laughter and applause)
Secretary Blumenthal
We all appreciate the opportunity to exchange with you views on
the economic side of the relationship, now and in the future. With your
permission, I would like to provide a brief overview and then call on
my colleagues, particularly Ambassador Strauss, Ambassador Owen
and Mr. Cooper.
We tend to think of the economic relations and problems between
us in terms of immediate short-term problems and longer-term
problems. The shorter-term problems must, of course, be solved be-
tween us in order to assure a stable relationship. We are encouraged
that your discussions with President Carter will help set in motion a
framework for agreement.
On the immediate problems, we have the issue of the MTN. Am-
bassador Strauss will no doubt deal with this issue in his remarks. Sec-
ondly, there is the problem of the need for continued progress toward
Japan’s eliminating its large current account surplus, not only to assist
international monetary stability but also to demonstrate to the E.C. as
conversation is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special
Projects, Henry Owen, Box 22, Memcons: 1–4/79.
2 Memoranda of conversation of Carter’s May 2 morning and afternoon meetings
with Ohira are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Sub-
ject File, Box 37, Memcons: President: 4–5/79. During their morning meeting, from 10:43
a.m. until 12:25 p.m., Carter and Ohira discussed U.S.-Japanese bilateral economic rela-
tions, among other topics; during their afternoon meeting, from 2:30 until 3:15 p.m., they
discussed Carter’s forthcoming visit to Japan and the Tokyo G–7 Summit, among other
issues. For the joint communique´ issued on May 2, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the
United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book I, pp. 763–768.
