1956 825 35. Wang said he had repeated many times that unjustifiable amendments of U.S. regarding his December 1 draft were absolutely unacceptable his side. These were unacceptable precisely because of U.S. attempts to use these amendments to interfere in China’s internal affairs and exercise of its sovereign rights. Must China ask for approval and ratification by any other government of its actions taken in order to exercise its sovereign right in liberation of its own territory? Was not this again utter nonsense? Therefore views of both sides on this issue were quite clear. 36. Wang said they had made repeated efforts on this question of issuance of declaration. They had no intention in this declaration to impose their views on U.S. They considered their views to be accept­ able to both sides. 37. Wang said these views were intended to facilitate issuance of declaration. However U.S. is doing to contrary, it had all along been insisting on these unreasonable clauses. U.S. had been insisting on its unreasonable stand for considerable period of time. I, on behalf of U.S., had stated that these reasonable suggestions of his side were unac­ ceptable to U.S. How could we expect to arrive at agreement in this situation? 38. Wang said after such a long time of discussion if I and my side still so adamant its position, how could one not arrive at conclusion that U.S. not willing agree on declaration and was obstructing issuance of such declaration? He saw no point continuing this sort of discussion. 39. Wang said if we still unable to make declaration at present time responsibility did not lie on his side. In view fact we not been able to arrive at agreement for such long time his side considering to make public views of his side on this question, so that public might be able make own judgment. 40. I said I would like try to get down to some fundamentals with him. I had tried in my opening statement this morning but did not seem successful in doing so. 41. I said he had again in his last statement spoken of this declara­ tion as “help” in settlement our disputes. He had also spoken of it as first step toward settlement our disputes. As he knew I entirely agreed with him on latter part—it is only first step and I had always so char­ acterized it. 42. I said however question still seemed to exist between us, as to what this step consisted of. I considered this step to be unconditional and unequivocable statement that we will not in any manner or under any pretext initiate hostilities against each other in attempt to settle these disputes. I would like to ask clear question as to whether he so considered it.
