Options Identified
253
specifically put to Dobrynin, who has now returned to Moscow, the
question of whether the Soviets would veto a Chapter 7 action in the
Security Council. He had in fact said to Dobrynin that we would assume
the Soviets would not veto, and Dobrynin had replied that he would
have to check this in Moscow.5
The Secretary said that he would like to discuss another aspect of
the economic situation, namely, the effort of the Iranians to open new
accounts and thus get around our blocking action. Dick Cooper
explained in some detail the variety of means which this was taking.
He had been surprised at the slowness of the Iranians in moving to
get either new accounts in dollars or other currencies set up to make
their payments. They were beginning to get cooperation from others
and this was giving a mixed signal to the Iranians. What they were
seeing on the economic front in many cases was business as usual. We
know that it is being interpreted this way because, for example, the
Daily Telegraph reported that certain British, French, Austrian and Japa-
nese banks have cooperated and that the Iranians are concluding that,
therefore, their governments are “with us.” It was important to elimi-
nate this ambiguity. The Iranians are attempting to handle normal
trade by the creation of new accounts, sometimes using coded numbers
or false names. Francois-Poncet said that, as we knew, the French
were not taking any more oil than they had normally from Iran and
wondered what we wished them to do—not pay at all or only pay in
non-dollar currencies or to open new accounts, the French should
refuse. Then the Iranians will begin to get the right signal.
The Secretary said that the lower level reaction in the Federal
Republic was that they will insist on dollars and not allow any payment
in Deutschmarks. Jean-Claude Paye said that he knows there has
already been a request to pay in Deutschmarks in one case. Francois-
Poncet concluded that perhaps this is something that should be dis-
cussed in the “four-power meeting” in Brussels later this week.
[1 paragraph (11½ lines) not declassified]
Both Cooper and the Secretary said that there were important risks
to the international monetary system and, therefore, it was important
to proceed. He has asked Mr. Carswell to go to Japan. We have already
talked to the Germans, British, Italians and Swiss6 and he would be
5 Vance and Dobrynin met on December 5 (see Document 86) but apparently did
not discuss Chapter 7 action.
6 Vance met with Okita on December 10 in Paris. (Telegram Secto 12020 from
Brussels, December 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840171–
0028, P840171–0028, P840125–1129) Vance met with Genscher and Schmidt on December
11 in Bonn, and with Pertini and Cossiga in Rome on December 12. (Telegrams Secto
12023 and Secto 12024 both from Brussels, December 13; Department of State, Records
of the Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Vance NODIS Memcons 1979)
