618  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
while at same time refusing implement. That is deliberate attempt 
defeat any concrete outcome talks. At our last meeting he had already 
brought out that PRC side has all along been faithfully implementing, 
and it was none other than US side which not only not implementing, 
but had acted in deliberate violation agreed announcement.
12. Wang said thus far US side not yet furnished PRC with names 
and information on all Chinese in US, while of those Chinese who US 
admitted had desired return but had long been prevented from return­
ing [garble] there still many who not been permitted return.
13. Wang said US has never given PRC side any accounting of 
Chinese imprisoned in US nor adopted any appropriate measures in 
regard them.
14. Wang said I had stated that Indian Embassy had made no repre­
sentations concerning the disability of any Chinese to depart, however, 
actual fact is that US side has completely refused offer any assistance 
to Indian Embassy permitting it take initiative to learn about Chinese 
in US and take measures help them. Result is that Indian Embassy not 
been in position to fully carry out its functions.
15. Wang said moreover US side is posing further threats to ­Chinese 
students in US by requiring them obtain entry permits Taiwan as con­
dition their temporary stay in US, so that in future they will not dare 
ask return mainland. Such is outright contradiction to undertakings of 
US side by which it announced “US recognizes that Chinese in US who 
desire return PRC are entitled do so, and declares that it has adopted 
and will further adopt appropriate measures so they can expeditiously 
exercise their right to return.”
16. Wang said this action by US side has grave consequences. He 
asked that US side give consideration point he had raised, make satis­
factory answer to it.
17. Wang said December 16 statement by State Dept. while 
attempting deny this gross violation agreed announcement even made 
allegation about Americans in China being subject cruel and inhuman 
treatment. He could only express indignation at such charges. Such 
charges do not have shred of factual basis since Americans who been 
imprisoned in China have repudiated these charges. If one to talk 
about cruel and inhuman treatment, it none other than American side 
which guilty of this, by preventing for long period return of Chinese 
to homeland and their reunion with their families.
18. Wang said it none but US which guilty cruel inhuman treat­
ment for, after persecuting threatening Chinese in US it has now come 
out in outright breach of agreed announcement by adopting measures 
against them. There many cases of Chinese whose mental state put out 
of order as result protracted threats and persecution against them by
