1956 941 either side, whereas my drafts require their side surrender rights and accept demands which their side cannot accept. Same comment applies fully my April 19 draft. 12. Wang said he must state in all seriousness that to reach agree­ ment on matter issuance announcement, such announcement must be fair and reasonable, on basis equality for both sides. My draft, however, fell short of this mark. 13. I said in these discussions I thought it important we keep in sight fundamental involved this matter. As I often said, problem we face not the issuing announcement for sake of announcement, simply saying some words that may mean one thing to him another thing to me, so we can give superficial agreement to world. This was not point. Whole objective much deeper and more fundamental than that. My basic suggestion from very beginning our discussions very simply stated: is that recognizing these differences between us, never [very] serious difficulties and particularly with respect Taiwan area that we very simply and straightforwardly say we are not going to go to war about them. At same time, we would not say anything that would prejudice views either side with respect these disputes. I had suggested his government make such statement, and if it did so, my government would make similar statement reiterating its position. He had suggested form and content such statement, to which I had very closely adhered in incorporating views my government with regard those points which it considers essential to a meaningful statement. However, question much more fundamental than those just of form and exact words of statement; question is, is there really agreement between us on renunciation use of force in settling disputes, including dispute in Taiwan area. That is, was his government, in accord­ance accepted standards international conduct, willing renounce force as instrument national policy? 14. I said if his government had made decision in fact to renounce force as instrument national policy, there could be no real objection to text of draft which I gave him April 21. If that decision had not been made by his government, I could see no formulation of a meaningful declaration would be acceptable to him. Only if that principle were accepted without mental reservation or purpose of evasion would agreement on meaningful agreement for declaration be arrived at between us. 15. I said he had previously stated that his objections my other drafts based on connections he saw between self-­defense clause and mention Taiwan area. Revisions which I suggested April 19 removed any plausible possibility such argument. I respected his right to hold whatever views he desired with regard to nature, origin, any other
