448 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement event of serious threats to its position in Eastern Europe. Barring such developments, we think the USSR will pursue a cautious policy of eco­ nomic aid, adjustment to national peculiarities, and toleration here and there of a somewhat greater degree of Satellite autonomy. 10. The strong identity of interest among the various Bloc regimes, their dependence upon Soviet aid and support, and the USSR’s over­ whelming military power will tend to maintain the essential solidarity of the Bloc over at least the next five years. But the underlying forces released by developments since Stalin’s death will persist, creating fur­ ther instability within the Satellites. Additional changes in intra-Bloc relations are likely. Internal Developments 11. Two of the major problems posed by Stalin’s death have per­ sisted: who is to rule, and how is the ruling to be done. While Stalin’s successors agreed on fundamental objectives—­maintenance of Party dictatorship, continued military buildup, and rapid economic growth—­ they differed as to the policies best suited to pursue these aims in the conditions of the USSR today. These differences in turn complicated the problem of who was to rule, rendering the leadership unstable. 12. Now, after four years of uneasy collective leadership, Khrushchev has emerged as dominant. Although he still lacks the degree of power achieved by Stalin through the use of police terror, he has disposed of his major rivals and asserted Party mastery over the economic bureaucracy and the military. These developments have probably enhanced the sta­ bility of the Soviet leadership, though this leadership will be subject to continuing strain over the next several years as difficult policy problems arise. We think that only the most severe problems could threaten the present leadership arrangements, but, considering the magnitude of the problems which the regime faces, and the risks of failure in the bold pro­ grams which Khrushchev has undertaken, issues of such gravity could arise. In such an event Khrushchev would probably move toward abso­ lute rule, if necessary attempting to reinstitute terror for this purpose. But important elements among the elite groups would be alert to and would probably oppose such a development, particularly if a recourse to terror were involved. 13. As to the question of how to rule, the present leadership has shown awareness of the need to overcome the alienation of the Soviet population which has been caused by fear and deprivation and expressed in apathy. Instead of a widespread use of terror, which in the end might not spare the leaders themselves, another approach was felt to be necessary in order to keep the society cohesive and responsive to central direction. In addition, a shift in emphasis to the use of incentives and the encouragement of initiative seemed to give promise of increas­ ing Soviet strength, particularly in the economic field.
