Haiti  739
but has been released, with the exception of a brother who is still in jail. 
The Colombian Minister informed me that the Assistant Manager of 
the Haitian-Colombian Bank, a known Jumellist, was savagely beaten 
in his home by a masked gang in an effort to force him to reveal the 
whereabouts of Jumelle. At last account he was recovering in a hospital 
from the beating which left him close to death.
I would emphasize here that I am persuaded that neither Dejoie 
nor Jumelle have seriously conspired against the Government since the 
inauguration of President Duvalier, although it is probably true that 
some of their followers, particularly of Dejoie, may have engaged in 
conspiratorial plotting. A large number of political prisoners languish 
in jail with estimates ranging from 80 to 800 and the actual figure prob-
ably being somewhere in between.
The Army, which under General Kebreau was at least a counter-
poise to the civilian element of the Government, now appears to be 
under the complete domination of Dr. Duvalier. It is difficult to believe 
anything else when we have a photograph in our possession of the head 
of the Secret Police, Clement BARBOT, striding behind the President 
with a sub-­machine gun under his arm, his military escort bringing up 
the rear, during the Flag Day celebration at Arcaihaie on May 18. To the 
best of my knowledge the Secret Police continues to operate with the 
tolerance, if not the support, of the Army.
The financial assistance to the Duvalier Administration which 
has thus far been forthcoming, or is in prospect, from United States 
and international sources will help to perpetuate the present regime. 
Looking at it for what it basically is, namely, aid to the people of Haiti, I 
find it entirely defensible and would even go so far as to support addi-
tional amounts of aid in the future.
However, I think we should do some careful soul-­searching before 
we agree to send a Military Mission to Haiti, particularly one of such 
composition and size that it will practically guarantee the continuance 
in office of Dr. Duvalier to the end of his six-­year term in 1963. Of course, 
we want stability in Haiti but, particularly having in mind the critical 
examination of our policies in Latin America provoked by the recent 
incidents involving the Vice President, should we agree to the estab-
lishment if the Mission without establishing any conditions precedent?
I find myself becoming increasingly repelled by the thought of send-
ing a Mission in here when the jails are crammed with political prisoners, 
many presumably innocent and none of whom have been given the ben-
efit of a fair trial; when defeated candidates and their supporters, many 
of whom have asked for nothing but peace and harmony, are beaten, 
tortured and hounded into exile; when a restrained opposition press has 
been ruthlessly snuffed out of existence; and when masked night rid-
ers, reminiscent of the Ku Klux Klan, operate from their headquarters 
in the National Palace. Aside from the question of our own conscience,
