114 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Mr. Gelb suggested that Guideline 5 was too open-­ended. He wondered whether “values” referred to human rights. Dr. Brzezinski and Secretary Brown both felt that it did. Dr. Brzezinski asked Mr. Gelb if he understood correctly that State wants us to inform the President that the State Department does not feel that human rights should be taken into account in US policy. (Laughter) Secretary Brown felt that Guideline 6 was too restrictive; it suggested strongly that the goals of meeting our military needs is subordinate to the goal of staying within desired budgetary constraints. He said we should be thinking about balancing our military requirements against other national priorities. Language along these lines was accepted. Dr. Brzezinski then asked whether there was any problem with the first five of the objectives stated under Strategic Forces in Section III. Mr. Gelb felt that in addition to reaffirming our goal of promoting nuclear stability, as in Objective 5, we should also reaffirm US policy not to acquire a capability for disarming first strike. Secretary Brown was not sure that the term “disarming first strike” was well defined; for example, some people might argue that the Mark 12A did not give us a disarming first strike capability while at the same time they might argue that the SS–18 gave the Soviets a disarming first strike capability. Dr. Brzezinski felt that Mr. Gelb’s proposal was not really an objective but rather should be part of Guideline 1 in Section II. This proposal was accepted. Secretary Brown felt that paragraph 6A should be restricted by the introductory clause “with available forces” so that it would be clear that this paragraph did not constitute acquisition guidance. He also proposed ending the sentence with a statement similar to that at the end of paragraph 6B to the effect that the US would like to maximize resultant power relative to the enemy in a nuclear conflict. After extensive discussion on the wording at the end of the paragraph, the group finally agreed to language for paragraph 6A, stating that “if control of escalation fails, US policy is to terminate the conflict on favorable terms.” Dr. Brzezinski then turned to the Guidance Section, paragraph III B1. Secretary Brown felt that “essential equivalence” means more than simply balancing certain key indices. He thought the problem was more than one of numbers. In particular, he felt that the guidance should read that the US would “exceed or balance the Soviet Union in certain key indices and capabilities.” This change was accepted. Dr. Brzezinski then turned the discussion to paragraph III B2, in which three alternative paragraphs were displayed. Dr. Brzezinski wondered why [1 line not declassified] for destruction. Secretary Brown felt that paragraph 2A was too specific. He believed that the President
