528 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I cupied with the Cultural Revolution, were unable to make progress toward overcoming our differences. The year 1971 marked the beginning of a new phase. Across a vast gulf of misunderstanding and mutual distrust, the Governments of Peking and the United States began a dialogue, starting with Henry Kissinger’s dramatic trip to Peking in 1971 and President Nixon’s visit in 1972.4 The Shanghai communique of that year set a framework for our new relationship.5 But that dialogue was incomplete. The United States still formally recognized the Republic of China—whose de facto control encompassed only Taiwan and a few adjacent islands—as the legal Government of China. Despite this, we were able to begin contacts and ultimately, in 1973, even establish Liaison Offices in Washington and Peking.6 But the nature of the relationship with Peking remained limited in scope and depth by the political, legal, and economic implications of our lack of mutual recognition. Nonrecognition—the delicate state in which we dealt with Peking in the 6 years after the Shanghai communique—presented daily practical problems. Although both sides made major efforts to minimize these limitations, they became increasingly inhibiting. Discussions with the Chinese often foundered on the fact that in the absence of recognition, many activities either could not proceed at all or had to be conducted at a low level. Contacts were constrained, including those that might have produced greater understanding on global issues. Trade was limited, and opportunities often would go elsewhere. Legal problems hung over commercial transactions because of American claims and frozen P.R.C. assets dating back to 1950. More importantly, not to try to move forward would have been to risk moving backward—and backward movement in U.S.-Chinese relations would have caused serious damage to our global position. So even before he was inaugurated, President Carter made his first China decision. In an act of continuity with two previous Presidents, he reaffirmed the Shanghai communique as the basis for our relationship and specifically reaffirmed its commitment to work toward normal relations. 4 For documentation on the July and October 1971 Kissinger visits and the February 1972 Nixon visit, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XVII, China, 1969–1972. 5 For text of the joint communique issued in Shanghai on Feb. 27, 1972, see Bulletin of Mar. 20, p. 435. [Footnote in the original. See footnote 6, Document 29.] 6 The United States and the People’s Republic of China established the liaison offices in March 1973. Bruce was appointed Chief of the U.S. Liaison Office (USLO).
