theory of domicile, while the project of the proposed code is
based largely upon the theory of nationality. The reason for this
affirmative vote is that the delegation of the United States desires
to further the work of codification of private international law. It
desires, furthermore, to make this recognition of what it believes
to be a constructive effort of very considerable value, and it
desires that, by the adoption of these articles, the forthcoming
Panamerican Conference at Habana may have before it, for its
mature consideration, a substantial basis for the discussion of
Private International Law.
In conclusion, the delegation of the United States desires to
express the hope that ultimately a code of private international
law may be proposed for the Americas, by which the opposing
principles of the two theories of domicile and nationality may be
reconciled. In this happy event it is to be hoped that the United
States may be able to join with her sister republics.
The clash between the adherents of the opposing theories of domicile and
nationality seems to have reached its height when Article 7 of the
Preliminary Title of Mr. Bustamante’s code came under discussion. Article
7 as originally drafted was as follows: “Each contracting State shall apply
to the nationals of the others the laws of an internal public order of their
domicile or of their nationality, according to the system adopted by the
State to which they belong.” Thereupon, Mr. Bustamante withdrew Article
7 as originally proposed and, after the whole of the code had been
substantially approved in the closing days of the Commission, proposed a
substitute for Article 7 as follows:
Each contracting State shall apply as personal law that of the
domicile or that of the nationality according to the system which
its domestic legislation may have adopted or may hereafter adopt.
It is to be observed that there seems to be no substantial difference between
the original and amended form, as it failed to satisfy the Delegates of the
States choosing a system of domicile, who were frank in the expression of
their desire to have the system adopted by them prevail universally in the
Americas.
