1956 855 nor our reply got any appreciable play from the press. We think it was just as well no great attention was paid to the exchange. I apologize for the slip which resulted in your not ­getting our reply until 24 hours after it was issued. We had been assured through FE/P that you would get it promptly through the USIA bulletin. For some unaccountable reason USIA did not carry it in its ­European ­Service, although it was carried in the Far East and Middle Eastern ­Service. I had a copy telegraphed you early on the morning of March 7, just on a hunch that you might have missed it. It was on its way before you telephoned. But you should have had it immediately and in the future we will see that anything of com­ parable interest is telegraphed especially to you at once. We will not rely on USIA for this service. A few short miscellaneous items. There was an error in my last letter in the amount of Miner’s account. The total amount for which the C.V. Starr Company is requesting a license from Treasury is approx­ imately $88,000. Prospects seem to be pretty good that Treasury will license the full amount requested, and that the local authorities will accept the settlement and give Miner his exit permit. We have sent the Liu Yung-­ming dossier to the American Red Cross for transmittal to the Red Cross in Peiping. We are working on the possibility of temporarily detailing John Holdridge to Geneva in place of Stanley. Holdridge is here on home leave from Hong Kong and could return to Hong Kong by way of Europe with very little extra travel expense. Hong Kong has been anxious to play a somewhat more active part in the Geneva talks, and this would give them their chance. The experience would be good for ­Holdridge and his observations would be useful to all our political reporting people in Hong Kong when he returns there. He is a China language officer with a good record although he is young. This is all tentative but I wanted you to know the way the wind is blowing. Pre­ sumably he could not stay in Geneva indefinitely, but it is questionable if the talks will continue indefinitely. The House Foreign Affairs Committee is very fully occupied with the Foreign Aid Bill, and for this reason has postponed the hearings on Chinese Communist mistreatment of Americans prisoners until May. Lindbeck has finished his work. He has winnowed out the 50 most sig­ nificant cases of mistreatment and has included case summaries of only these 50 with his report. He took into account your very constructive suggestions when he revised his first draft. Your letter of February 28 (No. 24) came on March 5 and was warmly welcomed.
