524
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
b) A full-press effort to get Sadat to accept the treaty; perhaps with
a public interpretation by him of Article VI to the effect that it does not
negate his defense commitments and a Saudi blessing for this position;
c) Followed by a similarly energetic effort to get Israel to accept the
target date and to initiate a substantive dialogue with the Palestinians
and a negotiation with Egypt on the scope of authority for the auton-
omous regime.
4) How is it to be done?
a) Have the Vice President go back with Khalil to tell Sadat that
U.S.-Egyptian cooperation will in effect come to an end unless Egypt
accedes to the treaty, but if Sadat does agree, then the US would engage
in long-term military and economic cooperation with Egypt and with
the Saudis on behalf of regional security and specifically to contain So-
viet influence. We would need to tell Sadat specifically what we are
prepared to do in the military assistance field for this approach to have
credibility; and we would have to tell him that if he accedes to our re-
quest that we will proceed as in c) below.
b) Have him repeat essentially the same message to the Saudis;
c) Then—if he is successful—proceed to Israel and tell Begin that
Israeli failure to accept the timetable and to begin positive movement
on the West Bank/Gaza will mean that the US will take the entire
matter to the UN Security Council, and consequently that the U.S.-
Israeli economic-military relationship will not be allowed to perpetuate
a stalemate which will inevitably radicalize the Middle East and rein-
troduce the Soviets into the region;
d) For the above to work, we must be genuinely prepared to be as
direct and blunt as is stated above; so far, we have never managed to be
and we have always backed off at the last minute. In fact, I am not sure
that anyone on your team could carry this out in the proper manner,
and perhaps, in the final analysis, the only way would be for you to do
it by letter, maybe reinforced by an additional verbal message deliv-
ered personally by the Vice President.
148.
Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter met with Egyptian Prime Minister Mus-
tafa Khalil at the White House on December 1, 1978. According to the
President’s Daily Diary, Carter met privately with Khalil in the Oval
Office from 1:46 p.m. to 2:06 p.m. before the President escorted the
