March 27–December 31, 1979
935
290.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State and the White House1
Cairo, September 10, 1979, 1731Z
18416. For the President from Strauss. Subject: Strauss Meeting
With President Sadat.
1. (S-entire text).
2. Following a relaxed hour and a half private chat with Prime
Minister Khalil, in which he foreshadowed what I would hear from
President Sadat, I met for an hour and twenty minutes with Sadat at his
Pyramids Guest House Sunday2 night. Only Vice President Mubarak
and Atherton were present. Sadat was relaxed, expansive, and confi-
dent, and reflected this mood in his comments to the press afterwards.
Sitting on the balcony, overlooking the Pyramids with a full harvest
moon shining, I was sufficiently impressed and emotionally moved to
buy whatever he had to sell. Sadat took delight in contrasting the sta-
bility in Egypt with the disarray in the Arab world. He predicted confi-
dently that the present negotiations would ultimately succeed in laying
the basis for comprehensive peace and that Syria, Jordan and the Pales-
tinians would join the negotiating process. With respect to the Pales-
tinians, he said they were welcome to join anytime but it was not neces-
sary for them to participate at the present stage. His description of the
Haifa meeting3 with Begin was somewhat rambling and contradictory
in places, but one message came through clearly: he has built a sound
personal relationship with Begin and is fully committed to consoli-
dating the Peace Treaty but now needs our help to make progress in the
autonomy negotiations by the end of the year. In saying this, however,
Sadat did not convey any great sense of urgency that matters had to be
brought to a decisive head by that time.
3. Among the principal themes which ran through Sadat’s com-
ments, I was struck by his repeated expressions of concern about
Begin’s health and political problems at home. In view of Begin’s health
and other problems, Sadat said he did not press Begin on the issues of
full autonomy and Jerusalem; he merely reaffirmed that his views re-
mained as he had stated them in Alexandria in July.4 At one point,
Sadat said he was not sure Begin would survive for more than a matter
of months. Sadat reiterated several times his deep feelings of friendship
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840131-2464. Se-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.
2 September 9.
3 See Document 288.
4 See Document 271.
