It is believed that participation on this basis will enable the United States to
contribute to the work of the Conference within the limitations imposed by
its standing policy on immigration, especially as evidenced by the
Immigration Act of 192465 and other legislation. You should, however,
make clear to the Conference from the beginning that this represents the full
extent to which the United States can take part in any discussion between
nations on the problems of emigration and immigration.
It is thus apparent that your efforts in the Conference will be confined to
discussion of the technical matters presented, to observing the trend of the
Conference, and to safeguarding and reaffirming the position of the United
States on immigration on such occasions as may be appropriate. It is
equally clear that you should refrain from voting on any of the resolutions
presented to the Conference for approval without the specific authorization
of this Government. While in the vast majority of cases it will be obvious
that a vote by this Government would be inappropriate, nevertheless it is
possible that certain resolutions may be put forward on which it may seem
desirable to put this Government on record: such as, for example, a
proposal for the convening of a Third International Conference on
Emigration and Immigration. In such cases the delegation should ask this
Government for instructions, by cable through the Department of State.
For your further information and guidance there are attached:66
(1). A collection of documents illustrative of the historical and
diplomatic background of the Conference and of American
immigration policy in general;
(2). An annotated copy of the agenda of the Habana Conference
indicating the special considerations attaching to the discussion of
the various questions by the American delegates.
I need not remind you of the importance which this Government attaches to
the manner in which you carry out the mission with which you are now
entrusted, involving as it does the authoritative and effective presentation in
an international gathering of one of the most important of the national
policies of the United States. It is my confident hope that you will be able to
carry this mission to a successful conclusion.
