864 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —The whole business of NORAD, the SIOP, etc. is a great curiosity. Mathematicians, scientists, and quacks will appear in droves to learn more, to provide copious advice, and to turn the system into a circus or analysts’ amusement park. —There may be some good reasons for a study, but they escape me. —I have already received a press call from Science 80 about this study. I warned Simmons that this would happen. 205. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, July 18, 1980 SUBJECT Significant Actions, Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense (July 12–18, 1980) FY 82 Defense Program: We are well underway in examining individual Service submissions for the FY 82 Defense Budget and the FY 82–86 program, and devising alternative policy and program options. Graham Claytor is chairing, with OMB participation at a senior level, the Defense Resources Board (DRB) review. The DRB objective is to develop an integrated DoD five-­year program centering on the 5-­year funding profile, provided by OMB, but with a reasonable range of alternative levels in either direction. I will have their recommendations shortly, and by the end of the month I will have made my tentative decisions, subject to my reconsideration soon thereafter in the light of comments from the Service Secretaries and JCS. This timing and that of the OMB “Spring” Review this year would make your consideration of the kinds of defense issues usually presented at OMB Spring Review an unproductive use of your time. Therefore I am working with John White of OMB to structure an alternative approach. It would present a brief written summary of the competing needs of readiness, personnel costs, and hardware within various defense funding levels as constrained by the overall economic and budget forecasts. Before our decisions on programs and budget details are made later this year, I believe we should 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 64, Brown’s Weekly Report: 1980. Top Secret. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “cc Harold. J.”
