Afghanistan
223
part, the leadership of Afghanistan, as is known, had also expressed
readiness to improve relations with Pakistan and had taken concrete
steps in that direction; he had in mind the visit to Pakistan by Deputy
Foreign Minister Dost and the invitation for the President of Pakistan to
visit Afghanistan. From the other side, however, although the Pakistani
leadership had earlier expressed interest in a high level meeting, it
subsequently was avoiding such a meeting.
4. Korniyenko did not directly address the question of charges of
Pakistani interference in Afghanistan’s internal affairs, but spoke
instead of the use of Pakistani territory for hostile actions against
Afghanistan. That this was going on was not something invented by
the media. It was openly admitted by leaders of the insurgents, who
made public statements about their activities and made no secret of
the fact that they were operating against Afghanistan from Pakistan
territory.
5. As for the question of the “involvement” of the USSR in Afghani-
stan, Korniyenko continued, the Soviet Union had even earlier pro-
vided aid—and was now doing so on an even larger scale—to the
Afghanistan people and state; all forms of aid were included—eco-
nomic and scientific and technological, and other forms, including
military. But all this assistance, regardless of type, was being given at
the request of the Government of Afghanistan, and there were no
political conditions attached. It did not constitute interference in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan. The questions which the U.S. was raising
about this aid, by referring to the presence of Soviet specialists and
advisers as though this raised concerns on the part of the U.S., were
not legitimate questions. In essence, this amounted to interference in
the relations between two sovereign states, since Soviet aid was given
at the request of the legitimate Afghan Government.
6. Picking up the reference to the nuclear issue, Korniyenko said
he could confirm what had been previously said by the Soviet side,
that Pakistan activity toward the development of a nuclear device was
also of concern to the Soviet Union. The Soviets had put questions to
the Pakistani leadership on this score, and they would be prepared to
continue to cooperate with the U.S. in this matter, on the basis of our
mutual interest in preventing proliferation.
Watson
