470
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—The basic problem seems to be that here, and in the field, AID’s
second-level leadership and below are either uneasy with or opposed
to an explicit human rights aspect to development assistance.
—Apparently it is either feared that recipient countries will object
or that this kind of focus is alien to AID’s operations. (The latter is as
much an obstacle as pointed up by AID inaction on a Rwandan Gov-
ernment proposal for AID training of judiciary cadres (low level magis-
trates). Embassy Kigali has stressed repeatedly the importance of re-
sponding to something proposed by, not imposed upon, Rwanda.)5
—While AID now seems to be looking at ideas, given the time con-
sumed by actual project formulation it may well mean that we reach
the end of the Fiscal Year (September 30) without more than a token
project or two, if any, having been actually implemented.
—The language of 116 (e) is broad enough to cover a broad range
of possible activities, but they should have at least an indirect or con-
tributory bearing on civil and political rights. It would not be appro-
priate to label a refugee assistance or other economic-social assistance
activity as filling the bill.
—You would appreciate Governor Gilligan checking into this per-
sonally in view of the congressional interest in the matter.
5 An unknown hand added the period at the end of the sentence and the closed
paren.
142.
Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 3, 1978
SUBJECT
Fascell’s Hesitation on the Human Rights Institute
John Richardson called today to say that Dante Fascell has been
contacted by representatives of OMB indicating that the President is
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 28, Human Rights: 5/77–11/78. No classification marking. Outside the System. Sent
for action. Printed from a copy that bears Bartholomew’s initials. A handwritten notation
indicates that a copy was sent to Huntington on May 4.
