1386  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
present tension in Far East, and cause failure achieve relaxed situation 
there. This was reason he proposed discuss question relaxing tension 
in Far East. They on their part had made repeated efforts and made 
series of proposals in course talks in order that tension in Taiwan Area 
may be relaxed.
17. Wang continued, we had discussed for nearly two years and 
still had not achieved anything. He had always been dissatisfied with 
the situation. It not his side who stalling in this question, not his side 
who had digressed from this problem. Still remained to see whether 
serious efforts would be made in these talks to relax tension in Taiwan 
Area. In this regard no empty words would settle the problem.
18. I replied all I had to say was important thing not that we agree 
on past history. Important thing was we take new departure. I pro­
posed that new departure two years ago. That departure was to make 
it unequivocally clear that we were not going to use force or threat of 
force to settle our differences. His government still publicly and in 
this room maintained threat use force if it could not otherwise achieve 
its objectives. Nothing that had been said could change that fact. Once 
that threat clearly and unequivocally removed so negotiations could 
take place free from that threat, attempts to resolve them could be 
undertaken with some hope of success. To say U.S. in conjunction 
with allies would renounce common sense measures taken to meet 
that threat was not serious attempt at negotiation, but rather a call to 
surrender to Wang’s point of view. What I have asked and still asked 
was that the threat be renounced.
19. Wang replied, in course past two years he had repeatedly said 
we should take active steps to settle dispute in Taiwan area. They 
had time and again expressed dissatisfaction at fact meetings being 
stalled and problems remained unsettled. They had made various con­
crete proposals but these had not aroused either a response or an echo. 
I had mentioned need of taking up new departure—­new starting point. 
This would be welcomed on his part. This would mean one should not 
further drag out these talks but take steps to push talks forward, to 
stop empty statements, and one should take concrete action. Even more 
important would be to see concrete action coming out from new depar­
ture I had referred to.
20. I replied, new departure I had referred to was renunciation 
threat force proposed by my side. It was departure he still refused to 
undertake. It was departure which was fundamental.
21. Wang replied I had said that relaxation tension in Taiwan 
area was fundamental problem to be dealt with between us. To this 
he agreed. Question remained by what formula disputes between us 
were to be settled. Any proposal for settlement this problem which 
violated sovereign rights of one side was unacceptable. Any proposal
