968 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 191. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, January 17, 1991, 1450Z 531. Subject: START: Foiled Again? 1. Secret—Entire Text. 2. With a Bartholomew-Obukhov meeting now scheduled for next week, perhaps a message from Geneva would be timely. However, it is difficult to know what to say that would be helpful, given the great uncertainties surrounding the summit and the Gulf and how these bear upon START. 3. People are working furiously here, but progress since the break has been disappointingly slow. Soviet backtracking from the Houston agreements was a major contributor to our problems, of course. We seem to have gotten that part of our work back on track, but it cost us valuable time. Another problem is that we still are spending a lot of time inventing new material, which diverts us from resolving existing brackets. For example, brand new notifications keep appearing and the ACDA lawyers have just invented a whole new protocol, similar to that for the CFE treaty, on the early implementation of certain provisions. Finally, as someone here commented, the backstoppers continue to act as though it were 1988, sending unexpected new material and reopening agreed language in unhelpful ways. Nevertheless brackets are disappearing and several major packages (rapid reload, prototypes, space issues, etc.) will, if implemented, clean up large portions of text. The memorandum on inspection procedures is probably the only piece of the treaty still far from resolution. Motors, Stages and Canisters 4. As a result of the Houston deal on PPCM, a solid rocket motor is no longer a unit of account. Thus the long-­standing equation, motor-­ stage-­missile, is no longer valid. However, locational restrictions remain on solid rocket motors. We have made a major effort here in the past week to reach agreement on the size criteria to be used at PPCM portals and in inspections of declared facilities. This has involved much discussion of solid rocket motors, stages and launch canisters. A closely related issue is weights, measures and unique identifiers. We are pursuing this vigorously in several groups and may have some ad ref agreements soon. I will not attempt to describe the deal in detail, since it is likely to change tomorrow, but I can outline the elements as they 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D9100054–0529. Secret; Priority.
