The Search for a Broader Peace, March 27–December 31, 1979 242. Editorial Note On March 27, 1979, in the aftermath of the signing of the Egyptian- Israeli Peace Treaty, a conference of Foreign Ministers from eighteen Arab states and the Palestine Liberation Organization convened in Baghdad to consider the implementation of sanctions censuring Egypt’s negotiation with Israel passed at the Baghdad Summit in November 1978. Reporting on the opening session, the United States Interests Section in Baghdad noted the “harsh rhetoric” used by Vice Chairman of the Iraqi Ba’ath Party Saddam Hussein, Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat, and Iraqi Foreign Minister Saddoun Hammadi, to condemn the Peace Treaty, the U.S. role in its negotiation, and Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat. In his speech to the first public session, Hussein “made it clear that any Arab state not remaining committed” to the Baghdad resolutions “was an ally of Sadat and thus an ally of the Zionist enemy.” It was, he continued, “incumbent on Arabs to take actions against any backsliders lest decisions of Arab Kings and Presidents become mere ink on paper.” Saddam also criticized the United States for “pushing Sadat in to a peace settlement,” an action which he noted would cause U.S. interests in the Arab world to “suffer.” Arafat called upon the Arab countries to “take decisions to punish the U.S. and to impose boycotts on it in the fields of petroleum, finance and commerce.” Lastly, Hammadi stated that the United States “bore the ‘primary responsibility’” for the “capitulationist treaty,” adding it was the “nationalist responsibility of Arabs to check Zionist imperialist conspiracy through an increase of awareness and sacrifices.” Hammadi’s speech outlined six demands for the conference: 1) “to expel Egypt from the Arab League and to isolate it both from Arab world and within the international community;” 2) transfer the Arab League headquarters from Cairo, along with all of the League’s associated institutions; 3) stop all Arab economic, financial, and technical assistance programs for Egypt; 4) “withdraw all official and private Arab deposits from Egypt[ian] financial institutions;” 5) “freeze” Egyptian membership in all economic, cultural and other groupings; and 6) “call upon the Egyptian people to shoulder their responsibility by supporting collective Arab efforts to confront Zionist, imperialist plots which have turned the Egyptian regime into their executive tool.” (Telegram 694 from Baghdad, March 28; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790142–0982) 814
