151.10 Wong Chong-sing
[Document 855]
The Secretary of State to the Consul in Chargé at Hongkong
(Carleton)
WASHINGTON, January 5, 1925.
SIR: The Department has received your despatch No. 621 of October 15,
1924,1 upon the subject of the visa of certificates of identity held by
American citizens of the Chinese race, and in this connection the
Department encloses a copy of a letter received from Mr. August J. Knapp1
stating that one Wong Mow, a native born American citizen of Chinese
descent, has a minor son named Wong Chong Sing, residing in China whom
he desires to bring to the United States but that some difficulty has been
experienced in obtaining the necessary visa from your office.
You are informed that a person of the class above described, who may claim
American citizenship under the provision of Section 1993 of the Revised
Statutes of the United States, may present to the Consulate General his own
affidavit setting forth that his blood father was born in the United States,
and giving the place and date of the affiant’s birth. This affidavit should be
accompanied by documents bearing the endorsement of a qualified
representative of the Immigration Service, Department of Labor, showing
that Department’s findings as to the father’s status. Upon presentation of
such an affidavit and accompanying document, the consular officer is
authorized to issue a certificate under the seal of the Consulate General,
giving the name of the person concerned and showing the nature of the
evidence submitted to establish his father’s birth in the United States. To the
certificate the Consul should attach and certify thereto a photographic
likeness of the person to whom the certificate is issued. Such certificate
may then be used as a travel document for use in returning from China to
the United States. The question of the admission to the United States of the
bearer of such a document is one which must be determined upon his arrival
at an American port of entry, and the person to whom the certificate is
