Chapter 7, January–May 1991  969
emerged yesterday. The Soviets seem to have agreed to list lengths, 
diameters and weights in the MOU. The size criterion at Votkinsk and 
Pavlograd would be an arbitrary size bearing a remarkable resemblance 
to an SS–25 canister. The size criterion for OSI would be an arbitrary 
reference cylinder bearing a remarkable resemblance to a solid rocket 
motor. This is premised on our allowing PPCM of the small ICBM. This 
is a crucial piece of the solution and should be in our interest, since it 
would preserve our option to base it in a mobile mode later.
5. Establishing initial verification of the technical characteristics of 
the various missiles will be complicated. We can see two uninteresting 
missiles—­the SS–13 and SS–N–17—­up close and personal right after 
entry into force. The others will have to be dealt with by some combina-
tion of inspection as missiles are presented for elimination, inspection 
of training models and other creative but as yet unagreed procedures. 
The future of Cargoscan is unclear.
Other Miscellaneous Developments
6. —­You may see references to the “real Geneva package.” This is 
a moveable feast of 8 or 9 issues the Ambassadors are trying to resolve 
which keeps changing. The further we go, the more the remaining 
issues will be packaged in pairs or larger groupings and settled ad ref 
here. I strongly support this approach as the only way to get to the end 
of the road.
– The Soviets say they want both silos and mobile launchers at 
space launch facilities. This is addressed in a larger ad ref package on 
space issues. You will soon receive our RFG on this.
– Work on the MOU has focused on site diagrams. The Soviets 
recently showed us a vastly improved site diagram of a heavy bomber 
base that came close to what we want in terms of detail and coverage. 
The delegation was also pleased by the last guidance cable on site dia-
grams that outlined Washington’s preferred approach and left it to us 
to negotiate details. (Similar guidance on other issues when possible 
would save a lot of time here and in backstopping.) If and when the 
exchange of site diagrams takes place the delegation is not planning 
to send the package home officially, so as not to give OSD and others 
another chance at micromanaging the negotiations. We, however, will 
unofficially fax the Soviet site diagrams to PM. Assuming Soviet coop-
eration, finishing the MOU by early February should not be a problem.
– We have made good progress on the technical issues in Article X 
(telemetry). Roslyakov told me January 14 that Obukhov will be pre-
pared to settle the tape exchange issue in next week’s meeting. It is 
not clear whether other data denial issues can also be resolved at this 
meeting.
– We are hoping to make what is left of tagging as credible as possi-
ble, using actual factory markings where these are accessible or, where 
not, requiring that they be reproduced in accessible locations. [3½ lines 
not declassified]
