National Security Policy  827
Under the proposed plan, $4.22 billion worth would constitute objec­
tives, leaving an excess of $2.95 billion.
Gov. Hoegh repeatedly emphasized that disposal of excesses 
would be undertaken only if the market conditions for the item were 
satisfactory and if disposal would not adversely affect our foreign rela­
tions. He made clear that it is proposed at this time to sell only natu­
ral rubber. There will be further interagency discussions prior to any 
disposal of aluminum. As regards other minerals, the market is not in 
satisfactory condition at this time.
Gov. Hoegh also stressed the importance of pressing again next 
year the general legislation which would eliminate the requirement for 
a six-­month waiting period prior to any disposal.
Gov. Hoegh then went over the specific recommendations in 
the Cabinet Paper. Following this, Sec. Benson inquired whether the 
three-­year requirement was based on estimates of need in an all out 
war. Gov. Hoegh said the basis was that of a three-­year period of 
emergency, not necessarily related to the duration of any potential 
war. The President added a word about his own concern with having 
resources at hand for accomplishing recovery in the event of nuclear 
attack.
Mr. Stans highly recommended approval since the paper contained 
all the needed safegards.
Mr. McElroy suggested that the paper be amended to eliminate 
the requirement that all the agencies approve each disposal action—
something that would be pretty cumbersome. The President said that 
concurrence rather that approval would be satisfactory but that spe­
cific agreement seemed to be needed. Mr. Flemming concurred with 
the President’s view.
Dr. Flemming inquired whether Sec. Mitchell should be consulted 
because of the relationship of any strike. Sec. Mitchell indicated that 
satisfactory arrangements for this were already established.
The paper was approved.
[Omitted here is discussion of other subjects.]
L.A. Minnich, Jr.
Copy to:
Mrs. Whitman (2)
Mr. Minnich
