514
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
b) Task the Schecter policy information committee to come up with
such guidance.
c) Disseminate the guidance developed by the committee to the
domestic staff for general guidance to all Administration officials.
d) Once we have an official agreed line, make sure that all top
officials, and particularly Administration Soviet experts, adhere to that
line. (C)
181.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State and the International Communication
Agency1
Moscow, January 28, 1980, 1706Z
1474. Subject: Soviet Reaction to U.S. Policy.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. One of the first authoritative Soviet reactions to President Carter’s
State of the Union message has come from Leonid Zamyatin, Chief of
the International Information Department of the CPSU Central Com-
mittee, who appeared, along with Yevgeny Primakov, the Director of
the Institute of Oriental Studies of the USSR Academy of Sciences, on
the January 26 “Studio 9” television program.
3. Zamyatin made the sharpest criticism to date of President Carter
personally and of the “turnaround” in U.S. policy—which he said had
begun long before Afghanistan.2 He also, for the first time to our
knowledge by a high level Soviet official, publicly made the charge
that Hafizullah Amin was a CIA agent. The Soviet press has printed
this charge before, but attributed it to Afghan officials. Also of interest
are Zamyatin’s claim that the Soviet Union more than once had warned
the United States via diplomatic channels to “stop the action against
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Box 6, Afghanistan: 1/27–28/80. Confidential; Immediate; Sensitive. Sent for information
to Warsaw, Amman, Baghdad, Beijing, Beirut, Belgrade, Berlin, Bonn, Bucharest, Buda-
pest, Cairo, Damascus, Islamabad, Jidda, Kabul, Leningrad, London, Paris, Prague, Rome
Sofia, Tel Aviv, Tokyo, Tripoli, USBerlin, USNATO, and USUN. Printed from a copy
that was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 An item in the President’s Daily Brief, January 29, described an article in Pravda,
January 29, as “Moscow’s initial authoritative reply” to Carter’s State of the Union
address, and characterized it as “polemical and vindictive” and “replete with abusive
language about your administration.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director
of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordina-
tor for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, PDBs)
