National Security Policy  261
1903–­b–(3), is transmitted herewith for consideration by the National 
Security Council at its meeting on Thursday, July 24, 1958.
James S. Lay, Jr.
Executive Secretary
cc:  The Secretary of the Treasury
The Director, Bureau of the Budget
The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
Enclosure
Memorandum From McElroy to the NSC
Washington, June 18, 1958
SUBJECT
Basic National Security Policy
REFERENCES
A. NSC 5810/1
B. NSC Action No. 1903–­b–(3)
C. NSC Action No. 1934
1. Transmitted herewith are Department of Defense comments and 
recommendations pursuant to NSC Action No. 1903–­b–(3). In the for­
mulation of these views, the conclusions and recommendations of the 
State-Defense study, “U.S. and Allied Capabilities for Limited Military 
Operations to 1 July 1961”, the memorandum signed by the Secretaries 
of State and Defense forwarding that study to the National Security 
Council, and the comments on that study developed by the Planning 
Board and forwarded by the Chairman of the Planning Board, have 
been seriously studied and taken into account.
2. As a result of the review by the Department of Defense of the mili­
tary aspects of Basic Policy, it is concluded that there have been no recent 
developments which change fundamentally the major undertakings for 
which the military should be prepared. The major threat to the security of 
the United States continues, and will continue in the foreseeable future, 
to reside in the capability of the Soviet Union to precipitate and wage 
general nuclear war against the United States. Therefore, the highest pri­
ority in our military effort must continue to be given to the deterrent to 
all-­out nuclear war.
3. In this connection, it is the intention of the Department of 
Defense to insure that this deterrent is adequate for its purpose but 
not excessive. It is believed that the conclusions of the Department of 
Defense study on Defensive and Offensive Weapons Systems, which
