860
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
6. Program of Work and Budget (PWB) 1980–81. Discussion indi-
cated virtual unanimity of support for the programs, policies and prior-
ities reflected in the proposed PWB. Developing countries supported
the budget at a minimum level. Ninety-six (96) countries voted in favor;
5 major contributors accounting for 56 percent of the assessed budgets
(UK, U.S., Canada, FRG, and Japan) abstained, reflecting difficulty with
the magnitude of the budget—dols. 278.86 million for the biennium.
Mexico also abstained, but on a technicality.
7. Review of field programs. Principal thrust of Secretariat was to
criticize UNDP, explicitly charging it with mal-administration in
choosing non-FAO sources to execute UNDP-financed projects. Most
speakers highly complimentary of Secretariat document. U.S. remarks
concerned with need for more stress on needs of rural poor; small, dis-
advantaged farmers; and landless workers; in the design, implementa-
tion and evaluation of programs/projects. Resolution on development
assistance adopted. U.S. reserved on paragraph requesting increased
contributions for special action programs.
8. Medium term objectives. U.S. critique of document, while gener-
ally favorable, argued that programs should reflect deliberate shift to
assisting low-income food deficit countries; comprehensive approach
to nutrition, rather than stressing data collection; and added emphasis
to rural employment and increasing level of participation of women in
development activities and the number of rural programs benefiting
women.
9. Action from World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development (WCARRD).
—DG indicated steps FAO has taken in implementation of
WCARRD Action Program (AP). FAO actively helping develop a
number of regional development centers to assist countries in the im-
plementation of the AP. FAO staff actively engaged in reviewing cur-
rent and projected field programs to make them more responsive to AP
goals.
—DG presented FAO estimate that dols 20 million needed, on a
voluntary basis, over next five years to finance these activities. Resolu-
tion, including target, approved by Conference. U.S. presentation
strongly supportive of AP as means of reaching higher levels of equity
and income.
10. Near East Regional Office. Director-General engaged in intense
and prolonged discussions with both sides until eleventh hour in effort
to reach compromise which would preclude a divisive vote on floor.
Position of U.S. delegation throughout was completely supportive of
Egypt. Compromise finally reached called for regional office in Cairo to
be closed quote until decided otherwise by Conference unquote.
Director-General authorized to determine which regional activities to
