Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 The United States has done nothing and will do nothing that could be used to justify violent or imprudent action by anyone. While we are pursuing all avenues of diplomatic resolution, we’re also acting unilaterally as appropriate—with restraint, yes, but without hesitation. First, in order to discourage violence and possible bloodshed here, which when televised and transmitted back to Iran might threaten the safety of the hostages, I’ve discouraged the issuing of permits for demonstrations on Federal properties here in Washington. Consistent with our laws and pursuant to my own powers and responsibilities, I have also encouraged local and State officials to take similar legal action. Second, I’ve directed our immigration authorities to review the visas of some 50,000 Iranian students, who are guests here in our country.2 Our Nation is fully committed to the enhancement of human rights, the protection of legal rights, and the enhancement of civil justice. All provisions of the United States Constitution will be honored. All foreign nationals who are here lawfully may continue here with their work or their studies. But those who are here illegally will be processed promptly and lawfully for deportation back to their own country. Third, I want to remove any question that our principles might be compromised by our supposed need for Iranian oil. Early this week, therefore, I ordered an immediate halt to any purchases or shipments of Iranian oil to the United States of America.3 I’m determined to make clear that we will never allow any foreign country to dictate any American policy. Fourth, in order to protect our economic interests and to ensure that claims on Iran by the United States or by United States citizens are settled in an orderly manner, we’ve legally frozen official Iranian property and financial assets.4 The order does not affect any accounts other than those of the Government of Iran, the Central Bank of Iran, or other government-controlled entities. 2 On November 10, the White House issued an announcement directing Civiletti to identify any Iranian students in the United States not in compliance with entry visa requirements and begin deportation proceedings. In addition, the President directed the Immigration and Naturalization Service to issue a notice requiring Iranian students to report their present location and status to local INS offices. (Ibid., p. 2109) 3 In remarks to reporters made in the Briefing Room at the White House the afternoon of November 12, the President discussed this decision and indicated that he had directed Duncan to collaborate with Congress, other officials, and industry leaders to develop “new measures to conserve oil” in light of the situation. (Ibid., p. 2110) Proclamation 4702, issued by the President on November 12, codified the discontinuance of oil purchases. For the text, see ibid., pp. 2110–2111.
