608 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I have understood, at home and abroad, that stability is not the status quo. It comes through human progress. We will continue in this American tradition. 119. Editorial Note On May 9, 1979, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and Secretary of Defense Harold Brown announced at the White House that the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT II) negotiations had concluded. The U.S. and Soviet Governments instructed their delegates at Geneva to incorporate agreements reached by Vance and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin during their negotiations into the draft treaty and resolve any outstanding issues. Vance commented on the significance of the treaty and then discussed the way forward: “This treaty will not only mark the end of one negotiation, it will open the way for another. When it is ratified by the Senate, it will become the cornerstone for still further limits in reductions in SALT III. “The national debate which we now commence is not only about this treaty. We are still considering as well the inescapable realities of a nuclear world—the necessity to our security of a strong defense and the grave danger to our security of an unlimited race in nuclear arms, for our security today lies in maintaining a stable strategic balance between two nations with awesome power. “The SALT II treaty will make a substantial contribution to that stability. We have demonstrated through the SALT process that even as we compete in some areas, the United States and Soviet Union can and must cooperate to lessen the dangers of war. In this way, the treaty can serve to open the path to a more constructive and peaceful relationship between us. “This treaty is a message of hope for us and for all the people of the world.” Brown explained that the SALT II treaty would aid the United States in maintaining a strategic nuclear balance. He highlighted the main elements of the agreement and concluded: “In sum, SALT will help us maintain flexible and credible deterrence, stability, and essential equivalence. Without the treaty, we could also do these things, but it would be more costly and less certain. None of the challenges we face would be less without the treaty, and some would be considerably greater. All the increases we plan in our defense
