their appointment gives a true measure of Chile’s good faith in accepting
the decisions of the Commission.
Item 8. The indefensible travel restrictions were nominally revoked. No
information has been obtained to the effect that the objectionable hotel and
guest law has been revoked or modified, but no complaint that the law is
being formally invoked against Peruvians has been recalled.
The situation both as respects free transit and as respects the right to
entertain Peruvians, item 8, as well as equal opportunity for propaganda and
flag display, item 9, may be judged from a report made yesterday by Udy
who has just returned from taking the testimony of over 30 witnesses both
Peruvians and Chileans in Putre, a town in the interior. Udy is an examiner
appointed pursuant to a resolution of the Commission. The testimony given
before him has of course been made of record. His report shows: (a)
flagrant interference with the transit of returning Peruvian electors by
carbineers despite the often proclaimed repeal of the transit restrictions; (b)
repeated brutal beatings of these same electors by carbineers and Chilean
propagandists; (c) a beating of the mother of a returning Peruvian elector
because she received her son in her house; (d) prevention of legitimate
Peruvian propaganda by espionage and intimidation to such an extent that
the townspeople do not dare to speak to returning Peruvian electors or
Peruvian personnel of the registration and election board; (e) forbidding
Peruvians to fly the Peruvian flag; (f) depriving returning Peruvian electors
of their personal property and the use of their real property; and (g) a
complete failure on the part of the local authorities either to punish the
perpetrators of any of these offenses or to prevent their recurrence and
continuation. In fact the ring leaders and instigators of the unlawful
oppression, coercion, intimidation, and violence are the Chilean member of
the registration and election board and the local commander of carbineers.
The situation in Putre is typical of conditions which exist all over the
province and which would render any election under present conditions a
farce.
 
Carbineers exercise strict control over circulation in the interior by means
of posts established for that purpose at the more important towns, villages,
