300
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
83.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, October 11, 1978, 5:35–6:15 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of President’s Meeting with Egyptian Delegation
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Hon. Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Hon. Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs
Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff
H.E. Kamal Hassan Ali, Minister of Defense
H.E. Boutros Boutros Ghali, Acting Foreign Minister
H.E. Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States
H.E. Usama al-Baz, Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs
The President welcomed the Egyptian delegation and referred to
the good feeling produced in Egypt and Israel by the Camp David
agreements. He expressed his hope that the remaining differences
might be identified quickly so that the talks could reach a conclusion
within days not weeks. The Israelis have agreed to work quickly.
The President said that the United States had drafted a standard
form2 of a peace treaty to use as a model in the discussions. This will
provide a starting point. Ambassador Eilts has also gone over the Sinai
map with President Sadat. We want to work toward realization of the
Camp David agreements within the shortest timeframe envisaged. The
President has already talked to the Israelis about the need for rapid
moves. He urged them to complete the first withdrawal within three
months, not nine months. The Israelis in return raised the question of
how rapidly Egypt could move toward recognition and the normaliza-
tion of relations.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 14, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 10/11–12/78. Secret; Sensitive. The memo-
randum was found attached to an October 24 memorandum from Quandt to Brzezinski
indicating that this is the official transcript of the conversation. Carter’s handwritten
notes from the meeting are in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign
Affairs File, Box 1, Egypt, 11/77–11/81.
2 A copy of the initial draft negotiating text of the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty is in
the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box
2, Arab-Israeli Peace Negotiations 1978: Volume II [III]. An earlier version, dated October
9 and bearing Carter’s handwritten comments and textual changes is in the National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Files of Alfred L. Ath-
erton, Lot 80D166, Box 6, Blair House Talks—October–December 1978: Briefing books.
