518 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Fourth, in discussions with Rick Burt in Geneva, the Soviets have talked informally but favorably about the possibility of eliminating all silo-­based MIRVs in START II. De-MIRVing is clearly consistent with the strategic approach of the new thinkers. Indeed, the positioning of Alexei Arbatov—­a radical new thinker—­alongside Nazarkin in the discussions about START II is probably a signal of where the new thinkers, including quite likely both Gorbachev and Shevardnadze, want to go. Even if the Soviets rejected the MIRVed mobile ban and we decided to withdraw the idea, we would be able to get back on track without undue difficu11y. If you could get internal agreement on this approach quickly, you could think about floating the package privately (perhaps as a non-­paper) to Shevardnadze in Namibia. You could suggest this is just an idea, one Shevardnadze need not react to immediately. If Shevardnadze finds merit in it, he could let you know at the upcoming Ministerial. Shevardnadze might take this as another sign that we are forward leaning and prepared to pursue ambitious initiatives down the road. Putting the Solution into Play: A Game Plan Given time constraints and travel plans, the following steps are suggested for pursuing the initiative: • Outline the approach to Cheney/Scowcroft in your Friday afternoon meeting with them,6 and seek their support and Presidential approval by early next week. Suggested talking points are attached.7 (Especially given the Ottawa problem, Colin Powell needs to be brought in early on.) • Consult with Nunn, Warner, and other key Congressional figures before departing for Africa, outlining our ICBM package and seeking their commitment not only to press for rail MX funding temporarily (in support of the proposal) but also to press for it in the event the Soviets reject a MIRVed mobile ban.8 • Present the package to Shevardnadze when you see him in Windhoek, urging him to provide a Soviet response well in advance of his arrival in Washington. This would allow us to make any necessary adjustments and consult Congressmen before the Ministerial, perhaps to come to closure there. 6 March 9. No minutes were found. 7 Attached but not printed. 8 Baker drew two vertical lines in the left-­hand margin beside this section.
