710 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV inclusion of an effective penetrator. And it seems likely that tanker support aircraft (if needed) will have to be comparable to bombers/CMCs in base escape characteristics. (C) As reported to you by Charlie Stebbins, the Air Staff is attempting a short study of all this intended to go to SecDef later this month. The rush results from CINCSAC pressing hard for the FB–111B that the Air Force is not keen about. (C) This seems likely to be a major programmatic issue over the next year to which we must pay close attention for fiscal and political reasons. Even more important, like C3I, strategic aircraft are likely to be closely linked to doctrinal questions. Although we are not in a position simply to pronounce a strategic doctrine for the 1980s and 1990s (doctrine doesn’t get made that way anyhow), we can and should assure that the future of strategic aircraft is discussed in terms of future doctrinal perspectives. For example, what are the new implications of your three questions on stable deterrence, crisis bargaining and warfighting? How should our growing concern about endurance and reconstitution shape strategic aircraft design? Do capabilities for limited options present special requirements? What SALT III, etc., environment should we plan for? (C) The Air Force, SAC, and other strategic aircraft advocates have long sensed the value of new doctrine in promoting their interests. The “flexibility” of manned aircraft is always featured in the relevant brochures. But when they get down to cases, these people generally think of strategic aircraft as dump trucks to carry megatonage into the USSR in a short, intense war having no aftermath of interest. Designers and force planners do not develop doctrine; they use it (or evade it) to rationalize “their thing.” (C) We are in close touch with the Air Staff people currently working this problem, and with their OSD audiences. We can therefore track and influence the results. (C) But we should take further steps: —At an early BBV lunch you should raise the nexus of aircraft and doctrine.3 —We should follow the planned NSC meeting on C3I, “quick fixes”, and counterforces with a follow-­on that addresses the content of “countervailing strategy” (Harold Brown’s felicitous name for the strategic doctrines you are pushing) and its implications for strategic aircraft.4 3 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this point and wrote: “and ask what?” 4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to the portion of this point that begins with “addresses the content” and ends with “implications for strategic aircraft,” drew a line from this section to the bottom of the memorandum, and wrote: “this is interesting. What would it involve?”
