832
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
no tangible evidence that Mubarak is at present planning any such
thing.
17. Despite these caveats, our current assessment is that Mubarak
is the most likely person to succeed in a constitutional succession. The
question remains how would he perform? Many consider Mubarak to
be a lightweight, intellectually unsuited to manage Egypt’s affairs. Yet
the same, and more, was said of Sadat following Nasser’s death. Sadat
learned quickly and confounded his critics, although not without some
difficulty.
18. While no Sadat in either wisdom or experience, Mubarak has
had a longer apprenticeship under Sadat than the latter enjoyed under
Nasser. Sadat has delegated far more authority to Mubarak than he,
Sadat, ever received from Nasser. Mubarak now has had considerable
experience in local government, party, and diplomatic affairs. He has
tremendous energy and appears to have grown in the job. His greatest
liabilities are his tendency to adopt simplistic approaches to complex
issues, and his frequent attempts to personalize abstract problems. We
believe he would be better qualified to rule after some more seasoning,
but suspect he could handle the job if it were thrust upon him. His ex-
ternal and internal policies, at least initially, would not deviate from
those of Anwar Sadat so long as the twin objectives of (a) further
progress on Middle East peace front and, (b) economic development
makes headway with our and other friendly states’ help. In connection
with the first, Mubarak is not rabid on the Palestine issue. He has sev-
eral times told the Ambassador that if meaningful autonomy for the
Gazans can be obtained, the West Bankers can be left to stew in their
own juice, if they refuse to participate in the peace process.
Eilts
248.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
Washington, April 29, 1979, 1721Z
108592. Subject: Letter to Prince Saud. London for Under Secretary
Newsom: Alert Tice at Hotel Europa; Jidda for Charge. Ref: Cairo 8604.
1. (C) Entire text
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790196–0134.
Confidential; Niact Immediate; Exdis. Also sent Immediate to Jidda and Riyadh. Drafted
by Roger B. Merrick (NEA/ARP); cleared by Crawford, Sterner, Saunders, and Richard
Castrodale (S/S–O); approved by Vance. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo.
