1977 181 4. It would also answer congressional criticisms, such as those concerning the B–1 and MX in the past several weeks, that we do not have a coherent defense policy and would provide a response to arguments (such as those advanced in the attached letter from Gene Rostow) that you should provide more vigorous leadership in this area. 5. It would usefully balance your other major foreign policy speeches which have emphasized the need to control the arms race and restrict arms proliferation through United States-Soviet Union and multilateral negotiations. 6. It could also, particularly if a SALT agreement is reached, provide reassurance to our allies that we are not relaxing our determination or our ability to meet our commitments to them. Given these reasons why such a speech might well be desirable about the first of the year, I am, unless you object, asking Sam Huntington to work with other members of the NSC Staff in developing ideas and themes for it.3

Attachment

Letter From Eugene Rostow of the Committee on the Present Danger to President Carter4 Washington, September 19, 1977 Dear Mr. President, The Executive Committee of the Committee on the Present Danger appreciated our meeting last Friday, September 16, with Samuel Huntington, of your National Security Council staff. Pursuant to your request at our meeting on August 4,5 he came to explain the several steps which led to your assessment of Soviet policy, and your decisions in PD–18 of August 26.6 After a thorough and spirited discussion of the main problems, we expressed these general preliminary reactions to him: (1) On the basis of Mr. Huntington’s exposition, the thrust and tenor of PD–18 appeared promising to us, but we believe its background 3 At the end of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “Naturally, we will coordinate with Harold.” 4 No classification marking. A copy was sent to Huntington. 5 Carter and Brown met with Rostow and other members of the Committee on the Present Danger in the Cabinet Room the afternoon of August 4. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) 6 Carter signed PD–18 on August 24. See Document 31.
