1956 1225 resolved. I had continued hope he would enter into agreement with me which would renounce threat force, thus open up way settlement other problems. US was one who made this proposal—expressed willingness unconditionally renounce use threat force in settlement that dispute. I still hoped his govt could perceive that acceptance that simple and straightforward proposition as well as carrying out first agreement between us was in its own interest as well as in interest peace in Far East and world. If there was good faith this was something entirely capable resolution between us here. If not good faith certainly could not be resolved at other level discussion. 10. Wang replied he not going make more comments on course our talks here as record of more than year past has fully proved tremendous efforts put in these talks by their side. He recalled occasion on which I had indicated talks on this Ambassadorial level capable resolving issues between our two countries. At that time he had said disagreed with that view but added if US genuinely desirous do so, of course he glad go along. I had stated that for our talks to go ahead depends on resolution practical problems, to this he readily agreed. However record of past year demonstrated US Govt not produced authority for settling issues and had not shown willingness do so. 11. Wang continued, had just made statement covering ques­ tion return civilians as well as what I called existence threat use force Taiwan. Both these questions demonstrated fundamentally erroneous approach my side to these questions. We must recognize principle of mutual benefit must be observed in any negotiations to resolve contro­ versial issues. In my statement I had repeatedly said I expected his govt do thus and so. This approach to talks entirely reveals standpoint my side; that is my side only takes account of own interests. On question return civilians, if US not willing take any action or make gestures to improve situaton of Chinese in US desiring return China and if US only made charges against his govt, how could such approach facilitate our resolving the question. With reference cases Chinese residents in US who long expressed desire return homeland and not able do so, can this situation indicate good faith on part US to carry out agreement? US authorities been trying coerce Chinese residents who desire return his country to apply for so-­called Taiwan entry permits or even cause them proceed Taiwan itself and US authorities trying coerce Chinese obtain permanent residence US. Could all these cases be described as record American good faith. If we were to talk about good faith ques­ tion involved US alone. 12. Wang continued, next, on question existence threat force Taiwan. Is it not situation US posing threat force against China? How can anyone say that in Taiwan it China posing threat force against US? Was it not fact precisely China which first proposed China and US
