942
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Zahedi’s position will be open to further attack if he goes through with
his plans to go to Europe for necessary medical attention following the
Shah’s return. Moreover, the possibility of assassination is always
present. Finally, the terms of the entire Majlis and one-third of the
Senate will expire in the spring of 1956, and toward the end of 1955 the
Shah may take the occasion to remove Zahedi and install a “service”
government for the electoral period as has been done frequently in the
past. On the other hand, should the Shah still be prepared to back
Zahedi as the year ends, the latter’s position would be strengthened,
since he would presumably have some part in deciding which candi-
dates would obtain the all-important support of the government and
the Shah.
25. Zahedi’s removal would not necessarily lead to any significant
change in the over-all stability and orientation of the government, since
the Shah would remain the most influential single figure in the gov-
ernmental structure and since the present government’s major policies
are as much his as Zahedi’s. However, a successor might not be as
willing as Zahedi to use force to maintain order. Furthermore, suc-
cessful efforts to remove Zahedi would encourage similar attacks on
his successor and might accelerate the return of extremist groups to po-
sitions of political influence. Such a development would tend to revive
the pre-Mossadeq pattern of political instability. In this situation, each
prime minister in turn would secure a temporary majority in parlia-
ment by promising a redistribution of spoils. Sooner or later, however,
he would no longer be able to meet the continuing demands of his sup-
porters and would be forced out in favor of someone else who was
willing to promise more. If, in the meantime, the Shah had not taken ac-
tion in the face of a succession of weak governments, a possibility of a
coup by a strong military leader would have been created.
26. None of the leading candidates for Zahedi’s position has any
solid political support and, moreover, none shows any great promise as
a national leader. The most prominent current candidate is Senator Ma-
nuchehr Eqbal, an experienced government official, believed to be par-
ticularly well-disposed toward the British and to have the confidence of
the Shah. The Shah might also appoint his Minister of Court, Hosein
Ala, as an interim prime minister.2 In any case, the effectiveness of any
successor to Zahedi would depend on the willingness and ability of the
Shah and the Prime Minister to cooperate.
2 Other aspirants for the prime ministership include: Senator Javad Bushehri; re-
tired general Hassan Arfa; Senator Dr. Mohammed Sajjadi; Ali Soheyli, a former prime
minister and now ambassador to the UK; and Abol Qasem Najm, a former minister of fi-
nance. [Footnote is in the original.]
