1980 809 185. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 22, 1980 SUBJECT Nuclear Employment Policy (C) The basic strategy document of your Administration, PD–18,2 called for a follow-­on review of our nuclear employment policy. Two major studies, one on targeting and one on secure reserve forces, were completed in 1978 and presented to the SCC in April 1979.3 Although the SCC accepted most of the recommendations, it also called for additional work. (S) At the same time, Harold Brown began implementing the SCC accepted recommendations. In January, 1979, as part of his annual Defense Report, Harold laid out publicly the rationale for our evolving employment policy and gave it a name, “countervailing strategy.” Together with the Joint Chiefs, Harold has been working out a detailed implementation directive that he would issue. In the past few weeks, the few outstanding issues have been resolved. (S) Harold and I have discussed next steps, and we believe that it is wise to codify these changes in a Presidential Directive as originally intended by PD–18. The text of such a directive, which would replace the extant NSDM–242, is at Tab A.4 Harold has edited it personally and has discussed it with the Joint Chiefs of Staff because it largely concerns military contingency planning. (S) The directive marks a significant step in employment doctrine. Its main features are: —Maintenance of a strong thread of continuity with our past deterrence doctrine to include nuclear support for our allies. —New emphasis on flexibility, which will make us better able to adjust to any surprises that growing Soviet capabilities could present us in operations. This is to be achieved through better staffing capabilities, a gradual increase in reserve forces, and better targeting of mobile and soft military targets as well as C3I. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 37, PD–59: 5–8/80. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. The date is handwritten. Carter wrote next to it: “Zbig J.” 2 See Document 31. 3 See Document 118. 4 Printed as Document 208.
