Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission The Attorney General said there was only a political problem. Should we, for example, put in reparations of $1,000 per day for each hostage held? Mr. Cutler said he could see no problem. There was plenty of money to cover any foreseeable claims. If there were insufficient funds, that would be different. The President said that since we must prepare legislation, we should go ahead. He thought that if we were perceived as acting forcefully for a change, that could keep Congress under control. Mr. Jordan said he would hate to see us have to change legislation two months from now to negotiate a solution. The President said the problems are going to be there anyway. We may face a struggle with Congress. He would prefer to let the courts handle this expeditiously. He was not a lawyer, but in the few weeks after the hostages are released—or killed—we should have a quick response. Mr. Aaron noted that the President had earlier indicated a desire to raise with the NSC the proposal of stopping all financial transfers between Iran and the U.S. The main effect of this would be to cut off funds to the Iranian students in the country. Many would go on welfare. Others would probably leave. The SCC had decided that if we wished to get rid of the students, we should simply throw them out rather than use the financial weapon. It would be cleaner. This action was very close to a break in diplomatic relations. The President agreed that this was probably not the way to go. He did want to discuss the possibility of a break in relations, however. Mr. Claytor briefed the President on the number of Iranian military students in the country. Secretary Vance asked what excuse we had to keep 500 military students in this country under these circumstances. Dr. Brzezinski said that if they were not sympathetic to the Khomeini regime, they should be allowed to stay. The President said we could offer them asylum if they want to stay. Mr. Claytor said that the U.S. military would prefer to send them home if the diplomats go. A number of midshipmen are in U.S. colleges just like civilian students. They are paid through Iranian banks. The President wondered what proportion of these Iranian students are supported by the Government. Mr. Claytor said only 500 are actually paid by the Government of Iran. The President said that the other thousands are supported by their families. He thought we should permit them (military students) to stay
