Comprehensive Test Ban
377
prove the test but require the study ACDA has requested prior to even-
tual decision on production of such components.6
[5 lines not declassified] They have made it clear, however, that they
strongly support your objectives and are prepared to do without this
test, if necessary. We recommend that you approve this test subject to
the conditions (treaty conformity, safety, press arrangements, etc.)
which have been agreed in our previous tests of their devices.7
Neutron Weapons. As a final point you should be aware that FUL-
CRUM II includes proof tests of enhanced radiation warheads for
LANCE and a new eight-inch artillery shell. I recommend that you
permit ERDA to complete these tests in order to maintain flexibility for
your decisions on production and deployment of these weapons in the
context of a review of our theater nuclear strategy.8
Subject to your decisions, I will prepare an appropriate memo-
randum to the agencies concerned.
6 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
7 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
8 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
162.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
Washington, July 2, 1977, 2054Z
155109. Exdis—military addressees handle as Specat Exclusive.
Following NATO 06260 sent Action SecState June 30, 1977 repeated to
you. Quote. NATO 06260. Subject: Warnke Briefing on CTB Discussion.
Summary: ACDA Director Warnke briefed the NAC June 27 on the
June 13–16 US-Soviet exploratory talks regarding comprehensive test
ban, noting in particular differences on PNEs, verification, and dura-
tion. The text of this report has been approved by Mr. Warnke. Action
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770237–0319. Se-
cret; Exdis. Sent for information to all NATO capitals; the Secretary of Defense; the U.S.
Commander in Chief, Europe; the U.S. Naval Military Representative to the Supreme
Headquarters of the Allied Powers, Europe, in Belgium; the Commander-in-Chief, At-
lantic Command, Norfolk; and the U.S. Liaison Office to the Supreme Allied Com-
mander, Atlantic, Norfolk. Drafted by Eric Newsom (EUR/RPM); cleared by Homer
Phelps (PM/DCA) and James Timbie (ACDA); and approved by James Thyden (S/S).
