790
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—Need to reiterate themes, particularly those of allies speech
(Commonwealth/WAC August 8).4 Make two economic speeches in
next two months (EB).
—Require that all Deputy Assistant Secretaries and above make a
speech monthly. Add speaking skills section to efficiency report on
FSO’s (IO).
—Stress citizen services stories to personalize department, build
support, combat ivory tower image (CA).
—Consider establishment of consular services office on Capitol
Hill (OES).
—Intensify and institutionalize communications with key interest
groups interested in foreign policy. Improve press guidance to avoid
cliches, evasiveness. Department Spokesman should be willing to deal
with reasonable hypothetical questions. Testify on Hill on interagency
agreed positions only. Consider monthly summaries of current foreign
policy with Q’s and A’s. Make senior officials available to networks
for a series of TV specials on the problems and imperatives of foreign
policymaking (AF).
4 Reference is to Muskie’s August 8 address in San Francisco before the Common-
wealth Club of California and the World Affairs Council of Northern California. Muskie
asserted: “We in the United States need to be sensitive to the special concerns and vulner-
abilities of our allies. At the same time, our allies must accept the growing responsibility
that comes with growing strength. They must be prepared to bear their share of our
common burdens.” (Department of State Bulletin, September 1980, p. 17)
158.
Radio Address by President Carter to the Nation1
Washington, October 19, 1980
Foreign Policy
This is President Jimmy Carter, speaking to you from the Oval Of-
fice of the White House.
For the past 4 years, the United States has been at peace. We’ve
strengthened the foundations of our security. We have pursued our na-
1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pp. 2337–2341. The President spoke
at 12:10 p.m. from the Oval Office at the White House. His address was broadcast live on
the Mutual Broadcasting System.
