3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
262
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
74.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, January 19, 1978, 12:40–2:10 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Dobrynin
While a great deal of the conversation was purely social, during
the more serious part of the lunch the following points were made:
1. Ethiopia: I pointed out to Dobrynin that I see clouds on the ho-
rizon insofar as U.S.-Soviet relations are concerned. The biggest cloud
is Ethiopia. I do not wish to debate the rights and wrongs of the situa-
tion, but simply to stress that the scale and intensity of the Soviet/
Cuban involvement is going to produce a domestic feedback in this
country, affecting our relations. It is neither in their nor in our interest
for this to happen. Dobrynin made the usual arguments, invoking even
our military presence in Iran as a justification, but ultimately agreed
that it is important somehow to terminate this issue as a danger to our
relations. He said that he has already made that point to Moscow. Basi-
cally, he agreed that the best solution would be an immediate termina-
tion of the conflict, based on the principle of territorial integrity, accom-
panied by the pull-out of the Soviets and perhaps Cubans. However, on
the latter point he was rather vague.
2. Nuclear Weapons: He urged a positive U.S. initiative regarding
earlier overtures by Brezhnev about non-first use. He thought that this
would have a more desirable psychological impact. He added that he
thought that the Soviet leaders feel that by and large our attitude
throughout the year has been negative.
3. Carter-Brezhnev Meeting: I suggested to Dobrynin that some of
the difficulties in our relations could perhaps be overcome if our two
leaders could consult with each other. I told him that it is a mistake for
them to insist on tying a meeting to major agreements, because we
could wait for such a meeting too long and it could finally come at a
time when the relationship had gravely deteriorated. Dobrynin made
the usual argument about the press misconstruing a meeting without
major agreements as a failure. I told him that in my judgment we could
have three kinds of a meeting: (1) a meeting linked to major agree-
ments—in which case we may have to wait a long time; (2) a meeting
tied to seeming agreements, as for example on the Indian Ocean, in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 49, Chron: 1/78. Secret. The initial C is written in the upper
right-hand corner of the memorandum indicating that Carter saw it.
