International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1021 ficers Conference. This performance criteria effort relies on the ability of the USAIDs to continue to collect these data on an annual basis. Conceptually, the best measure of accomplishment of a FP program would be the difference between the reduction in fertility produced by the program and what theoretically would have been achieved in the given socio-economic conditions without any FP program. Even attempting to estimate this difference would require a much better understanding than we now have of the relationship between fertility reduction in a particular country and family planning services and other socio-economic factors. In the absence of such multivariate analyses of the determinants of birth rates, one measure of fertility reduction is provided by the increase in the use of contraceptives obtained from public and private programs throughout the country. Based on field experience in selected countries, a rough approximation of the relationship between the crude birth rate and use of reliable methods of contraception (i.e., excluding abstinence, coitus interruptus, and rhythm) is that a two percent increase in the percentage of couples using contraception is associated with a decrease of one birth per thousand population, and that a contraceptive user rate of 60 to 70 percent is associated with a replacement level birth rate of 20 per thousand. In measuring rates of contraceptive use, there is considerable variation among developing country FP programs in the quality and reliability of FP service statistics. Many systems generally collect only data on new acceptors, from which current use rates must be estimated through the application of method continuation rates to new acceptor data or through analysis of contraceptive distribution over time. An increasing number of the developing countries are beginning to use prevalence of use as a measure of program impact, and AID has initiated programs to assist them with this activity. Estimates of contraceptive use and births averted can be improved by better data and more sophisticated techniques of analysis. The responsibility would rest with AID in cooperation with the Office of the Coordinator of Population Affairs, State Department, to establish guidelines for the missions to estimate prevalence of use, and to continue efforts to develop new and better estimates of program impact. One measure of cost-effectiveness can be obtained by dividing annual financial inputs from all sources by the number of users. These cost-per-user statistics (in dollars) are calculated for the last year in which data are available and as averages of the latest three, five, and ten-year periods. A crucial aspect of the analysis of cost-effectiveness is the explanation of variations in cost-per-user rates. These rates tend to be much
