International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1021
ficers Conference. This performance criteria effort relies on the ability
of the USAIDs to continue to collect these data on an annual basis.
Conceptually, the best measure of accomplishment of a FP pro-
gram would be the difference between the reduction in fertility pro-
duced by the program and what theoretically would have been
achieved in the given socio-economic conditions without any FP pro-
gram. Even attempting to estimate this difference would require a
much better understanding than we now have of the relationship be-
tween fertility reduction in a particular country and family planning
services and other socio-economic factors.
In the absence of such multivariate analyses of the determinants of
birth rates, one measure of fertility reduction is provided by the in-
crease in the use of contraceptives obtained from public and private
programs throughout the country. Based on field experience in selected
countries, a rough approximation of the relationship between the crude
birth rate and use of reliable methods of contraception (i.e., excluding
abstinence, coitus interruptus, and rhythm) is that a two percent in-
crease in the percentage of couples using contraception is associated
with a decrease of one birth per thousand population, and that a con-
traceptive user rate of 60 to 70 percent is associated with a replacement
level birth rate of 20 per thousand.
In measuring rates of contraceptive use, there is considerable vari-
ation among developing country FP programs in the quality and reli-
ability of FP service statistics. Many systems generally collect only data
on new acceptors, from which current use rates must be estimated
through the application of method continuation rates to new acceptor
data or through analysis of contraceptive distribution over time.
An increasing number of the developing countries are beginning
to use prevalence of use as a measure of program impact, and AID has
initiated programs to assist them with this activity. Estimates of contra-
ceptive use and births averted can be improved by better data and
more sophisticated techniques of analysis.
The responsibility would rest with AID in cooperation with the Of-
fice of the Coordinator of Population Affairs, State Department, to es-
tablish guidelines for the missions to estimate prevalence of use, and to
continue efforts to develop new and better estimates of program
impact.
One measure of cost-effectiveness can be obtained by dividing an-
nual financial inputs from all sources by the number of users. These
cost-per-user statistics (in dollars) are calculated for the last year in
which data are available and as averages of the latest three, five, and
ten-year periods.
A crucial aspect of the analysis of cost-effectiveness is the explana-
tion of variations in cost-per-user rates. These rates tend to be much
