National Security Policy 1059 Dr. York then reported on developments which resulted in a change from the emphasis on broad research studies to emphasis on early operational missiles. He referred to the Keller Survey which had examined all types of missiles in order to determine which ones should be selected for development. As a result of this Survey, study of the ATLAS was reinstituted. At this time long-­range missile programs had the lowest priority because the yield of the warhead which could be carried in them and the inaccuracy of their guidance systems made them unattractive in comparison to other weapons systems. In 1953 Secretary Wilson ordered a review of surface-­to-­surface missiles. One committee under Von Neumann studied long-­range surface-­to-­surface missiles while another committee under Trevor Gardiner studied all other missiles. The Von Neumann Committee recommended develop­ ment of a long-­range missile weapons system. Dr. York pointed out that by the time the Von Neumann Committee formulated its recommenda­ tions, the thermo-­nuclear bomb had been exploded by the U.S. and the possibility of achieving high yields from warheads of limited weight was better understood. A second Von Neumann Committee instituted ATLAS as a development program in 1954 although the final config­ uration of the ATLAS was not clear at this time. ATLAS at one time was a seven engine vehicle; later its engines were reduced to five in number and then to three as at present. As a result of the studies of the second Von Neumann Committee, the Ramo-­Wooldridge set-­up, and other studies, a decision was made to provide backup programs for all ATLAS components. These backup programs early in 1955 evolved into the TITAN program. The Killian Committee then made studies of the missile question and concluded that an IRBM could be made oper­ ational sooner than an ICBM. The Secretary of Defense, after review of the Killian Committee conclusions, instituted the THOR and JUPITER programs. Originally JUPITER was conceived of as a land or sea missile while THOR was to be a land missile only. As nuclear yields in relation to the size of the warhead increased, it became apparent in the summer of 1956 that the required payload could be delivered by a missile four-­ tenths the size of the JUPITER. At the same time it became apparent that progress was being made with solid propellants and that liquid fuel rockets would be unsuitable for use in submarines. Accordingly, both JUPITER and THOR became land-­based missiles exclusively; POLARIS began to be thought of as the submarine missile. JUPITER and THOR became operational about three years after development of them began. ATLAS became operational about 1959, about 4½ years after it was decided to give the highest priority to the three-­engine ATLAS design. POLARIS would become operational about four years after it was instituted.
