924
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
makes a series of recommendations on trade and commodities. Its
major recommendations are: an early reopening of the Multilateral
Trade Negotiation (MTN) with a view of reducing tariffs on labor in-
tensive products from developing countries; extension of the General-
ized System of Preferences (GSP), which allows developing countries
to ship many products to the U.S. duty free, on a fixed term, multi-year
basis with an expanded list of products; an active U.S. role in the con-
tinuing General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations
on limiting quantitative restrictions on imports; and Administration
support for H.R. 1543,10 which would make certain changes in the cur-
rent trade adjustment assistance program. These recommendations are
aimed toward additional liberalization of the existing international
trading system that would allow developing countries to increase their
exports.
It is premature to suggest reopening MTN at this time. Much was
accomplished in the MTN to benefit developing countries; for the
present, we need to concentrate on effective implementation of these
gains, especially the terms under which developing countries can be
encouraged to join and benefit from its non-tariff codes. We should,
however, attempt to use the very limited tariff reduction authority you
have to negotiate bilateral tariff agreements with the developing coun-
tries by the end of 1981. In your next term, we should investigate the
feasibility of seeking broader authority to negotiate tariff-reducing
agreements with developing countries.
We are not yet ready for a full consideration of the GSP exten-
sion—the program does not expire until 1985. During your next admin-
istration, however, we should develop a strategy for extending GSP
benefits and for further improving the program’s benefits for devel-
oping countries. For the present, we need to implement your pledge to
Congress to use your existing authority to improve GSP benefits for the
lesser developed beneficiaries.
As the Commission recommended, the U.S. is taking an active role
in multilateral efforts to negotiate a safeguards code strengthening in-
ternational discipline over actions to restrict imports. The U.S. position
on safeguards is closer to that of developing countries than are the posi-
tions of the European Community (EC). Differences between the EC
and developing countries continue to be the major obstacles to progress
on this issue.
The Administration has not actively promoted the adjustment
assistance reform bill because of budget limitations. This is an issue to
be considered in your next term.
10 Introduced by Vanik on January 25, 1979, the bill sought to improve the operation
of adjustment assistance programs for workers and firms under the Trade Act of 1974.
