Chapter 6, June–December 1990  925
176.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to Secretary of State Baker, 
Secretary of Energy Watkins, Deputy Secretary of Defense 
Atwood, Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Jeremiah, 
Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency Kerry, and 
Director of Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Lehman1
Washington, December 10, 1990
SUBJECT
Data Denial in START (S)
The attached paper records the consensus of our December 6 
­meeting as refined by subsequent work by our staffs. This consensus 
provides the basis for proposing an approach to the Soviets on data 
denial. (S)
However, our agreement leaves open the important question of 
how specifically to implement the exclusion of RV data. Let me ask 
DOD, DOE and the Intelligence Community to analyze, on a prior-
ity basis, the options to telemeter U.S. RV data under alternative data 
denial regimes, and the monitoring implications of such regimes. The 
alternatives should include the following:
— interpretative information would be provided for all data 
during the boost phase and could be withheld only for RV data trans-
mitted after RV separation. (S)
— interpretative information would be provided for all missile 
data; constraints would be placed on what the sides could declare to 
be “RV data” prior to RV separation for which interpretative informa-
tion could be withheld. Such constraints could include limits on the 
aggregate quantity, data rate, or other identifiable characteristics of RV 
telemetry prior to separation. (S)
Let me also ask DOD, DOE, and DCI to analyze options for the size 
of the “small annual quota” of test flights that could be excluded from 
the proposed information exchange. (S)
Please forward the preliminary results of both analyses to Arnie 
Kanter no later than Wednesday, December 12, for consideration by the 
Ungroup and, as necessary, at our level. (U)
Brent Scowcroft
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01033–006, START—December 
1990. Secret.
