1292
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
they get their views across. If not, the Palestinians will suffer most: they
will be held responsible for failure. The Israelis say they want to go for-
ward, but the Palestinians do not—Israel does not hear their demands.
King Hussein said that there is a dilemma: Camp David dealt with
two areas, Egypt-Israel in one and the Palestinians in the other. The
Egypt-Israel treaty many see as progress and as a solution to part of the
problem.
The President underlined that it was a part.
King Hussein said that the Palestinian side, unfortunately, was
done in the absence of the Palestinians and Jordan. Egypt was unable to
address this adequately, because it did not know what was involved.
The President said yes, this is what he is saying.
King Hussein said that Jordan passed maps to Egypt to help it avoid
mistakes. Is there a way to say that what happened between Egypt and
Israel exists, and take a fresh start on the rest? Camp David is telling
people to fit into a formula which does not meet their needs. It brings
into question the end results Jordan is asking about. The Palestinians
do not know what rights they will secure at the end of the day—the
future.
The President said that nothing in Camp David contradicts what
His Majesty wants in the future.
King Hussein and the Prime Minister said that they understood.
The Prime Minister said that asserting the demands of the Pales-
tinians is difficult for them to do under occupation.
The President said that we know what they want, and want to get
there. But there is no mechanism to get there, if they will not partici-
pate. For Jordan and the Palestinians, if you are not in the talks until the
goal is clear, and is 100% of what you want—then there will be no
progress. Sadat knew what he wanted; he (Sadat) said so to Begin:
withdrawal. Begin didn’t want that, and wanted to keep the settle-
ments. But world and Israeli opinion was with Sadat. Begin yielded,
and said that the Knesset should decide. He (the President) believes
that Begin is difficult. He has spent as much time with Begin as with his
(the President’s) wife—since each hour with Begin is magnified a hun-
dred fold (laughter)!
We should remember that there will be other Israeli leaders after
Begin—and he (the President) will be President. Also, the people of Is-
rael want peace. Its public opinion indicates that, if settlements were an
obstacle to peace, the overwhelming majority are opposed to them.
Now there is no way for moderate leaders or public opinion in Israel to
believe that Palestinian leaders demand rights: e.g. an independent
state, a confederation, or Israel’s getting out. Demanding these is all
right. But no one is designated to work with Dayan, Yadin, us or
