Covert and Overt Operations airport where he was handed over to the Swiss. That was his first knowledge that he might be released. He had been concerned about his health—unsteadiness, dizziness, and recently nausea—since December. His condition had become acute in the last week or so. —Queen said he had a good relationship with most of his captors although he could not abide a few of them. He thought his adjustment had been as successful as any of the hostages he knew of. He said one of the captors told him privately just before he left that the others would be released in three or four months. —Queen is anxious to come back to the U.S. and interested in his next assignment. He cares deeply, of course, for the hostages left behind. At this point, we believe unless there are strong medical reasons to the contrary that he should be moved to the U.S. rather than Germany for further tests. This would emphasize the fact that he was turned over to his parents rather than to the U.S.G. and could lay a basis for subsequent releases in the future. —At White House initiative, Henry briefed the President, and the President also spoke to Queen in the afternoon from Georgia. —The Swiss were told by Sanjabi that the Iranians have found another body at the Tabas site. We checked with DOD and there is absolutely no possibility that the body is that of an American or an Iranian associated with us. We told the Swiss that the body should not be turned over to them or to the Red Cross for us unless there was information we were not aware of to indicate that the body was an American. —Ghotbzadeh told Richard Cottam last night that he had been responsible for the fast action to release Queen. Ghotbzadeh said he was afraid Queen might die while in Iranian custody and Iran would be blamed for having tortured him. —Ghotbzadeh said again that he would not take part in the new government under Habibi. When Cottam asked if the installation of a new government would be a setback for hostage release, Ghotbzadeh answered quickly, there was no question; the hostages would be released. He had fixed it so that would happen. —We attach an analysis of the new Parliament prepared by Bruce Laingen and submitted yesterday through the Swiss. —We also attach cables received today from the Swiss.3 3 The cable from Laingen and cables from Lang are attached but not printed.
