The Chilean Ambassador stated that in the logical order of ideas, as Peru
has accepted in principle the suggestion of the Secretary, it would be Peru’s
part to make a suggestion.
The Peruvian Ambassador replied that to do this it would be necessary for
Chile to give the proposal the same acceptance that Peru had given and so
have a starting point for discussion. He added that he felt that proposals
should be made by both and not by one only.
The Secretary stated that he considered this reply technical rather than
meritorious. He did not understand that Chile had rejected a corridor but
wanted more details regarding it and he inquired whether both would
submit to the Secretary their ideas in detail as to a corridor, the part to go to
Peru and the part to go to Chile, et cetera. If they will do so he will do his
best to try to harmonize the views of the two parties.
The Chilean Ambassador stated that he would cable his Government
regarding the situation and would advise the Secretary as soon as possible
of his Government’s definite position in the matter. The Peruvian
Ambassador made the same reply.
The Secretary then inquired whether the two parties wished to continue the
good offices. The Peruvian Ambassador replied in the affirmative and stated
that he would make all possible personal efforts to arrive at a satisfactory
solution. The Chilean Ambassador made the same reply.
The Secretary then stated that the negotiations had been going on for two
months or more and the plebiscite also going on. If anything was to be done
in Washington it must be done soon. A meeting had been called in Arica for
four o’clock Saturday afternoon. The Secretary did not know whether they
would press for a definite determination at that time or not. He understood
that under the rules the question might go over if objected to. He wanted to
urge both parties however to try to come together in agreement. From his
private conversations with both Ambassadors he did not think they were far
apart and he hoped that they would reach an agreement.
The Secretary then inquired whether there were any suggestions as to the
next meeting and inquired whether the following day, Saturday, June 5,
