732  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
162.	 Memorandum of Conversation1
Geneva, June 5, 1959
SUBJECT
Strategic Concept and Military paragraphs of NSC 5810/1
PARTICIPANTS:
1 Source: Strategic concept and NSC 5810/1. Top Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/P 
Files: Lot 67 D 548, Military and Naval Policy.
State
Secretary Herter
Gerard C. Smith
Defense
Secretary McElroy
John N. Irwin II
The Secretary of State opened the discussion by saying that his 
review of the new language which State had proposed in the Planning 
Board for the military paragraphs of NSC 5310/1 suggested that the 
place to make changes was in paragraph 10A rather than paragraph 
14. The Secretary of Defense read the State redraft very carefully and 
expressed a measure of sympathy with the thrust of the proposed 
changes. He asked whether State would agree to tie a clause on the 
use of nuclear weapons when required to achieve national objectives 
to the first sentence of revised paragraph 10A rather than make it a 
separate sentence as in the State redraft. Secretary Herter agreed that 
this could be done.
Mr. Irwin said that the proposed change in paragraph 10A could 
have a great impact on the budget and urged that the results of the Gray 
target mix study be awaited before making a decision on paragraph 10A.
Secretary McElroy said he assumed that there would be no change 
in hardware flowing from the proposed change in paragraph 10A as 
last year’s limited war study had shown that our limited war capability 
was adequate. Mr. Smith reminded Mr. McElroy that that study was 
based on the assumption that only the US would use nuclear weapons, 
although a subsequent SNIE on the Quemoy situation cast considerable 
doubt on that assumption. The Secretary of Defense commented that he 
could not understand why this unrealistic assumption was used. Both 
Mr. Smith and Mr. Irwin pointed out that any other assumption would 
have contradicted the current strategic concept.
The Secretary of Defense then asked whether the proposed change 
in paragraph 10A would result in budgetary changes in FY 1962. 
Mr. Smith replied that he thought not in that year but was bound to 
say that in later years he thought it would. Secretary McElroy indicated 
concern at this prospect.
