March–August 1953
483
Secretary Dulles then asked if, before answering the President’s
question, he could go on to make his third and last point on courses of
action to gain time in Iran.
The third course, he said, was to go ahead and purchase oil from
the National Iranian Oil Company, supply that company with the tech-
nicians it needed, and furthermore to give material support to the
Mossadegh regime. This completed, said Secretary Dulles, the courses
of action which seemed open to us to gain time in the emergency. We
were not obliged to take all three of the courses he outlined, but one or
more of them seemed to him the best way to gain time. Unless, how-
ever, the Defense people really believed that it was desirable to gain
time and had specific reasons for this view, Secretary Dulles again ex-
pressed doubts as to the genuine desirability of pursuing any of these
courses of action except, perhaps, to recall Ambassador Henderson.
The reason for his doubt, he said, was that the losses we might antici-
pate in other parts of the world were likely to overweigh any gain in
Iran.
The President said he understood why Secretary Dulles hesitated
about these courses of action, but thought it possible that the British
themselves might be persuaded by the course of events lately to agree
to an independent policy vis-a`-vis Iran by the United States.
Mr. Stassen inquired if we had not just been given an important
reason to gain time in Iran. In view of Stalin’s illness and probable
death, was it not absolutely requisite that the United States assume a
firm and steady stand everywhere throughout the world? Soviet policy
was bound to be somewhat confused and hesitant in the immediate fu-
ture, and it was incumbent upon the United States to take advantage of
this fact.
Secretary Dulles replied that he believed that Mossadegh might
well last another year or two, and that he had not meant to suggest that
the United States should formally disengage itself from concern with
Iran.
Secretary Wilson inquired whether we were not in fact in partner-
ship with the British in Iran, and whether the British were not the senior
partner.
Secretary Dulles answered that this had been the case until fairly
lately, but that the British had now been thrown out.
The President added that we do have to respect the enormous in-
vestment which the British had in Iran, and that we must moreover rec-
ognize that their latest proposals, unlike earlier ones to the Iranians,
had been wholly reasonable. It was certainly possible, he added, for the
United States to do what it thought necessary to do in Iran, but we cer-
tainly don’t want a break with the British.
