198
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
53.
Handwritten Note Prepared by the Ambassador to Israel
(Lewis)1
Camp David, September 16, 1978, 11:30 a.m.
Vance, Mondale, Zbig., Saunders, Lewis, Quandt
Dayan, Barak, Dinitz
—Barak reconfirms GOI views on Egyptian proposals re Sept. 15
draft given last night.2
—GOI rejects Egyptian “package” language
Vance tables new US language for A–1–c in the Framework. All
read carefully. Consultation in Hebrew.
—Barak:
a) Less important point:
1) break out of 1, 2, & 3 of nature of Palestinian participation—
highlights it too much—and leaves out vote by all parties.
b) major problem is structural; is 242 the basis for final status of
WB/G?
—Dayan:
We feel absolutely that there’s a mixture here; peace treaties on 242
w/individual countries; (not mixed up—two treaties with E[gyptian]
role. Clarified in working paper last year (Oct. 5): 242, boundaries, & se-
curity arrangements belong to peace treaties—& in this case, should be
with Jordan. E[gyptian]s said at Leeds that they don’t want any in-
volvement in Gaza after 5 yrs.
Roles in peace treaty has nothing to do w/E[gypt]. We must make
treaty w/Jordan based on 242—boundaries, security, forces, etc.
Proposes 2 negot. track, per their paper. Conclusion of future
status negot. can be incorporated into the US-Jordan peace treaty.
Re future status—
1) Shouldn’t try now to define it, or set principles about it. Just
agree on general framework. Need experience.
2) a good deal of the future status should be implemented before
the end of 5th year & then go with final agreement.
Barak: Of course many issues decided in final status would affect
Israel-Jordan relationship; “can’t be divided”; Jordan is in both; what-
ever 4 party agreement reached—including on borders; will end up in
Israel-Jordan treaty
1 Source: Department of State, U.S. Embassy Tel Aviv, Principal Officer Program
Files, Lot 85F104, Personal for Ambassador Lewis—Sensitive Notes 1978. No classifica-
tion marking. See footnote 77, Document 28.
2 See Document 52.
