1956  823
any particular state of affairs contrary its views. I could assure him US 
was not submitting to his government for its approval or ratification 
any of our treaties or agreements with other countries.
23. I said in its proper relationship to other parts of declaration, 
self-­defense clause only stated fact that if one side violated declaration 
by using force other side would not have renounced what it considered 
its legitimate right to self-­defense.
24. I said opposition to self-­defense clause could be based on only 
two possible grounds. That is, that intent of one side in issuing this 
declaration is not consistent with exercise of self-­defense in case of 
necessity by other side. Only other alternative was that one side was 
attempting to get other side to renounce its views with regard to char­
acter our dispute in Taiwan area. This I wanted make clear was abso­
lutely unacceptable my government.
25. I said however I continued my willingness to strive reach with 
him agreement upon this tremendously important subject. I felt way to 
reaching agreement was not giving of what were in fact ultimata, or of 
take it or leave it positions, but to continue to strive to see whether or 
not agreement could be reached.
26. I said it was in this sense that I had made my opening statement 
this morning. I had tried very hard in it to avoid introducing extrane­
ous issues not germane to our immediate task. It was utter nonsense 
to say that because US not willing in this declaration unilaterally to 
renounce its views with respect Taiwan area and concede to his views, 
that it did not desire declaration.
27. I said he had spoken this morning of ambiguous terms of our 
Jan 12 draft. It seemed me that shoe was on other foot. His objections 
to that draft appeared be based precisely upon grounds that it removed 
ambiguities of his Dec 1 draft. If declaration was to have any real mean­
ing rather than just appearance of agreement where no agreement 
existed, those ambiguities must be clarified in his Dec 1 draft. I had 
indicated essential points upon which we considered ambiguities must 
be removed.
28. I said I had indicated way, in the declaration, that I felt those 
thoughts might be expressed. I still thought that language which I had 
suggested was best way of doing it, and if there was genuine agreement 
on these essentials, there should be no objection to that language. How­
ever, I have never put this forward on any ultimatum or take it or leave 
it basis. I had repeatedly indicated that if he had any thoughts on how it 
could be better expressed I was willing listen his suggestions and give 
them careful consideration. It not possible for me see how I could be 
any more reasonable than that.
29. Wang said in his opening statement this morning he had again 
made attempt frankly express thoughts his side in order explain more
