International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 659 urged not to overreact to the inflationary impact of the oil price increase. They have already significantly increased their interest rates this year, forcing other countries (including us) to do likewise. Further restrictive policies in both countries could severely curb their growth rates. If this should occur, we could well end up in the situation we all want to avoid, a repeat of 1974–75. 226. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs (Bergsten) to Secretary of the Treasury Miller1 Washington, August 29, 1979 SUBJECT Supplemental Points for EPG—Solomon Speech on International Monetary System, Substitution Account 1. Speech elaborates view on long-term evolution of monetary system in context of increasingly interdependent world.2 Two basic elements: —Adjustment. We support a strong IMF surveillance role in promoting smoothly-functioning balance of payments adjustment process, involving stronger policy coordination. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Office of the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs, Subject Files of Anthony Solomon, 1977–1980, Box 1, EPG. Confidential. Drafted by Widman. Printed from a copy bearing Bergsten’s stamped initials. The memorandum was forwarded to Solomon under cover of a September 5 note from an unidentified Treasury official, who wrote: “After the press coverage of your Alpbach speech, some of which indicated that this represented a shift in U.S. policy, Stu Eizenstat apparently raised questions about the speech at an EPG meeting last week. Miler apparently indicated that this did not represent a shift in U.S. policy, but he subsequently asked for supplemental briefing on the issue in case it came up again.” (Ibid.) 2 According to IMF historian Boughton, Solomon’s August 27 speech in Alpbach, Austria, constituted the “definitive statement of U.S. support for establishing a substitution account.” (Boughton, Silent Revolution, p. 940) Boughton indicates that a copy of the speech is in the Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection, 1977–1980, Box 12, Alpbach Monetary Conference, 8/27/79. A copy was reportedly released in Washington. (“U.S., in Shift, to Weigh Dollar Substitution Plan,” The New York Times, August 28, 1979, p. D1) Solomon sent Miller a more detailed paper on the substitution account under cover of a September 5 memorandum. (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection, 1977–1980, Chronological File, Box 6, 9/79)
