808 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI problem than any of their predecessors. This discussion is intended to make two points. First, we have led congress to believe something that is not true. This is an emotional issue and we must begin to describe what this treaty does and doesn’t do more carefully. Second, there is a major disagreement with the Soviets on this point and it comes into focus on the new kinds/future systems issue. 12. As highly accurate, conventionally-­armed systems gain the capability to perform the missions now performed by nuclear-­armed systems, how should they be classified and constrained? Should “strategic” be understood as primarily related to armament or should “strategic” refer to the range over which weapons are delivered? There are profound and difficult questions here. Some of these systems should be dealt with now and others we may have to finesse in a treaty which only has to cover 15 years. Any volunteers for the JCIC? Burt 148. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, July 24, 1990, 0910Z 7810. Subject: START: Looking at The New Joint Draft Text 1. Secret—Entire Text. 2. By now, you should have had time to memorize the new JDT. START trivia buffs will be interested to know that it was completed on Friday the 13th, that it marked the end of Round XIII, and that it is the 13th JDT we have produced. JCS, who apparently have people with time for such matters, reports that it is 450 pages long and has 1750 brackets. The length will increase considerably when the MOU is filled in. We will complete a totally new set of annotations this week and get a copy back to Washington by courier. We are trying to hold the Soviets at bay this week while we do this and also conduct an internal review of all the documents. We understand Washington plans a quick JDT review the week of August 6. 3. The new JDT is a major improvement over its predecessor. We must now stop reorganizing and concentrate on substance. The 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D900674–0061. Secret; Immediate.
