Venezuela  1297
In this connection, would be particularly interesting to know 
Betancourt’s evaluation of potential and orientation of various anti-Tru-
jillo groups within Dominican Republic and abroad, including those in 
Venezuela.3
3 When queried on the substance of telegram 926, Betancourt responded that the 
United States should speak to José Figueres and “trust in his judgment,” since Figueres 
had been very active in working with non-Communist Dominican exiles.
He stated that there were very few Communists in the Dominican Republic or 
among the exile groups and that the United States should not worry about another Fidel 
Castro in the Dominican Republic. He reasserted that the United States must face up 
to the Trujillo problem before the United States faced the Cuban problem, and warned, 
“do not attack Cuban problem and expect handle it way Guatemala under Arbenz was 
handled.” He advised that the program which should be followed vis-á-­vis Cuba was 
to press for elections. (731.00/5–560)
VE–42.	
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in 
Venezuela1

Caracas, May 11, 1960, 8:10 p.m.
970. Ambassador Falcon Briceño returning Caracas Pan American 
Jet Thursday May 12 expecting return Washington after about ten 
days. Department informed Romulo Gallegos travelling Caracas same 
flight.
Falcon Briceño called on Rubottom and Mann May 10 take his 
leave.
Rubottom expressed U.S. concern continued existence Trujillo dic-
tatorship and its disturbing contributions Caribbean tensions. Stated 
U.S. objectives same as those of GOV but pointed out fact Trujillo has 
indicated he will eliminate all potential successors of any stature if and 
when he falls from power. This poses delicate problem. Falcon Briceño 
said he had heard similar views from Dominican exiles. Rubottom said 
most reports indicate Trujillo’s days numbered. Rubottom mentioned 
recent conversations Betancourt with Ambassador Sparks and said that 
while he fully understands bitter hatred of Trujillo he is concerned over 
Betancourt’s impatience. Said we wish work through Peace Committee 
and expect that GOV may have evidence which we do not have and 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/5–1160. Secret; Limit 
Distribution. Drafted by Ingersoll and initialled by Rubottom.
