World Hunger and Food Policy
759
tion intervention programs should be accompanied by expansion of
family planning wherever possible.) Education in improving general
health and nutrition standards would also be important.
A program attacking malnutrition problems at home and abroad
does involve a number of difficulties which should be carefully consid-
ered. For example, such a program can be quite expensive in terms of
donor and recipient resources per unit of food delivered. It is particu-
larly costly in terms of labor and administration. Many LDC gov-
ernments have assigned a low priority to fighting malnutrition in their
countries and it may be difficult to persuade them to allocate their own
scarce resources to fighting malnutrition. Finally, nutrition interven-
tion programs, while responding to improving Basic Human Needs,
may make less a contribution to recipient country economic devel-
opment than traditional AID activities with a heavier investment
orientation.
Money Is Needed
The policies outlined above represent an integrated and cohesive
effort to deal with world hunger and malnutrition problems. They seek
to deal with global and national agricultural production, distribution
and consumption, broader development issues, international food
trade, food reserves and short and long run food aid. They also include
concurrent efforts in other areas such as population growth control,
maintenance of the global resource base, new energy and resource
saving production techniques and inputs and improvements in local
science, technology, extension and management capabilities (particu-
larly in the poorer countries).
Effective programs in all these areas require money which
Congress will be reluctant to provide. In this connection, a hunger ini-
tiative could usefully be turned to our advantage. Funds to support it
should be more easily forthcoming. We believe, in particular, that
Congress would be more willing to support increased AID appropria-
tions linked to this objective. We hope this important connection will be
made and maintained by the Administration.
A World Hunger Campaign
While it may appear attractive, our tentative conclusion is that a
major World Hunger Campaign probably is not desirable. Although re-
serving judgment, we doubt that the Working Group will be able to de-
velop genuinely new initiatives providing effective solutions to the diffi-
cult food problems we face. There is the risk of over promising, with
subsequent disillusionment over results. In addition, we see a distinct
threat that such a campaign could lead directly to confrontation with
the Administration’s human rights efforts i.e. do we assist hungry
people in Uganda.
