V. That the extraterritorial Powers refuse protection of every nature to
persons of Chinese race who by reason of birth or naturalization are citizens
or subjects of such Powers and who return to China to live, unless such
person, after a residence of six months in China, have obtained from the
Chinese Ministry of the Interior, a denaturalization certificate in accordance
with the provisions of the Law of Nationality (Chinese). Article XII,
paragraph 1, number 4, and paragraph 3 and Articles XIV, XV and XVI.
VI. That the practice of granting asylum to political or other offenders, in
the foreign concessions or settlements and on foreignowned property,
except the general right of asylum which is recognized under International
Law, be abandoned, and that such persons who seek asylum in the foreign
concessions and settlements, or on foreign-owned properties, be
surrendered upon a warrant of the proper Chinese authorities, countersigned
by the local Commissioner of Foreign Affairs.
VII. That all extraterritorial practices which have no basis in the treaties or
special grant of the Chinese Government, be abandoned.
VIII. That in the case of civil claims and criminal complaints of
extraterritorial nationals against Chinese and non-extraterritorial nationals,
it is recommended that all such cases be tried in the so-called New courts of
China, viz., District Courts, High Courts and the Supreme Court, and their
corresponding procuratorates, instead of being tried in the Magistrates’
Court, in the presence of, or jointly with consular representatives as is now
the practice, provided, however, that a foreign consular representative of the
Power concerned may be present in the court room as a visitor.
 
SECOND SECTION OF RECOMMENDATIONS
I. That the conditions created in the First Section of
Recommendations continue in force until the extraterritorial
Powers, jointly or severally, decide the conditions precedent to
the institution of the system outlined in the Second Section of
Recommendations have been fulfilled.
