International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 159 The Chancellor had spoken with Giscard and Barre; neither thought the government should do more than it is doing at present. —Italy: growth is not the problem; it is the social differences— North v. South, rich v. poor, etc. —Holland is in good shape; Belgium is not. Austria is very healthy, but too small to affect general Western recovery. Switzerland is economically strong after expelling its foreign workers. While Norway is fine, Denmark has problems and the Swedish situation is deteriorating. The Chancellor concluded that while there are difficulties, he did not think that there will be further economic decay. He noted that growing productivity complicates German efforts to cut unemployment. The President responded that U.S. productivity is falling. The Chancellor suggested that good labor relations are responsible for the rise in German productivity. Much of the unemployment is a result of women entering the work force. The President said that women also account for much of the problem here; there is also a huge illegal alien population, as many as several million Mexicans. The Chancellor complimented the President on U.S. economic performance in the first two quarters, saying that he thought the change was less one of economics than of mood, a good part of it brought on by the President’s arrival in the White House. The President said the low 6% savings rate was the cause of U.S. growth. If the confidence reflected in polls continued, so would the growth. [Omitted here is discussion of Turkey, Portugal, and Spain.] The President said that both he and the Chancellor were concerned at the public impression of discord between the U.S. and the FRG. He said that they had decided the previous night that should occasional disagreements arise, they would call each other. An image of US–FRG tension is difficult for the weaker states. The President noted that disagreements are always exaggerated by the press and instructed U.S. officials present to inform him of any hints of trouble in the relationship so that he could call the Chancellor. The Chancellor fully endorsed the President’s statement. He said that some of the sources of such exaggeration were in his country— those who want a return to the Cold War. Also, there are those in the EC who do not view German economic growth with pleasure and are willing to play up any US–FRG disagreement. Some of the sources are also in the U.S. The Chancellor felt that he and the President should
