Afghanistan
445
third world. We should anticipate this event and be prepared to counter
efforts to deter us from our required course.13
These are preliminary thoughts. In effect, they add up to three key
propositions:
1. Our response has to be a sustained one and a regional one. Success
or failure will depend on what we do in terms of the longer run in
Southwest Asia. You might want to think of a “Carter doctrine.”14
2. There is no need to freeze the U.S.-Soviet relationship any further,
but by the same token we should have no illusions about an early
improvement—nor should we strive for one. Any alteration, of course,
would look like a zig zag, and it would make the attainment of our first
objective more difficult, while undercutting your domestic support.15
3. Whatever we do in the region, it will be costly. The more we can
do with our allies, the better, but the major initiative will have to come
from us.
These are painful and difficult issues. We will never know whether
any of this could have been averted, but we do know one thing: if we
do not respond in a timely fashion, the consequences of an inadequate
response will be even more horrendous because our vital interest in
the Middle East will soon be directly affected.
I will be chairing an SCC meeting on this in the next several days.16
I will also be discussing these issues with my European colleagues at
the Tuesday meeting17—though, naturally, in a very tentative fashion,
without any commitments.18 Any guidance you could give me for
either meeting would be very helpful.
13 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Let’s do it then (see a) below).”
14 Carter underlined “Carter doctrine” and wrote in the left margin: “No name.”
15 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “I agree.”
16 The SCC met on January 14, the first in a series of meetings on U.S. strategy for
Southwest Asia and the Pacific. For the summary of conclusions of the meeting, see Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula, Document 40.
17 Christopher, not Brzezinski, met with NATO members on January 15 in Brussels.
See footnote 4, Document 163.
18 At the bottom of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “a) We should probe for more
normal relations among friends of SU, i.e., Angola, V. Nam, Cuba, Ethiopia, Syria, Iraq,
etc. as feasible. b) A quick move to consult c¯ PM Gandhi is needed. We must leave the
door open for her & encourage Pakistan & PRC to do the same. c) Economic consultations
c¯ LDCs should be expedited, with rich OPEC & our trading partners involved to discuss
food, energy, raw materials, etc. d) Assess how Mid East peace effort is affected.”
