Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
385
78.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Cabinet1
Washington, undated
In order to infuse greater clarity into public understanding of our
foreign policy, the President wishes that all Cabinet members under-
stand our key foreign policy goals so that they may be emphasized in
your public statements and speeches.2
The summary which follows is based on major Presidential speeches
as well as statements by Secretary of State Vance and other top officials.
Our Foreign Policy Goals
1. We seek wider cooperation with our key allies and a more cooperative
world system. Close collaboration with Japan and Western Europe has
long been the point of departure for America’s global involvement. Re-
sponding to changes over the past 15 to 20 years in the global distribu-
tion of power, we are seeking to broaden these patterns of cooperation.
This means developing new and wider relationships with such region-
ally influential nations as Nigeria, Indonesia, India, Saudi Arabia, Iran,
Venezuela, and Brazil.
2. Stabilizing the U.S.-Soviet relationship. Through a broader range of
negotiations we are pursuing a pattern of detente which must be both
comprehensive and genuinely reciprocal.
3. Maintaining sufficient military capabilities to support our global secu-
rity interests. To achieve this we shall maintain a strategic nuclear bal-
ance; work closely with our NATO allies to strengthen and modernize
our defenses in Europe; maintain and develop a quick reaction global
force available for rapid development [deployment] to counter threats to
our allies and friends in Asia, the Middle East, and other regions of the
world.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 26, Foreign Policy: 12/77–12/78. No classification marking. Brzezinski sent an earlier
version of the memorandum to the President under a May 5 memorandum, asserting:
“One way to reduce public confusion over our policy is for all top officials to use certain
key formulations when speaking about foreign affairs. Indeed, the repetition of certain
‘code phrases’ (e.g., ‘de´tente must be both comprehensive and reciprocal’) will help to in-
dicate that we speak with a single voice from the top down.” He added that the attached
memorandum “is designed to accomplish that objective.” (Ibid.)
2 The earlier version of this paragraph (see footnote 1 above) reads: “In order to in-
fuse greater clarity into public understanding of our foreign policy, the President wishes
that all Cabinet members use certain common formulations and phrases in their public
statements and speeches.” The President crossed out the portion of the paragraph begin-
ning with “use” and ending with “their,” drew a line into the right-hand margin, and
added the replacement text found here.
