September 1953–December 1954 in helping to bring that about. His diary entry reads, in part, as follows: “Another recent development that we helped bring about was the restoration of the Shah to power in Iran and the elimination of Mossadegh. The things we did were ‘covert.’ If knowledge of them became public, we would not only be embarrassed in that region, but our chances to do anything of like nature in the future would almost totally disappear. Nevertheless our agent there, a member of the CIA, worked intelligently, courageously and tirelessly. I listened to his detailed report and it seemed more like a dime novel than an historical fact. When we realize that in the first hours of the attempted coup, all element of surprise disappeared through betrayal, the Shah fled to Baghdad, and Mossadegh seemed to be more firmly entrenched in power than ever before, then we can understand exactly how courageous our agent was in staying right on the job and continuing to work until he reversed the entire situation.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diary Series, Box 1) 329. Memorandum by the Chief of the Near East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)1 Washington, October 9, 1953. The following information from Tehran, Iran, dated 1–4 October, is evaluated at 3. Source of this information is [1 line not declassified]. Subject of the information is “Activities of Mullah Kashani”. 1. A Soviet Embassy Attache´ who speaks Persian and claims to be a Moslem, met a representative of Mullah Kashani on the night of 1 October at the home of engineer Gholim (first name unknown), official architect to the Soviet Embassy. The Attache´ told Kashani’s representative that the Shah and the Iranian Army were becoming stronger every day and that, if Kashani wants to maintain his position, he must organize the National Front again. 2. Kashani organized a meeting for the night of 4 October at the home of former deputy, Yusef Moshar. The meeting was attended by Kashani, Moshar, Hoseyn Makki and Haerizadeh, who agreed to reform the National Front movement.
