August 8–September 17, 1978 145 thority over the West Bank should be returned was the Palestinian people rather than Egypt or Jordan. He also noted that the Palestinians were recognized as early as 1947 as having a right to their own state. Kamel argued that Egypt was sure King Hussein is ready to renounce any claim to sovereignty to the West Bank. The Secretary noted that Israel is only willing to put aside for the next five years any claim to sovereignty to the West Bank. El-Baz asked how the problem should be solved in the end. The Secretary said it should be solved by sitting down with the Palestinians. El-Baz asked what happens if the Israelis refuse. The Secretary noted that the Israelis reserve their claim to the West Bank. El-Araby noted that if the Israelis do not like what is happening, they can go back in under our ideas. El-Baz observed that the Israelis have not put forward any claim to sovereignty prior to Begin’s advent. When they did so, their purpose was simply to annex territory. If they wish to present a claim to sovereignty in the future, they can also do so in Sinai and elsewhere. Sovereignty, he reiterated, should reside with the people. Self-determination is necessary. El-Reedy said that legitimate security concerns can be discussed, such as termination of belligerency, good neighborly relations, etc. El-Baz insisted that the sovereignty question should be dropped. Quandt noted that some day it will have to be resolved. Atherton said it is not simply one of how it will be resolved, but also when. In the peace treaty, Egypt, Israel, Jordan are all parties and can define their relationship. El-Baz noted that deciding a relationship is different from sovereignty. Quandt pointed out that we are talking about a political relationship. El-Baz thought that a link could be obtained. But to introduce Israel as a party to sovereignty over the West Bank produces a problem. Quandt pointed out that we are trying to get a framework to see where we are going. El-Baz noted that after five years the Palestinians may opt for their own entity. They may prefer an independent state, although Egypt will do what it can to influence a linkage with Jordan. If Israeli sovereignty is introduced into the equation, it negates selfdetermination. El-Araby commented that the Israelis occupy and the Palestinians live in the West Bank. Egypt says that the Palestinians are the proper sources of sovereignty. He asked what the Israeli claim to sovereignty to the West Bank is based upon. The Secretary said that Begin bases it on biblical rights, others say by annexation. El-Baz noted that by the same token, the Palestinians could claim a right to determine the sovereignty of Israel. If the issue of sovereignty in the West Bank/Gaza is left open to Israel, the same should also be done in reverse.
