Arms Control and Disarmament 1379 of new generating capacity required in the U.K. between now and 1966 would come from coal-­fired stations. 57. Significant bilateral activity between the U.S. and U.K. contin­ ued. U.S. consultants made available under the U.S.–U.K. agreement for cooperation were responsible for many of the recommendations relating to health and safety standards and procedures contained in the official Fleck Committee Report on the Windscale Accident. U.S.–U.K. study of the properties of graphite under in-­pile conditions has been proposed and is under consideration. 58. The technical exchange of information on gas-­cooled and fast-­ breeder reactors has raised the problem of reconciling the different pol­ icies relating to the disseminating of information which prevail in the two countries. Under U.K. policy, information developed with public funds is sold; under U.S. policy such information is disseminated with­ out cost to the recipient. 59. The UKAEA has concluded bilateral agreements with several European Countries and is presently negotiating an agreement with Japan. Close U.K. cooperation with Canada and Australia has contin­ ued. Three British firms submitted bids on the S.E.N.N. project to be financed by the World Bank in Italy (six U.S. firms also submitted bids). It is expected that the construction of a full-­scale nuclear power plant for AGIP-­Nucleare, a publicly owned utility in Italy, by a British Con­ sortium, will proceed on schedule, although no firm contract has yet been signed. 60. France. The French program has expanded greatly. France has appropriated 235 billion francs for its second five-­year program as com­ pared with a total of 148 billion francs spent by the Commissariat a l‘Energie Atomique since its establishment in 1945. The new five-­year plan includes: (a) expansion and enlargement of present research facil­ ities and setting up of more research centers; (b) construction of new research reactors and of several prototype reactors for nuclear power and marine propulsion; (c) increased production of natural uranium, plutonium and thorium (the French plutonium separation plant begun in 1955 was reported completed in May 1958); (d) an isotope separation facility either alone or in cooperation with other European countries. A French gaseous diffusion pilot plant went into operation at Saclay the last week in December 1957. 61. Japan. Negotiations were completed with Japan on a compre­ hensive bilateral Agreement for Cooperation which provides for a total net amount of 2,700 kgs. of contained U–235 for use in several research reactors, three experimental power reactors and a full-­scale power reac­ tor. The Agreement, which will run for a period of ten years, will super­ sede and incorporate a research bilateral Agreement for Cooperation which has been in effect with Japan since December 27, 1955. Japan’s
