886  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
be welcomed. Requests for loans for which specific amounts were men-
tioned were as follows: schools $12-1/2 million, agriculture $7 million, 
sewers $13-1/2 million, telecommunications $2-1/2 million, Tocumen 
Runway extension, half a million dollars, and an unspecified amount 
was hinted at for the Panama Bay development program and addi-
tional highway projects.
The various projects appear to have been prepared in the various 
ministries concerned without an overall coordinated effort at establish-
ing a national plan. If Panama is to achieve a viable economy as a basis 
for political stability, there must be an accelerated development of the 
production resources. This is a broad task. Under the political system 
in Panama, the primary burden for economic development rests with 
private enterprise. The three main pillars of the economy are agricul-
ture, industry, and trade. The Government, however, must support, 
encourage, serve, and regulate private enterprise in the public interest 
to achieve national goals. The Government has undertaken to do this 
in various fields but so far, despite the mounting costs to the people, 
increased national production has fallen far short of expectations. This 
seems partially due to poor planning and inadequate personnel and 
organization to make available technical knowledge and get decisions 
in dealing with these problems. In order to plan effectively, the follow-
ing would seem to be needed:
1. An inventory of the nation’s assets, both human and natural.
2. A study to determine the viability of new industrial enterprises.
3. A study of domestic requirements and possible sales on foreign 
markets, including tourism.
4. Establishment of standards and levels for essential govern-
ment services in developing, supporting, and regulating private 
activities.
5. Formulating the necessary finance, tax, and trade policies to 
serve the economic development programs and a study of the orga-
nization and functions of Government agencies working in this field.
The President of Panama has taken an interest in this matter and 
arrangements have been made for a Mr. Alvin Mayne of the Puerto Rico 
Planning Board to advise and assist the Panamanians in these matters. 
Pro-Communist and anti-U.S. activities appear in Panama as in other 
countries in the area to be centered in the University.
