September 18–December 16, 1978 463 cluded this subject by saying at least we were agreed there should be a meeting between Ehrlich and Blumenthal. Turning to the treaty text, Begin said he understood we considered it closed, but this could not be the case until it was initialed. Israel did not reject Egyptian proposals. Israel, however, has objected from the beginning to the “noting” paragraph in the preamble and to the language on Gaza. Israel wants to solve these two issues but the Israeli Government had taken the position that the present language is not satisfactory. Barak then read proposed Israeli compromise language on the preamble and Gaza. The Secretary replied that these suggestions had been considered and opposed by Egypt. Egypt had made proposals on Articles IV and VI which Israel opposed. If we opened up any of these issues, we would open up all kinds of issues. In our best judgment, the present draft is fair for both sides. Begin said he had instructions from the Cabinet. This does not mean re-opening the treaty but making another attempt to find a solution. The Prime Minister said he understood that the Secretary said he could not accept opening the text, but the Israeli Cabinet had not accepted this. He had suggested an idea for balancing the language in the preamble but Atherton had said it was a non-starter. Why did the U.S. say this and yet consider Egyptian proposals. The Secretary said the latter were also non-starters. We think it would be a mistake to open the treaty; it would then begin to unravel. Rosenne interjected that the interpretive note on the treaty had been agreed, yet now the Egyptians want to reconsider it. The Secretary said the Egyptians could not do this and he would speak to them. Begin said the Israeli Delegation and he could not do anything in view of the Cabinet decision. The Secretary replied that he hoped the Cabinet would reconsider in light of the present situation. Begin asked whether it was premature to discuss the exchange of letters on the West Bank and Gaza. In response to Dayan’s query, the Secretary said we expected an Egyptian reply Tuesday at the earliest but could not be certain. Begin said should we discuss it or wait. Dayan said he preferred to wait; if the Egyptians turned it down, there was no use discussing it. The Secretary commented that he thought his discussions with Dayan the previous night on the letter had led to a constructive result.7 President Carter had approved it and agreed to recommend it. Dayan then said it was perhaps better for the Prime Minister to give his views to the Secretary. 7 See Document 131.
