574
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
183.
Memorandum From Michele Bova of the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to John Spiegel of the
Office of the Deputy Secretary of State1
Washington, March 9, 1979
SUBJECT
Suggestions for Improving the Procedures of the Inter-Agency Group on Human
Rights and Foreign Assistance
Mr. Vest’s recent memo2 reiterates some of the problems and frus-
trations faced by your office, our bureau and all those involved in the
interagency review process of human rights and foreign assistance. The
problems are not new. Some of them can probably never be resolved
satisfactorily. Others can. From the perspective of someone who has
been dealing with this process since its inception and who will soon be
leaving for another tour, I would like to offer some frank suggestions
on what can be done and some observations on how to minimize dis-
satisfactions with what will always be a less than perfect procedure.
This is not an official memo. I have not cleared it with anyone and
it is not in the “system”. The principals in my own bureau would prob-
ably not agree with some of my points. I offer it as the last salvo of a de-
parting bureaucrat who has seen much progress in implementing a
new, controversial and broad reaching policy but who is also disap-
pointed that so much of what has been done depends on the initiatives
of individuals rather than the existence of institutionalized procedures
or the inadequacy of those which have been established. This lack is not
fair to busy men like Mr. Christopher and it is not good for the human
rights policy.
If you conclude that some of the suggestions which follow should
be implemented, I believe the most effective way to achieve this end
would be for Mr. Christopher to direct that they be done. If you would
like a more democratic approach to be followed I suggest that an ad hoc
group be called which would be tasked with preparing a paper on
methods of improving current procedures. Such a paper should repre-
sent the consensus of the group and should not take the form of yet an-
other Solomon’s choice options memorandum. The attached list of sug-
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, EAID IAGHR 1979. Confidential. A hand-
written notation in the right-hand corner of the first page reads: “BB [Barbara Bowie]—
FYI (This was never distributed beyond MS [Mark Schneider] + John Spiegel). Michele.”
2 Not found and not further identified.
