522 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement force concept. We are getting an increasing number of queries as to where we expect to go if the Chinese Communists should unexpect­ edly agree to sign some form of textually acceptable renunciation of force declaration? Taipei clearly believes that the Communists might be willing to sign some such form of declaration with no intention of observing it longer than it served their purposes. Taipei knows that no such declaration can be self-enforcing and they believe the Chinese Communists would not hesitate to try to rationalize a violation of any wording which might be proposed. Taipei is asking with increasing insistence, “Where would you go after you got an agreed announce­ ment on renunciation of force?” We are drafting a message to Rankin which spells out to some extent the rationale behind the Geneva Ambassadorial talks. There may be some tendency on the part of our people out there to look at the problem almost exclusively in military terms. More of all this next week. On the repatriation question, I am enclosing a copy of an Aide Memoire we are giving the British which answers some of their ques­ tions on the stand we would like for O’Neill to take in regard to letters and visits to prisoners, the obstruction issue, and the special responsi­ bility resting on the Chinese Communists to establish contact between O’Neill and the prisoners in view of the inability of the prisoners to take any initiative without the consent and assistance of Chinese Commu­ nist authorities. We are enclosing a copy of the report of the interview with Downey on November 15. We are also sending you separately a copy of the memo of conversation between Indian Ambassador Mehta and Mr. Robertson which took place yesterday. We are working on a revision of the draft public statement (your 1141). Presumably there will be no occasion to use this right away but we hope to have some concrete suggestions for you before the next meeting. It seems to me that there are various little straws indicating that the Chinese Communists may be laying the ground work for a resort to the public forum later. The casual suggestion of Tuesday for the next meeting is one such straw. I hope you will find our proposal to substitute Dave Osborn for Doug Forman acceptable. Doug’s family situation seems to call for his early return. Dave is outstanding and will bring considerable original­ ity, resourcefulness and fertility of mind as well as a good basic knowl­ edge, both general and particular. His report of current thinking here, such as Doug brought you in mid-August, will also be valuable to you. We are working hard on the Ekvall case and hope to have a solution although it is too early for you to take this for granted. The bureaucratic hurdles encountered on such a seemingly simple problem are well-nigh incredible. I was glad to get your letter No. 17 of Nov. 4 (which took 10
