926
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
364.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, February 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation Policy Progress Report
The following non-proliferation progress report covers the period
since your speech last October before the organizing conference of the
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE).2
Where Are We After the First Year?
Your non-proliferation policy has challenged the conventional
wisdom surrounding the nuclear fuel cycle and progress has been
made towards key objectives. International attention to the prolifera-
tion risk of sensitive nuclear technologies has increased. A more coop-
erative assessment of the problems is underway. Opposition remains
and tensions with some nations persist, but our intentions and actions
are better understood, received with less suspicion and have greater
credibility.
The London Nuclear Suppliers Group Guidelines were published
in early January, publicly establishing minimum conditions for nuclear
technology exports to which all Suppliers have agreed.3 By submitting
them to the IAEA and publishing them we reduced institutional ten-
sions between the Suppliers Group and the IAEA.
Following your opening of the INFCE, its constituent working
groups have begun substantive work. The polemics we feared could
hamper the Evaluation’s progress have been minor and a number of
nations see real value in such a comprehensive examination of the nu-
clear fuel cycle. It will take time but our purpose is to develop a con-
sensus, not to solve immediate problems.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 123, Vance, Miscellaneous Communications With: 3–5/78. Secret. In the upper right-
hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote “Good report. J.”
2 On October 19, 1977, Carter told the INFCE Conference that the United States was
“eager to cooperate as a nation which is a consumer and also as a supplier. We want to
ensure that where there is a legitimate need and where there’s mutually agreed upon
nonproliferation restraint, that there be an adequate supply of nuclear fuel.” (Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, pp. 1812–1814)
3 The updated Guidelines applied to nuclear transfers for peaceful purposes to help
ensure that such transfers would not be diverted to unsafeguarded nuclear fuel cycle or
nuclear explosive activities. (Documents on Disarmament, 1978, pp. 7–25)
