Options Identified 209 In addition, Swiss, Japanese, and West German banking officials fear the increased use of their currencies as reserve assets and settlement currencies. The Japanese, for example, strongly resisted US pressure in the early 1970s to further internationalize the yen. Wider use of the Swiss franc, yen, and Deutsche mark, would lessen the control of domestic monetary authorities, making money management more difficult. Unregulated Euro-markets in these currencies—now limited— would undoubtedly grow, as happened with the US dollar in the 1960s. If other developed countries continue to resist pressures for greater international use of their currencies, support for a broader role for the SDR in international transactions would likely grow. [portion marking not declassified] Although other oil exporters have rejected Iranian demands that oil be priced and sold in other currencies, the issue is not a new one. Indeed, OPEC as a whole has been discussing for some time now the possibility of pricing its oil in a currency—or a basket of currencies— stronger than the dollar. If only Iran shifted away from using the dollar, the result would probably be a brief flurry in exchange markets. If all oil were suddenly priced and sold in other currencies, however, the one-time drop in demand for dollars would be dramatic and adjustment problems could be severe. World oil trade at current prices is now running at the tremendous level of something more than $250 billion a year. If the value of the dollar takes a plunge, however, so does the value of OPEC assets worldwide. [portion marking not declassified] Over the longer term, the strength of the US dollar will essentially be determined by fundamental economic factors, such as the US inflation rate, current account balance, and the general health of the economy. Thus, any erosion in the status of the US dollar as a reserve currency would not cause serious long-term damage, provided it occurs on a gradual basis—a process that OPEC countries have a strong interest in assuring because of their large dollar holdings. Providing the change in the international currency regime is a gradual one, the dollar over the longer run might benefit. Such a move would give the United States greater control over monetary policy and an enhanced competitive position. [portion marking not declassified]
