El Salvador 585 ES–10. Memorandum of Conversation by the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)1 San Salvador, November 20, 1959. PARTICIPANTS Lt. Col. José Maria Lemus, President of the Republic of El Salvador Thorsten V. Kalijarvi, American Ambassador President Lemus asked me to remain after the presentation of the parchment2 saying he had a problem he wished to discuss with me. He stated that he needed U.S. assistance. He had already requested a Military Assistance Program. Now, instead of making a specific suggestion, he wished to request such aid as could be given. The growing instability of the area, especially communist agitation and possibilities of attacks by El Salvador’s neighbors left El Salvador vulnerable. He referred to the despatch of a shipload of arms to an unknown destination from Mexico, to the invasions attempt from the sea, and to the constant disturbance of the whole area. Some time ago El Salvador had purchased a number of airplanes from the United States and then had bought additional planes to rehabilitate those already purchased. Some planes were lost on the way down and others had deteriorated in service. He referred to the five planes which are to be sent to Costa Rica for repair and rehabilitation. He contrasted these with the jets now contemplated for purchase by Cuba. He referred to some 50 pilots capable of flying the planes, but no planes to fly. He noted the lack of funds of the Government of El Salvador for the purchase of necessary military equipment in order to maintain itself in a strong defense position against possible attack. While his illustrations were drawn from the air force, he was general in his discussion, including the need for ships for coast guard purposes, for control against smuggling, and for guarding the coast against possible attack. He added that the problem confronting his government was grave and the need for U.S. assistance, while not immediately urgent, certainly was in need of prompt consideration. There was a strong implication that he was asking for military equipment financed by the U.S. Government as well as for assistance in organizing the military forces of this country. He voiced a desire to keep the budget in the black, maintaining the social and welfare projects that have been undertaken, and at the same
