812 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement As of this writing, I have not received instructions for Thursday’s meeting. I assume that you are working on them today and that they will be in tomorrow morning. Kind regards. Sincerely yours, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador P.S. Feb. 29 a.m. Have received the instructions for the March 1 meeting this morn­ ing since writing the above. My views on Chinese prisoners asked for in Para. 2 of the instructions are largely incorporated in this letter. How­ ever, I want to think about it some more and will reply by telegraph. I am somewhat disturbed by the answer given the Indians in the second sentence of your 1694, although I am not sure I would have been able to suggest a good alternative. If we felt giving the Indians the addresses would establish an undesirable precedent, I feel we should have found some grounds for refusing other than we “did not feel it necessary” to send copies to the individuals named. The Agreed Announcement provides the Indian Embassy may also give publicity thereto and I do not feel we should be in a position that could be inter­ preted as preventing them from doing something that comes within the strict terms of the announcement and which they consider desir­ able. There is also the question of consistency with the position we have taken with respect to O’Neill’s functions. However, as a broader matter, I would be inclined to go a long way in keeping the Indian Embassy completely satisfied and well informed. We “invited” them to undertake their functions and our position is so strong with regard to the freedom of the general run of Chinese in the United States to depart if they desire to do so that we can well afford to let the Indians fully satisfy themselves on this. They can be our most useful ally in establishing the strength of our position and I feel we should make every possible effort to cultivate their support. Nothing could so effectively further spike the Communist charges as the Indians sending the text of the announcement to some individuals and getting back replies that they did not desire to leave. Let us hope they get such replies in those cases where they have transmitted the announcement. I wonder, for example, if it might be a good idea to read them some of Wang’s milder charges. I know you have all of this very much in mind, but I wanted to express my feeling that on the basis of what I have seen of our exchanges with the Indian Embassy we could in some cases with advantage to ourselves be somewhat more forthcoming than it seems to me we have been. UAJ
