642
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Continue to strengthen international machinery for dealing with
human rights issues (United Nations, Organization of American States,
International Labor Organization, UNESCO) and promote the creation
of regional human rights bodies.10
6. Ratification of International Human Rights Treaties11
—Complete U.S. adherence to six major international human
rights treaties through ratification. The six treaties currently before the
Senate are: the Genocide Convention, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, So-
cial and Cultural Rights, the International Convention on the Elimina-
tion of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the American Convention
on Human Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.
7. Non-Governmental Organizations12
—Continue to cooperate with private non-governmental organiza-
tions engaged in programs and activities to strengthen the protection of
human rights internationally.
8. Asylum Policy13
—Strengthen the asylum unit to enable it to deal with a rapidly in-
creasing number of cases, for example Iranian, Nicaraguan and Cuban
cases, among others.
10 In this point, Walker deleted “Continue to” and substituted “review US action/
efforts in,” added a question mark and a check mark in the left-hand margin, and brack-
eted the words “and promote the” and wrote “and” above the brackets. She also placed a
check mark in the margin next to this insertion.
11 Walker placed a check mark in the left-hand margin next to this point. She also
drew a slash through it.
12 Walker added “Relations with” to the heading “Non-Governmental Organiza-
tions” and drew a line from it to the word “engaged” in the first sentence. The portion of
the sentence leading up to the word “engaged” was deleted. She also added a question
mark and a check mark in the left-hand margin next to this bulleted point.
13 Walker added “Policy toward” to the heading “Asylum Policy” and placed a
check mark in the left-hand margin.
