Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
569
Soviets on issues of common concern, perhaps with my counterpart
who works for Brezhnev. This could be in preparation for the Summit.6
With reference to the latter, I should note that we really have not
had sustained and truly tough-minded “consultations” with the So-
viets since you took office. Most of Cy’s sessions have been primarily
negotiating ones, and I suspect that some of the misunderstandings
that exist are due to suspicions that have become more intense. Kissin-
ger, even while bombing Hanoi, did engage in such forthright consulta-
tions with the Soviets and they were mutually helpful in defining more
precisely the limits of what is tolerable and what is not. At the min-
imum, I would suggest engaging in some soul searching with Do-
brynin here on the basis of guidance cleared by you and Cy.
In addition, it might be useful for Cy to give a foreign policy
speech in which he would stress some of the themes that you have re-
cently expressed: the importance of power, and our recognition that re-
lations with the Soviet Union may require from time to time a forceful
American reaffirmation of our interests (e.g., in relationship to Iran, or
peace in the Far East, or the Soviet military buildup). I am scheduled to
give a speech before the Council on Foreign Relations in Chicago some
time in late March or early April and my plan is to use it, subject to your
approval, for a strong defense on SALT and for an explanation of its im-
portance to our overall foreign policy.7
There may be other ways in which orchestration by you could be
symbolically expressed, but I have the feeling that some initiatives
along the lines suggested above are needed.
Finally, I attach a page from Nixon’s memoirs which is very sug-
gestive.8 If we can combine a Camp David success with a wider Mid-
dle East regional security initiative and a comprehensive energy initia-
tive, we might generate genuine momentum that would be politically
significant.
2. National Security Affairs Calendar (see Tab A)9
6 Reference is to the summit meeting between the President and Brezhnev, sched-
uled to take place in Vienna June 16–18; see Document 120.
7 On April 4, Brzezinski addressed a dinner meeting of the Chicago Committee of
the Council on Foreign Relations; see Harry Kelly, “Brzezinski defends SALT II; says that
Soviets cannot cheat,” The Chicago Tribune, April 5, 1979, p. 6.
8 Brzezinski attached a photocopy of page 497 of RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon
(New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1978). He drew the President’s attention to the following
paragraph: “Having hit the lowest of low points in 1971, we suddenly rebounded with a
series of stunning successes, among them the announcement of the China trip, a break-
through in the SALT negotiations, an extremely popular and apparently effective eco-
nomic program including a freeze of wages and prices, and the scheduling of a Soviet
summit. These and other things gave us a momentum that carried right into the presiden-
tial election year of 1972.” Brzezinski also underlined a portion of the first sentence.
9 Attached but not printed.
