National Security Policy  1147
a. To protect U.S. citizens including, if necessary and feasible, their 
evacuation to and welfare in relatively safe areas.
b. To reduce to a minimum the number of U.S. citizens subject to 
the risk of capture as hostages.
c. To reduce to a minimum the number of U.S. citizens in probable 
combat areas in order not to impair the combat effectiveness of U.S. and 
allied military commanders.
POLICY GUIDANCE
4. In furtherance of the foregoing policy objectives, the Secretaries 
of State and Defense shall:
a. Conduct a continuing review of conditions abroad with respect to:
(1) Imminence of general or localized hostilities or civil distur­
bances which may involve U.S. citizens.
(2) The capability and willingness of local authorities to provide 
adequate protection.
(3) The numbers and locations of U.S. citizens.
(4) The evacuation and protection capability, including availability 
of relatively safe holding or survival areas.
b. Make recommendations to the President if required for the 
timely reduction of the number of U.S. citizens in an area.
c. Maintain plans for: (1) evacuation of U.S. citizens to the United 
States or their movement to and welfare in other relatively safe areas; 
and (2) “stand-­fast” and welfare of U.S. citizens in the countries where 
appropriate.
5. Normally, the decision to initiate evacuation shall be made in 
Washington, taking into consideration the recommendation of the 
principal U.S. diplomatic or consular representative in the country con­
cerned, or of the appropriate U.S. Military Commander. The following 
additional considerations apply in initiating evacuations:
a. Evacuation not Involving the Use of U.S. Military Forces and Facilities: 
When hostilities or disturbances occur with complete surprise or are so 
imminent as to jeopardize the safety of U.S. citizens and conditions do 
not permit communication with Washington, the principal U.S. diplo­
matic or consular representative is authorized to initiate such action as 
the gravity of the situation warrants.
b. Evacuation Involving the Use of U.S. Military Forces and Facilities: 
Because of the grave international consequences that may be involved, 
the President’s advance approval for the use of U.S. military forces and 
facilities is required except:
(1) Where such use would be limited to non-­combatant military 
forces and facilities which are normally assigned to the diplomatic 
or consular mission concerned or which are used routinely for the
