1098
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ment assistance to the minority of workers and owners who might lose
out for the benefit of the country as a whole.
Investment
—OPIC’s capacity to stimulate private U.S. investment in devel-
oping countries will be enhanced, and AID’s program to increase op-
portunities for U.S. companies abroad will be expanded.
The creation of productive employment and the ability of a nation
to export are both essential to development. One of the most important
means to achieve these objectives is through increased private sector in-
vestment in the developing nations. We will work to expand OPIC’s
abilities to stimulate increased investment in all the developing na-
tions. Special efforts will be made to develop energy and other natural
resources in these nations. In conjunction with the U.S. Trade Repre-
sentative, we intend to review and seek to resolve legal and other ob-
stacles to sound investment relationships.
Investment abroad often means exports for U.S. industry, and
other benefits as the investment reaches a productive stage. In ac-
cordance with OPIC’s mandate, we will pursue investments for the
benefit of poorer countries with concern for the domestic U.S. effects.
Additionally, we will make a special effort to maximize the benefits for
U.S. business of AID’s reimbursable development assistance program.
3. Focus Special Development Efforts on Regions and Countries of Highest
Concern to the United States
Caribbean Basin
—A program will be prepared to accelerate the development of
countries in the Caribbean Basin.
We will help design an overall U.S. strategy for accelerating devel-
opment throughout the Caribbean Basin. This program will be aimed
at ameliorating social and economic difficulties, as well as at strength-
ening the democratic institutions of our neighbors to the South. This
program will emphasize development assistance aimed at long-term
economic development, as well as funds for meeting short-term needs
in both public and private sectors. The World Bank and Inter-American
Development Bank are also committed to supporting effective devel-
opment in this region. This effort will have to be coordinated carefully
with policies outside the assistance field, particularly those related to
trade.
We believe that a serious effort should be made to help the Carib-
bean nations achieve the kinds of societies that meet the aspirations of
their people.
