38
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
B. A quota placing an absolute ceiling on imports, e.g., at the 1975
import level of 287 million pairs, as proposed by the industry.
C. Negotiate restraints with foreign suppliers (orderly marketing
agreements), based on absolute limits or a tariff rate quota. Under the
Trade Act you would have 90 days after April 9 to negotiate such agree-
ments before restrictions would have to enter into force.
Adjustment assistance can be combined with any of the above im-
port relief options.
On balance, the arguments favor some form of import relief. How-
ever, to increase the effectiveness and saleability of a less restrictive
remedy than proposed by the USITC, it would be desirable to couple
any import relief action with a special adjustment assistance program,
which could be developed on a priority basis and the necessary legisla-
tion obtained before the end of the year.
Among the options, a tariff increase sufficient to generate any sig-
nificant amount of production and employment is probably ruled out
because the European Community, and possibly other suppliers,
would retaliate against a large volume of U.S. exports. Agricultural
products would be key targets.
The quota option interferes most with market forces and at any
level acceptable to the industry would entail huge costs to consumers.
Orderly marketing agreements would prolong the agony of im-
posing restrictions. Pressure could arise for another textile-type agree-
ment. Practical considerations (e.g., the 90 day statutory deadline)
would probably prevent negotiation with all of the countries involved.
The EC would not negotiate and others would resist and resent any
cut-back from current levels. The industry would oppose any nego-
tiable level of restraints.
A tariff rate quota offers the flexibility needed to provide relief ac-
ceptable to the Congress at lower costs than other import relief options.
The USITC remedy, however, requires certain modifications as sum-
marized in Option III above and spelled out in Tab A.
The modified TRQ has the selling point on the Hill of being the
same form of relief as that of the Commission. The variations are defen-
sible because:
1. A 1974–76 base would provide adequate relief. The 1974 USITC
base was the lowest level of imports since 1970.
2. Country allocations should reflect more recent trade patterns
than 1974. The 1974–76 average shares make better provision for newer
suppliers. 1976 should not be used because the EC would be cut back,
thus generating major frictions jeopardizing broader trade objectives.
3. Introduction of a price break for footwear valued at $2.50 pair
and under will avoid shifts in imports to higher priced models and
