1172  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
requested. Such being case, side which extremely dissatisfied with out­
come agreement precisely his side.
28. I said no obligation under agreed announcement submit any 
list Chinese in US. Obligation was permit Chinese in US who desire do 
so return his country. Let us keep to facts. Agency established for assur­
ing whether or not this case had not among tens of thousands Chinese 
in US yet brought to our attention any single case alleged obstruction. 
This was fact which no amount vague statements, vague charges could 
controvert. Was also fact Chinese steadily returning his country. I knew 
of nine who had definitely done so since I last mentioned this subject. 
This made total 190 I definitely knew of since last Aug 1.
29. Wang said even this 190 did not represent all who desired return. 
He had given me names 50-­odd persons, 52 of whom had not returned. 
I had stated no allegation been made to US as to obstruction return, but 
this did not mean there been no difficulties encountered by Chinese. He 
had repeatedly spoken on this situation. He had nothing further.
30. Wang proposed next meeting Thursday, Sept 20 and I agreed.
Gowen
710.	 Letter 44 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 44
Geneva, September 7, 1956
Dear Walter:
I have little to add to my “comment” telegram today. I felt satisfied 
that the meeting went as well as it did and particularly appreciated 
the very complete and clear guidance for today’s meeting. You will 
see that I made full use of it. I especially appreciated its explicitness in 
instructing me not to be deterred in refusing to discuss trade by fear 
they would use it as a pretext to break off or recess the talks. It gave me 
just the guidance I was looking for on this subject. I hope you under­
stand that my recent emphasis on the possibility of a break or recess 
has not been motivated by any change in my feeling they are probably 
not going to make any major new move until around election time, but 
simply a desire to anticipate and be prepared for the worst while hop­
ing for the best.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
