660  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
143.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National  
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy 
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, July 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Defense Investment (U)
The attached chart, one you used at the 4 June NSC meeting, makes 
a point we shall have to take increasingly into account in defense plan-
ning and budgeting: Soviet defense investment has exceeded ours for 
a decade, has exceeded ours by about 75 percent for the past several 
years, and is projected to continue to do so well into the 1980s.2 (S)
This is the conclusion of work done in Andy Marshall’s net assess-
ment office in OSD. I’ve had a chance to review informally a draft of 
his full report, and want to pass on some additional highlights. Andy 
has sent copies to Harold Brown and other senior DOD people. After 
responding to some of their comments, he will distribute a finished ver-
sion. Almost all of the analysis, incidentally, is unclassified. It derives 
from comparing published US and NATO defense data with unclassi-
fied CIA analysis of Soviet and Warsaw Pact defense outlays. (U)
The key message is in the chart itself. While Soviets outspend the 
US on defense by 25–40 percent, depending on how you measure, they 
out-­invest us by even larger amounts. Defense investment is defined 
as spending on military R&D, procurement of hardware, and military 
construction. Unlike spending for current operations and maintenance 
(except for training), defense investment is aimed at future strength. It 
tends to be cumulative (although there is also the opposite tendency for 
investments to “decay” through obsolescence and wear-­out of equip-
ment and facilities). In other words, even if we somehow matched 
Soviet defense investment next year, we could not suddenly match the 
results of Soviet investment in earlier years. (U)
This is, of course, a highly generalized indicator of relative 
defense activity. Captured within it are such specific developments as 
those Soviet strategic force improvements that have made MINUTE-
MAN vulnerable. Andy’s study reaches the judgment that unless the 
USSR sharply alters very long-­standing defense spending patterns, 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Ermarth, Box 3, Defense (Items in the System): 7/79–6/80. Secret. Sent for information. 
Copies were sent to Brement, Odom, and Utgoff.
2 Not found attached. For the June 4 NSC meeting, see Document 141.
