3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 374 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI stances of the Orlov trial in the cases of Shcharansky and Ginzburg.50 These were matters of intense interest in the United States. The President was not questioning the right of the Soviet Union to act in these matters as it saw fit, but he did have to point out what detriment51 to mutual trust and respect between our countries and to certain other matters such as52 trade and scientific and cultural exchanges53 would come as a result of these trials. The President recognized the sensitivity of these matters for the Soviet Union, but wanted to be sure that Gromyko understood their sensitivity in the United States. The Soviet Union never refrained from criticizing us when it felt that we were acting improperly toward our own citizens. The President felt no restraint,54 therefore, in expressing the55 concerns he had just expressed.56 Africa Gromyko continued his response to the President on African matters. He called the presence of a Soviet general in Ethiopia a myth.57 Had the Soviet Union been invited to send a general there, it would have refused.58 There was no Soviet Napoleon in Africa. Evidently the President was being fed completely fantastic information. As for the Cuban presence, the Soviet Union had information that in Angola the number of Cubans was being reduced rather than increased. The President’s reference to GDR personnel in connection with Kolwezi could not be regarded as authentic.59 Even the U.S. press had not alleged anything of the sort.60 As for the invasion into Zaire, the press had first reported that Mobutu’s soldiers in the area were shooting blacks, then that blacks were shooting whites, whites were shooting blacks, and had spoken of certain rebels. The situation appeared to be totally confused, but there was certainly no Soviet or Cuban involvement there. 50 Bartholomew added “and others” after “Ginzburg.” 51 Bartholomew put brackets around “what detriment” and wrote “the destruction” in the margin above it. After “to mutual” Bartholomew put “trust and” in brackets and added “and friendship” after “respect.” 52 Bartholomew put “certain other matters such as” in brackets and wrote in the margin above “possible better relations in.” 53 Bartholomew added “that” after “exchanges.” 54 Bartholomew put one bracket in front of “restraint,” and wrote “constraint” in the margin above it. 55 Bartholomew put “the” in brackets and wrote “his own” in the margin above it. 56 Bartholomew put “he had just expressed” in brackets. 57 Bartholomew added “and wrong information” after “Ethiopia a myth.” 58 Bartholomew added “it did not interfere” after “refused.” 59 Bartholomew added the sentence “The GDR had nothing to do with it and this was the first time we ever heard of this.” 60 Bartholomew put brackets around “anything of the sort” and wrote “that the Angolans and Cubans were involved” in the margin above it.
