International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 151 —Growth. The central factor in dealing with the political/economic issues facing Europe, and indeed other nations, is the ability of the US and FRG, plus Japan, to achieve stable growth, and to stimulate substantial amounts of new exports from weaker economies. The political situation in countries like Italy, France, Spain and Portugal limit the severity of the stabilization programs they can implement. Stronger input demand by the stronger economies is therefore essential. The US and Germany have made important commitments at the London Summit with respect to achievement of growth targets. Germany has made efforts to stimulate its economy, but will fall below its 5% target—perhaps to 4%. In part, the problem has been the lack of response by the German economy to earlier stimulus and in part the reluctance to introduce new stimulus for fear of triggering new inflation, despite the expectation of only 4% inflation in 1977. We want Schmidt and his economic officials to see adequate growth and increasing imports as key international economic and political objectives (essential to moderate outcomes in France, Italy, and elsewhere in Europe) and to pay extremely close attention to this problem in the months ahead. Even if targets cannot be precisely met in 1977, and we hope the Germans will come as close as possible, we must be certain that actions are taken to ensure maximum non-inflationary growth in 1978. Regarding current account imbalances, the Germans, Japanese, Dutch and Swiss surpluses may add up to $12 billion, added to a roughly $40 billion OPEC surplus. This puts undue financial stress on those countries which we have the greatest interest in helping—France, Italy, (as well as poor countries). The US deficit of roughly $12 billion makes economic sense, since it results from growing oil imports, a growth rate in the US that is higher than most other countries, our highly elastic demand for imports, and stabilization policies in some of our more important markets. We can sustain this level for a time, but unless Germany and Japan reduce their surpluses, we will be subject to increased protectionist pressures from those people here who say that it is unfair for the US to have a deficit while Germany and Japan and others maintain surpluses. Is there anything further we can do together to strengthen consumer and investor confidence in Europe? Enlargement of the European Community Enlargement of the EC (to include Portugal, Spain and Greece) contains positive as well as negative factors. First and foremost, it should help stabilize the governments in those countries and strengthen their democratic forces. And over the long run, enlargement will contribute to growth in Western Europe through the addition of economies with a potential to achieve high growth rates and act as new markets.
