574
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
doubt that sufficient popular support could be obtained for a settle-
ment on present British terms.
It might be accomplished by “peculiar” pressure on the Chamber
of Deputies. However, no agreement would be of value or be enforce-
able for any substantial period of time unless it was reasonably accept-
able to the Iranian public. There is at present no Iranian on the political
scene who has displayed the necessary force and personality success-
fully to replace Mosadeq.
Alternative D
We could renew our pressure on both the British and Iranians to
come to a more reasonable attitude with regard to compensation. This
is essentially a policy of continuing our policies in Iran of using every
suitable occasion to impress upon Iranian leaders the necessity of
coming to an arrangement on this matter and of inaugurating a policy
with regard to the British of insisting that they do not remain passive in
this matter. The British should understand that sooner or later if they
maintain their present attitude (a) Iran will be lost to the free world or
(b) Iranian oil will find its way into the world markets in quantities and
in a manner which can create acute discomfort for the AIOC.
Comment:
Favorable: This alternative would seem to contain less immediate
hazards than those mentioned heretofore. It would be in keeping with
the practice which the U.S. customarily follows in trying to bring about
a solution of problems between its friends.
Unfavorable: There is a possibility despite all that we might do
along these lines, that Iran will drift into chaos and that we would be
open to the accusations of not taking sufficiently positive action.3
3 Telegram 4524 from Tehran, May 25, Henderson transmitted the text of an oral
message Dulles authorized him to convey to Mosadeq upon the Ambassador’s return
from meeting with the Secretary in Karachi. The Secretary wished to communicate to Mo-
sadeq that his trip to the Near East and Middle East had been a fact-finding trip and that
he was disappointed at not having been able to visit Iran. He nevertheless wished to ex-
press his regret “hear you apparently coming opinion it would serve no useful purpose
continue searching for solution problem compensation; and that therefore you thinking
of ignoring that problem in making plans restoration Iranian economy.” The Secretary
urged Mosadeq to continue to work with the British to find a solution to the oil dispute.
Telegram 4524 is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954, pp.
728–729 (Document 327).
