654  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
have the certainty and reliability to insure that all forces can respond 
when warning is received?
e. What facilities have we now for determining that our bases are 
under attack? What facilities for disseminating this information?
f. Will the concept of perimeter, area and point defense continue to 
have validity in the 1960–65 period?
g. What is an appropriate balance between manned interceptors, 
interceptor missiles and ground-­to-­air missiles?
h. To what extent do our present continental defenses meet the 
threat of missiles launched from submarines? What measures have 
promise to be effective against this threat?
i. Is there a need for more centralized management of the various 
aspects of continental air defense?
3. Control of the Seas—Antisubmarine Warfare
a. In what ways can our present ASW capability be improved?
b. Should further emphasis be placed on methods for broad ocean 
surveillance?
c. Is the effort currently being devoted to ASW commensurate with 
the threat:
(1) against the continental U.S.?
(2) against task forces and against shipping?
d. Is there a need for more effective, centralized direction of the 
ASW effort?
4. Tactical Forces
a. In the event of general war involving a nuclear exchange, is 
it assumed that there will be a requirement for further deployment 
of ground forces overseas? If so, can the probable requirements be 
determined?
b. Taking into account our commitments and the nature of the 
threat with respect to hostilities short of general war, do our tactical 
forces have adequate mobility, flexibility and readiness? Should this 
requirement have priority over mobilization reserves for general war?
c. Do present programs provide aircraft and weapons wholly 
appropriate to such tactical combat?
d. Is there a need for so many different tactical weapons (i.e., the 
280-­mm gun, the 8-­inch howitzer, the 155-­mm howitzer, HONEST 
JOHN, LITTLE JOHN, LACROSSE, SERGEANT)?
e. Is there an element of overlap between the Army’s growing arse­
nal of short-­range missiles and the Air Force’s tactical aircraft; and if so, 
is this desirable?
