502 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 or to diminish the deeply held Iranian conviction that we are opposed to the revolution.2 2 A February 28 CIA assessment of the INR paper stated “we generally concur with the thrust of this analysis,” but added that CIA believed Khomeini would aid other Islamic revolutionaries in neighboring states both materially and financially. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator, Box 13) A paper prepared in CIA, “National Policy and Intelligence Considerations in Post-Hostage Iran,” February 21, argued that U.S. policy toward Iran after the hostage crisis should focus on an independent Muslim Iran as a bulwark against Soviet expansionism, and on major oil producer Iran’s participation in the Western economy. An addendum offered four policy options: 1) ignore Iran and have the U.S. defense line based on the Saudis, 2) back Bani-Sadr openly and offer Iran U.S. aid, 3) take a low profile and wait for the Iranians to “come to us,” and 4) allow and encourage NATO allies to take a greater role in Iran, especially in arms sales. (Ibid.) 193. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State (Raphel) to Secretary of State Vance and the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, February 29, 1980 SUBJECT The Shah and Panama This afternoon from 3:00 to 4:45, Hamilton Jordan, Lloyd Cutler and I met with Armao and Bill Jackson to discuss the Shah and Panama. Armao had requested the meeting and began with the usual list of complaints about the Panamanian treatment of Armao, his associates and the Shah’s party. Armao offered considerable detail about what he purported to be pay-offs made to Panamanians, and various examples of how the Shah’s stay was made exceedingly uncomfortable. He and Jackson also highlighted what they saw as the Shah’s real fears of extradition to Iran. His presentation ended with the statement that the Shah, his family and he have decided the Shah has to leave Panama immediately and what would we do to assist. 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Personal Files of the Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot 80D135, February Chron 1980. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only.
