August 8–September 17, 1978
19
veto. The formulation3 you used at Aswan last January holds the poten-
tial for a compromise on this issue. Language clearly derived from your
statement, elaborated to provide that Palestinian representatives be a
party to the negotiations, should ultimately be acceptable to both
parties.
The more difficult stand-off exists on the questions of Israeli with-
drawal and sovereignty. The Egyptian position on withdrawal is
grounded in the legal principle (embodied in the preamble of Resolu-
tion 242) of “the inadmissability of the acquisition of territory by war,”
although Sadat has accepted (including publicly) the need for “minor
rectifications” in the pre-1967 border between Israel and the West Bank.
He also recognizes that withdrawal poses security problems for Israel,
and has been increasingly forthcoming in his support for time-phased
withdrawal and special arrangements to solve those problems. On sov-
ereignty, Egypt holds that it resides in and should be exercised by the
Palestinians themselves. (It is useful to recall that neither Egypt nor any
other Arab state ever recognized Jordanian sovereignty over the West
Bank prior to 1967.
The present Israeli position on these questions is a function of the
longstanding conviction of Begin and his Herut Party that the West
Bank is an integral part of the land of Israel, and that its separation from
Israel prior to 1967 was a temporary aberration rectified by the war in
that year. This finally came out in the open in February when the Israeli
Cabinet refused to concede that Resolution 242 required Israeli with-
drawal from any of the West Bank. On this, the Israeli position at the
present time is at variance with our own and with that of all other
parties involved in the discussions leading to the adoption of 242. Some
members of the present Israeli Government, while not endorsing Herut
ideology, nevertheless reject West Bank withdrawal purely on security
grounds. Begin believes that Israel has a valid claim to sovereignty over
the West Bank, although it is willing to admit that other competing
claims exist. Even those Israeli political parties which reject Herut ide-
ology are not prepared to accept minor modifications and insist on the
need for “territorial compromise” (meaning more than what the Arabs
would consider minor changes in the 1967 lines) for security purposes.
In April we asked Israel a set of questions designed to get it to
come to grips officially with the matter of how to resolve the status of
the West Bank after an interim period. Israel replied in June with an-
swers that did not move things at all. Three weeks later the Cabinet
somewhat modified its position and agreed either “to consider” any
3 See footnote 5, Document 3.
