1956 1243 time. Certainly no misunderstanding between us at time we were discuss­ ing this as to what we meant by words “obstruction” and “expeditious” and to whom they applied with regard Americans in China. If relations between us to be improved and international agreements have meaning, must be carried out in good faith by parties thereto. Attitude his govt taken regarding these prisoners after we entered into our agreement and attitude of his govt, as exemplified by his statement this morning, were at grossest variance with not only our understanding but the plain words of agreement. Not only does agreement specifically and clearly cover all Americans desiring return but he would well recall when we discuss­ ing this, question differentiating in some way between those in prison and those not was discussed and specifically eliminated from agreement. Not question of placing demands which as he termed it “unacceptable any self-­respecting country,” it question whether self-­respecting country would carry out solemn commitments into which it entered. Agreement said any American who felt being obstructed—did not say any Americans not in prison—any American who felt being obstructed from returning might communicate with UK Charge. 8. I continued, agreement said his govt would receive representations from UK Charge in any such case. Agreement said if desired by US Govt UK Charge might also investigate facts in any such case. Fr. McCarthy rightly and properly felt he was being obstructed and he invoked, strictly in accordance with agreement, the assistance of UK Charge. No action taken by his govt in response to representation made by UK Charge. UK Charge, still strictly in accordance with agreement, attempted to inves­ tigate facts in Fr. McCarthy’s case. Fr. McCarthy expected he would do so and Charge expected be able do so. Both certainly had every rea­ son expect this could be carried out because it clearly embodied in our agreement. As Fr. McCarthy said in letter to UK Charge he certainly didnt ask to see him to carry on any social chat. He desired talk about his case in order that UK Charge could investigate facts. Fr. McCarthy was informed he would not be permitted in any way to discuss his case with UK Charge. Fr. McCarthy properly felt under those circumstances interview was pointless. This action by Wang’s authorities clearly in vio­ lation of our agreement, and entirely frustrated whole purpose of our agreement. As I said I and my govt consider this whole act with regard to Fr. McCarthy not only in violation basic principles our agreement that all—and I repeat all—Americans who desire to do so be permitted return but also in grossest violation subsidiary provision of agreement concerning function of third party. As he had properly said improvement relations between us required efforts of both sides. Attitude which his govt adopting with regard prisoners did not indicate any effort—in fact quite contrary—to resolve this problem. It indicated willingness entirely to disregard and ignore solemn commitments.
