National Security Policy 167 should, among other things, take every opportunity to negotiate with the Soviet bloc. Paragraph 39 reads, “The United States should continue its readiness to negotiate with the USSR whenever it appears that U.S. interest will be served thereby.” Paragraph 35 b says we should take the initiative—­paragraph 39 is completely passive. This inconsistency prob­ ably arises from the fact that paragraph 35 b is new, whereas the first sentence of paragraph 39 has not been revised and except for the deletion of one word is the same as in the old paper. Paragraph 36 b (2)—This is another example of the timid, uncer­ tain approach toward the USSR. Why must we discreetly inform Free World nations that expansion of US-Soviet Bloc contacts does not sig­ nify US acceptance of Soviet Bloc attitudes? Why should our talking to the Communists raise any question about our accepting their atti­ tudes? It seems to imply a lack of confidence in our own values. We should say openly and most emphatically to the whole world, and particularly to the USSR, that we are expanding contacts with them in the hope of making them better neighbors in this world that we both inhabit. Paragraph 40—The last part of this paragraph is a considerable improvement over the old paper. But I believe it can be sharpened. Our overriding objective with respect to disarmament, arms reduction, etc., should be to make more difficult a surprise attack against the US. Any reduction in the possibility of surprise would be of the utmost value to the US—­of much greater value, for example, than say a 25% reduc­ tion in the active duty strength of Communist forces or even a 25% reduction in the number of their active aircraft. It is reasonably certain that the USSR would never contemplate an all-­out attack on the US unless it felt sure of virtually complete surprise. President Eisenhower recognized this point in his address to the NATO heads of government last December when he talked of “establishing a system which would exclude the risk of massive surprise attack”. Paragraph 42 c—This should be the job of many people in govern­ ment, not just the USIA. We should have a positive program which would entail the deliberate preparation of official statements designed to get our views across to the world and particularly to the people of the USSR. We should carry the battle to the Communists by taking the initia­ tive and every allegation made by the Communists should be promptly answered by an appropriate official of the US Government. We should exploit their vulnerabilities and expose their every weakness in an orga­ nized, planned national effort. For example, on the matter of housing the head of the Federal Housing Administration, should, in public state­ ments, point out the glaring inadequacies of Russian housing as com­ pared with the US; the Secretary of Agriculture should point to the great
