984 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III both real and symbolic, interest to the developing countries, especially those in Latin America. It is important in the North/South context that we not move toward greater restrictions on sugar imports and preferably that we relax the restrictions that we now have. —The volume of foreign aid, both bilateral and multilateral, is of tremendous importance substantively and politically. You know the domestic difficulties with this, so I will not rehearse them here. It would be good to emphasize these two areas at the Summit. The Japanese and especially the Europeans are skittish on the question of trade, and we need to remind them of the vital importance to the economic prospects of developing countries of maintaining our markets open to their products. You also might mention there your planning targets on U.S. foreign aid for FY 1982, since that will indicate your commitment to this area despite the widely-known domestic political difficulties with it. In addition to these two areas, we should continue to push along with price-stabilizing commodity agreements where there is some promise of success. We have agreed to negotiate on rubber and there is perhaps some prospect for a copper agreement. Beyond pricestabilizing agreements, we may want to indicate a willingness to support applied research for product improvement in other commodities (e.g., jute, sisal). In the category of things we might do if necessary to mollify the developing countries are our positions on the Common Fund and on providing debt relief before acute debt crises arise: —The Common Fund is a major plank in the G–77 platform of demands. The substantive value to the economic welfare of developing countries is considerably less than the political significance that they have given to it. A major move toward the G–77 position on the Common Fund would be well received by them, but because it would provide only marginal benefits to the world economy, a major investment of your political capital would be required to secure Congressional support for U.S. participation and a U.S. contribution of perhaps $100 to $250 million. —Authority to ease the terms on outstanding debt of the poorest countries is now before the Congress. In addition to pressing for that authority and using it when we get it, we would please some of the leading moderates in the G–77 (e.g., India, Pakistan, Jamaica) if we would agree to a procedure whereby official debts could be rescheduled in anticipation of a balance-of-payments crisis rather than, as now, trying to provide additional aid in such situations and relying on debt rescheduling only when default appears imminent. However, this approach could involve very substantial amounts of money and there will be major Congressional difficulties with getting authority and appro-
