984
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
both real and symbolic, interest to the developing countries, especially
those in Latin America. It is important in the North/South context that
we not move toward greater restrictions on sugar imports and prefer-
ably that we relax the restrictions that we now have.
—The volume of foreign aid, both bilateral and multilateral, is of
tremendous importance substantively and politically. You know the
domestic difficulties with this, so I will not rehearse them here.
It would be good to emphasize these two areas at the Summit. The
Japanese and especially the Europeans are skittish on the question of
trade, and we need to remind them of the vital importance to the eco-
nomic prospects of developing countries of maintaining our markets
open to their products. You also might mention there your planning
targets on U.S. foreign aid for FY 1982, since that will indicate your
commitment to this area despite the widely-known domestic political
difficulties with it.
In addition to these two areas, we should continue to push along
with price-stabilizing commodity agreements where there is some
promise of success. We have agreed to negotiate on rubber and there
is perhaps some prospect for a copper agreement. Beyond price-
stabilizing agreements, we may want to indicate a willingness to sup-
port applied research for product improvement in other commodities
(e.g., jute, sisal).
In the category of things we might do if necessary to mollify the
developing countries are our positions on the Common Fund and on
providing debt relief before acute debt crises arise:
—The Common Fund is a major plank in the G–77 platform of de-
mands. The substantive value to the economic welfare of developing
countries is considerably less than the political significance that they
have given to it. A major move toward the G–77 position on the
Common Fund would be well received by them, but because it would
provide only marginal benefits to the world economy, a major invest-
ment of your political capital would be required to secure Congres-
sional support for U.S. participation and a U.S. contribution of perhaps
$100 to $250 million.
—Authority to ease the terms on outstanding debt of the poorest
countries is now before the Congress. In addition to pressing for that
authority and using it when we get it, we would please some of the
leading moderates in the G–77 (e.g., India, Pakistan, Jamaica) if we
would agree to a procedure whereby official debts could be resched-
uled in anticipation of a balance-of-payments crisis rather than, as now,
trying to provide additional aid in such situations and relying on debt
rescheduling only when default appears imminent. However, this ap-
proach could involve very substantial amounts of money and there will
be major Congressional difficulties with getting authority and appro-
