Arms Control and Disarmament 1635 454. Memorandum From Killian to Gray1 Washington, April 7, 1959 SUBJECT Limitation and Control of Armaments At its meeting on 16 and 17 March 1959, the President’s Science Advisory Committee considered the need for developing a more thor­ ough understanding of the military and technical aspects of interna­ tional agreements aimed at the limitation and control of armaments. The Committee was deeply concerned by the fact that at present no organi­ zation within the United States Government is conducting systematic and continuing studies on this problem, which the Committee recog­ nized as one of great importance and complexity. The Committee was impressed by the requirements for technical studies on the limitation and control of armaments, not only to under­ stand the effectiveness of available technical means for carrying out possible inspection and control concepts but also to understand the impli­ cations of the objectives desired and the effects on national security of the various measures that might be proposed to attain these objectives. The Committee concluded that in considering these problems it is necessary not only to cover existing military forces and inspection techniques but also to lay great stress on the effect of changing technology on military forces and operations and on the techniques of monitoring agreements. The Geneva Conferences on Surprise Attack and the Discontinu­ ance of Nuclear Weapon Tests have demonstrated the great importance of adequate preparation for discussion of these complex problems at international conferences. The various departments of government and the scientific community cooperated exceedingly well in the technical studies undertaken immediately prior to these conferences. It is clear, however, that it is not possible either to understand specific proposals and alternatives adequately or to develop an integrated national policy on the limitation and control of armaments by means of such periodic ad hoc studies conducted under the pressure of impending negotiations. An effective study program on this problem should not be limited to purely theoretical considerations but should include the conduct of research and experimentation in order to permit the development and evaluation of technical means for control and inspection. As a specific example, the recommendations in the recent reports by the Panel on 1 Source: Recommends systematic study on military and technical aspects of arms control. Confidential. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Suspension of Nuclear Testing.
