National Security Policy  621
already committed themselves considerably, and we believe that the 
crisis may be severe, with considerable chance of miscalculation by 
one or both sides.
253. We do not believe that the raising of the Berlin issue signal­
izes a Soviet willingness to move toward a settlement of the German 
problem as a whole on other than Soviet terms. We foresee no change 
at present in the USSR’s adamant opposition to German reunifica­
tion despite the handicaps this imposes on Soviet maneuverability in 
Western Europe. The Soviet leaders cannot contemplate abandonment 
of East Germany because of the threat which would probably develop 
to their whole position in Eastern Europe, beginning with Poland. Over 
the longer run, a major political change in West Germany, such as might 
develop after the death of Chancellor Adenauer, could lead to a new 
and seemingly more flexible Soviet and East German approach to Bonn 
and to the reunification problem. The Soviets probably believe that a 
period of political uncertainty would ensue, and that party realign­
ments would give them new opportunities to promote West Germany’s 
separation from NATO and the withdrawal of Allied military forces, 
to achieve international recognition of East Germany, and eventually a 
reunification scheme acceptable to the USSR.
254. Moscow probably has come to view the Communist Parties in 
Western Europe more as a vehicle for propaganda and agitation than 
as the basis for revolutionary action, at least for the next several years. 
While the long-­range subversive and political potential of these Parties 
will be cultivated, their present role is mainly to support Soviet for­
eign policy objectives, such as arousing popular concern against West 
German nuclear armament and the stationing of missiles in Europe.
255. Latin America. The trend noticeable in the last year of 
increased Soviet attention to Latin America will continue during the 
coming five years. The USSR apparently estimates that current eco­
nomic and political differences between the US and Latin America 
and the elements of political instability in certain countries provide 
a promising opportunity to expand Soviet influence. In the immedi­
ate future, Moscow will concentrate on broadening its diplomatic and 
cultural relations and on trade or economic assistance offers in selec­
tive, politically sensitive situations in order to expand Soviet influ­
ence on the governmental level and to facilitate both the overt and the 
subversive activities of local Communists. The most significant recent 
Soviet economic moves in Latin America have been the conclusion in 
October 1958 of a $100 million credit to Argentina for the purchase of 
Soviet petroleum equipment (the largest Soviet credit offer extended 
to any non-Communist country outside the Afro-Asian Bloc), large-­
scale Soviet purchases of Uruguayan wool, and the conclusion of a 
barter deal with Brazil.
