Yugoslavia
873
that 20 million dollars is too high a price to pay to avoid that, but I
do not.
5. The Pesic conversation introduced an additional consideration:
The GOY fear that if we fail to do anything it will have a major impact
on what others are willing to do. Nor are the Yugoslavs far wrong,
the Canadian Embassy, for example has told us that Ottawa is waiting
to see what “other Western countries” do before it decides whether to
give any economic reconstruction assistance. So, our decision will have
an impact beyond the narrow parameters of what we ourselves are
prepared to do.
6. The forthcoming visit of Mrs. Mondale is yet another new factor.
She is scheduled to visit Montenegro June 14 to meet with senior
Republican officials and tour the coastal region hardest hit by the
earthquake.5 I do not see how she can visit the area and remain totally
silent on what we plan to contribute to economic relief efforts. If it is
not possible for Mrs. Mondale to announce that the administration is
prepared to support a specific appropriation, then the next best course
would be a statement that the administration accepts the principle
of long-term reconstruction assistance to Yugoslavia but is currently
evaluating the appropriate level (this, of course, commits us to some-
thing, and to working with the Yugoslavs in deciding how much that
something is). Should even that be impossible, then I strongly urge
that the Yugoslavs be told we can do nothing before Mrs. Mondale
arrives, to wait until after her departure would be insulting to the
Yugoslavs and unfair to Mrs. Mondale.
7. So, in my view, we can avoid a decision for only a little while
longer. And as the decision is thought about I hope two factors will
be kept in mind.
A) If the USG decides it cannot assist it should be remembered
that the Yugoslavs will—since they know about the Kennedy Amend-
ment—view it a negative administration decision in the face of congres-
sional willingness to help.
B) When Tito dies, and for some time thereafter, we will surely be
searching for ways to show our support for those Yugoslavs who want
tostandagainst: 1)Sovietpressures;2)thosewhowouldreturn thecoun-
try to a more repressive and centralized internal system acceptable to
5 Joan Mondale visited Yugoslavia June 11–15 for the opening of the America Now
art exhibit in Belgrade and a tour of the areas affected by the earthquake in Montenegro.
In telegram 152031 to Belgrade, June 13, the Department provided talking points for
Mrs. Mondale on U.S. policy toward reconstruction aid. Mrs. Mondale was to stress that
the administration was working actively with Congress to find a way to participate in
the reconstruction efforts in Montenegro, on the basis of the “broad base of friendship
between the Yugoslav and American peoples.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790266–1018)
