September 18–December 16, 1978 419 “within a short period” was better. The Secretary said this might be better; he would need to discuss it with the Egyptians. In response to Dayan’s comment that Israel cannot commit itself to a number of months, the Secretary said it would be only a target. He was puzzled about what was wrong in setting a target. Dayan said that the date should be part of the modalities to be discussed in the negotiations. If we set a date in advance, this would have a negative reaction among the Palestinians who would see this as patronizing them; they would say that these are our elections and others are trying to tell us what to do. The Secretary said let’s leave this subject; you reflect on it and I will talk to the President. Dayan responded that it would be important if agreement could be reached while the Prime Minister is here. Barak commented that Israel would not want to say in a side letter that negotiations would start one month after ratification of the treaty. Israel did not want to give the impression that this matter is linked to the treaty. We should speak of x months after Camp David or “within a short period” after the exchange of letters, with the understanding that this meant one month. The Secretary said no, we cannot change this. Barak replied, let it stay as it is. Turning to the treaty text, the Prime Minister read the third paragraph of the preamble beginning “noting that the aforementioned Framework . . .” The Israeli Government, he said, had decided unanimously to demand deletion of this paragraph. It took Camp David language out of context. One could also quote other parts of the Camp David Framework which were important to Israeli public opinion. Israel had accepted paragraph one of the preamble from the start although many of his friends had doubts about this. It is necessary, he said, to show that an Israel-Egyptian agreement is only the first treaty. Any addition out of context, however, is an insult to Israel. If the reason is Arab opinion, Israel’s problems are more serious than Sadat’s. Israel’s problems are internal. The Prime Minister therefore asked that this paragraph be deleted as detrimental in Israeli opinion and unnecessary. The Prime Minister then noted that the United States’ replies to King Hussein had been publicized in Ha’aretz; this was causing more problems. The Secretary interjected that he was deeply concerned about the attacks on Mr. Saunders. He had spoken for the United States Government and these attacks must stop. With respect to paragraph three of the preamble, the Secretary had two comments: without this paragraph there would be no treaty with Egypt; and both the President and he believe it is fair; it only repeats Camp David language and should be retained; we see no basis to change it.
