National Security Policy  971
difficult to foresee except through de Gaulle. His early overthrow or 
death would probably be followed shortly by a rightist authoritarian 
regime based on military support. Such a French Government would 
be likely to pursue policies in Algeria that could seriously injure the 
West’s position in underdeveloped areas. Moreover, the policies of such 
a regime in this and other respects could well produce critical divisions 
within France, impede European economic integration, and induce 
severe strains within NATO and in Franco-­US relations. The realities 
of France’s political, economic and military situation would, however, 
tend to restrain extremist tendencies.
50. If, on the other hand, de Gaulle continues in power and brings 
off some workable Algerian solution, France would be much strength­
ened and stabilized. De Gaulle would be likely to press the harder his 
present efforts to enlarge French influence and, if unsuccessful, would 
probably act with increasing independence.
51. There are also uncertainties in the prospects for West Germany. 
Recent events have highlighted the importance of Adenauer’s role and 
the problem of his succession. It appears likely that the CDU will win 
the 1961 election, and be able to maintain internal stability and economic 
growth. Adenauer’s successors will almost certainly continue the main 
lines of his foreign policies, although there might be some decline in their 
devotion to European integration and to close Franco-­German rapport.
52. However, West Germany will in any event remain highly sen­
sitive to US policy. Moreover, West Germany’s stature within Europe is 
steadily increasing; militarily, its forces will within a year or so be by far 
the largest European contribution to the NATO shield in Germany, and 
its capacity for military production is growing rapidly. If West Germany 
should come seriously to doubt that the US can and will defend Europe 
and uphold basic West German national interests, it would be increas­
ingly attracted to schemes for some form of continental military group­
ing and might hope to become the eventual leader in such a grouping.
53. In any case, some increase in West Germany’s assertiveness and 
independence in foreign policy is probable over the next few years. A 
West German attempt to resolve the German reunification problem by 
force is highly unlikely, and only in the event of a serious weakening 
of the Western alliance might the Federal Republic be likely to seek an 
accommodation with the USSR. However, if West German policy and 
opinion were to take on an increasingly nationalistic tone, this might 
lead to growing distrust both among NATO countries and in the Soviet 
Bloc, particularly when West German forces have access to nuclear 
weapons. Thus, NATO relationships could be disturbed, and tensions 
with the East increased.
54. Outlook. Over the next few years, despite these uncertainties, we 
believe that basic military dependence on the US will hold the NATO
