until advised of Department’s position. (Sent also to Embassies in Great Britain, Germany, Italy, and Japan.) of Doc. Doc. 24, and Doc. Apr. 23 (118) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Unacceptability of French draft; exposition of Secretary’s views on points emphasized in French correspondence and draft treaty; authorization to use this material, at own discretion, in discussions at Foreign Office. Willingness, if necessary to prevent complete failure of negotiations, to include provision that in event any party to treaty becomes involved in war, the other parties shall be released from obligations under the treaty so far as regards belligerent party; instructions to feel out general situation. (Instructions to repeat to Embassies in Great Britain, Germany, and Italy. Similar telegram to Embassy in Japan.) 34 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. Doc. 24, and Doc. Apr. 27 (88) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Expression by Foreign Secretary of readiness to approach anti-war treaty sympathetically, of probability that meeting of Foreign Secretaries might be necessary later, and of pleasure at intimation via British Ambassador that U. S. Secretary might be willing to go to Europe to meet them. Ambassador’s suggestion that Secretary give to press a statement of position along lines of exposition set forth in telegram of April 23. 39 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. Apr. 30 (104) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Information that in address before American Society of International Law, April 28, Secretary gave statement of position as set forth in telegram of April 23. Hope that French proposal to Italian Government that question of compatibility of anti-war treaty with League Covenant, Locarno treaties, etc., be referred to a commission of jurists representing principal Locarno powers and Japan, will not meet with general acceptance. 41 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. May 1 (3473) From the Ambassador in Germany Foreign Minister’s note of April 27 (text printed) stating 42 [Pg.
