Chapter 4, February–April 1990  513
First, while I favor long-­term support for deployment of the SICBM 
program, it is not clear that Congressional support for it can be sus-
tained for two or three years (or even one year). Sustained support for 
the SICBM could be especially difficult in the House of Representatives. 
If we are successful in banning all MIRVed ICBMs, but are not success-
ful in funding deployment of the SICBM, we will have no modern 
ICBM for the early 21st century.
Second, banning all MIRVed ICBMs creates complexities from 
the monitoring/verification perspective. It is not difficult to refit cer-
tain classes of single-­warhead ICBMs with a MIRVed warhead con-
figuration in a short period of time. For example, the existing Soviet 
single-­warhead SS–25 road mobile missile could be refitted with the 
three-­warhead SS–20 reentry vehicle, since they are of similar design. 
Consequently, any comprehensive MIRVed ban will require strict lim-
itations on missile throwweight and intrusive monitoring provisions to 
preclude circumvention.
Third, while some Soviet officials have voiced support for a 
possible ban on mobile MIRVs, the Soviets have made an enormous 
investment in their rail-­based ICBM program, the SS–24. The Soviets 
have rarely, if ever, negotiated away a major strategic system when no 
counterpart exists in the U.S. inventory. The mere tabling of a mobile 
MIRVed ICBM ban could reduce support for Rail Garrison MX (RGMX) 
in Congress. Members may not be interested in funding a $2.2 billion 
bargaining chip this year, even if the obligation rate is slowed. Indeed, 
Congressman Aspin stated during a recent hearing that the House 
would not fund RGMX as a bargaining chip. Thus, we may find our-
selves with a cancelled RGMX program and the Soviet Union unwilling 
to negotiate a ban on their mobile MIRVed ICBMs.
Fourth, as Senator Nunn noted in his memorandum,3 technology 
may soon permit detection of rail-­based ICBMs in almost real time. 
However, such technology also could be used to detect road-­mobile 
ICBMs. Such a development would suggest a move to ban all MIRVed 
ICBMs—­particularly the Soviet heavy ICBM, the SS–18—­and deploy-
ment of the SICBM in existing Minuteman silos. Soviet willingness 
to eliminate their SS–18 and all other MIRVed ICBMs is questionable. 
But, if we were to succeed in such a move and actually begin to reduce 
the level of our land-­based deterrent with deployment of SICBMs in 
silos, it is my personal opinion that strategic defenses will become 
even more important to protect our reduced ICBM force and our C3 
assets, as well as population centers.
3 See Document 80.
