Arms Control and Disarmament 1247 297. Memorandum for Eisenhower From Cutler1 Washington, March 21, 1958 In our talk last night relative to the importance to the United States of developing “clean” nuclear weapons, I omitted in my advocacy one very important reason: The ability to set off “clean” nuclear detonations without contami­ nating nuclear radioactive fallout would have tremendous significance in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. By using greater explosive force than there has ever been known before, when free from contaminating radio­ active fallout, land-­locked waters can be channeled to desert areas, rock and earth obstructions to industrial and civil progress can be removed, mines can be more easily opened, oil can be freed from non-­porous rock where it is now trapped, safe and deep-­draught harbors can be devel­ oped, and large canals can be dug even through mountainous areas. Robert Cutler Special Assistant 1 Source: Peaceful uses of “clean” nuclear weapons. Confidential. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Administrative Series, Cutler, General Robert L., 1958 (3). 298. Record of Telephone Conversation Between Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles1 March 23, 1958, 1:40 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT (IN AUGUSTA) Sec said he would like to ask for quite a bit of the Pres’ time tomor­ row afternoon. Sec said we have a briefing Cutler set up, but perhaps right after that. Sec said there were two things coming to a crisis. (1) There were considerable reports around with credibility that the Soviets after their present series of intensive tests are making a unilateral announce­ ment of suspension of testing. Sec said he thought Pres should do some­ thing comparable e.g. announce that this series next summer will be the last during his Administration. Sec said this would only mean a couple 1 Source: Possible announcement of nuclear testing; summit preparations. No clas­ sification marking. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations.
