Romania
667
2. Launching a propaganda campaign designed to undermine con-
fidence in Romania’s financial and economic reputation. Such a cam-
paign could be focused on the international community and/or on the
Romanian population itself;
3. Undertaking to encourage, solicit or force allied or friendly coun-
tries to join in economic actions against Romania.
A. Trade
Two-way trade between the Soviet Union and Romania constitutes
some 17 percent of Romania’s total trade activity. Although this figure
is large, reflecting the fact that the Soviet Union is Romania’s largest
single trading partner, it is not so large that complete disruption of
two-way trade would necessarily result in anything other than short-
term, if dramatic, dislocations. It is generally agreed that the global
figures mask special situations and sensitivities: Romania imports no
Soviet petroleum but is dependent to a large extent on the USSR for
coking coal and iron ore. The trend, however, has been one of decreas-
ing dependency in general and specific declines in percentage terms
of these two raw materials. Since this is a key point, a bit of elaboration
is probably useful.
The effect of a complete cutoff of trade between the two countries
would force Romania to undertake a crash program, supplementing its
existing policy of diversification of sources for imports of raw materials.
Existing commodity markets are such that coal and iron ore, for
instance, could be picked up quite quickly, although most probably at
a premium price if deliveries had to be made urgently. Over the longer
run, it is doubtful that the prices Romania would have to pay for these
raw materials would be substantially higher than those paid now to
the Soviet Union since they are pegged to Western market prices.
The placing of Romanian exports would probably be somewhat more
problematic. Something like a billion and a half dollars worth of goods
are involved. In the short run, that loss could be swallowed. In the
longer run, it could have, among other effects, that of inducing the
production of goods more acceptable in other markets.
A real possibility is selective cuts in trade such as simply holding
up shipments of replacement parts for Romanian factories which use
predominantly Russian-manufactured machinery. This kind of thing
could be done without much fuss and give rise to a whole set of
important, if temporary, dislocations.
B. Disinformation
The functioning of any economy is based on a set of relationships
imbued with a certain level of credibility. This fact of economic life is
particularly evident in the financial world, where rumors of currency
devaluation or looming bankruptcy can have a positively self-fulfilling
