Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX last months had been appreciated by President Tito. He recalled that the day that President Tito was first to be operated upon, with Foreign Secretary Vrhovec and LCY Presiding Officer Doronjski he had visited the President in the hospital in Ljubljana. Together they had reviewed the world situation. President Tito had decided to send a message to President Carter.5 When he had recovered somewhat, President Tito had insisted on reviewing the draft text of the message to President Carter, because he placed such great importance on their personal relationship. Then, President Tito had received the message from President Carter. Its personal nature had touched him very much, Kolisevski asserted. Tito recalled with particular appreciation the first sentence in that letter, in which President Carter had said that he and his wife Roslyn were praying for his recovery.6 8. Turning to our bilateral relationship, President Kolisevski noted that the statements of U.S. support for Yugoslavia from various American leaders since President Tito fell ill “have been positively assessed.” He hoped the Vice President did not think he was exaggerating, but Ambassador Eagleburger could confirm that the Yugoslav people have received President Tito’s death with dignity, calm, and with resolution. Perhaps it would come as a surprise to some, but there has not been the slightest disturbance throughout the country. It is almost as if the Secretary for Internal Affairs has nothing to do. 9. Kolisevski also observed that it is the Yugoslav hope that during these solemn days, Belgrade would become “an oasis of peace”. The current leaders of Yugoslavia had worked together with Tito in the revolution and in building a new political system, and in the struggle for peace. “Therefore, we consider the accomplishments you see as both his and ours.” The Yugoslav people, who suffered 1.7 million 5 On February 21, Eagleburger was asked by Vrhovec to deliver the text of Tito’s letter to Carter. Vrhovec explained that Tito had approved the text of the letter prior to falling gravely ill, and, while he could not sign it at the present time, wished that its contents be delivered to Carter. Kolisevski signed a cover letter to Carter. Tito’s letter dealt extensively with the Yugoslav opposition to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and Tito’s concern that détente be preserved by any possible means. (Telegram 1401 from Belgrade, February 21; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
