Czechoslovakia 301 Charter 77. Two received prison terms of three or more years for subversion involving alleged efforts to send written materials out of the country and to have materials published abroad. Although Czechoslovak authorities maintain there was no connection between that trial and Charter 77, the three Charter signatories were directly associated with efforts of the Charter 77 Movement to encourage full compliance by Czechoslovakia with all provisions of the CSCE Final Act. Earlier this month, the Czechoslovak court rejected the appeal of the three Charter signatories and lessened by one year the sentence of the other defendant, who had pleaded guilty at the trial and subsequently publicly apologized for his “crimes.” We have received information that a Charter 78 may be disseminated in the near future. This new Charter reportedly will examine the compliance of the Czechoslovak Government with the CSCE Final Act, the International Covenants on Civil and Political and on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, and the Czechoslovak Constitution. We regard human rights as a key issue in our bilateral relations and, both here and in Prague, have made our position on this subject clear. (See, for example, the attached report of my conversation last fall with a Czechoslovak Deputy Foreign Trade Minister.)3 Pending indications as to how the regime’s treatment of dissidents may evolve, we are going slow on any initiatives to improve relations. For example, we are delaying signing a cultural and scientific exchanges agreement, negotiated in 1976. The regime’s treatment of dissidents—and its overall image here—will determine whether we will be able to take positive action both on the exchanges agreement and on other bilateral issues. We also object to the Czechoslovak Government’s policy on the issuance of visas to U.S. journalists. It flatly refuses to issue visas to a few journalists and demands that others pledge not to attempt to contact dissidents while in Czechoslovakia before it will issue them visas. We consider this policy to be inconsistent, to say the least, with the provisions of the CSCE Final Act regarding the treatment of, and working conditions for, journalists. We take every useful opportunity to express our concern and displeasure to the Czechoslovak Government on this issue. 3 Attached but not printed. In telegram 259591 to Prague, October 29, 1977, the Department reported the discussion between Jakubec and Vest on October 18, 1977. The two officials discussed the status of bilateral relations between the two countries and the effect of human rights, especially the recent trials and convictions of dissidents in Czechoslovakia, on the future of relations between the two countries. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770399–0115)
