Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 287 Admiral Crowe: If we go for all nuclear weapons, the elimination of nuclear torpedoes might be possible. Mr Gates: The range problem makes this solution more difficult. Lt Gen Scowcroft: It could look like a U.S. concession when we have the advantage. Marshal Akhromeyev: Maybe we couldn’t do it. The US would have to eliminate long range nuclear SLCMs while the Soviet Union would eliminate our SLCMs and MIRV mobile missiles. We’ll have problems because we’d be eliminating a whole category of missiles. We will analyze these issues. The second option is easier: a bilateral elimination of nuclear weapons except for ballistic missiles with naval forces. Lt Gen Scowcroft: I’m confused. Marshal Akhromeyev: The two options are: 1) Eliminate long range nuclear SLCMs and MIRV mobile ICBMs—­difficult but can’t rule it out. 2) Eliminate all nuclear systems with the exception of ballistic missiles with naval forces on both sides—­this would be simpler for the Soviet Union. Lt Gen Scowcroft: I think our difficulties are on opposite sides—­ your greatest problem is with SLCMs. To reconfirm, 1) on sea launched systems, the only nuclear weapons at sea would be ballistic missiles (SLBMs) and 2) on land you would give up SS–24s and we would give up MX on railcars. Marshal Akhromeyev: Yes. You have to present us a fair agreement. You would be obligated to eliminate more SLCMs than us, but we would make up for that by eliminating the mobile missiles. Lt Gen Scowcroft: It’s a very interesting proposal. Mr. Gates: There will be skeptics here on trading the rail mobile MX. Admiral Crowe: They are dissimilar systems. Lt Gen Scowcroft: This has a lot of merit. I suggest we look at it seriously. We might want to talk more on this, other than at ongoing negotiations. Marshal Akhromeyev: Like now. We have discussed two options. Do you think both deserve scrutiny and analysis[?] Lt Gen Scowcroft: Yes. May we could find a way to exchange information on both options. Marshal Akhromeyev: Not in the open. Lt Gen Scowcroft: I agree. Marshal Akhromeyev: What would be the best forum to exchange ideas on both options? I’ll talk to General Secretary Gorbachev about it. Lt Gen Scowcroft: Now we don’t have such a forum. Marshal Akhromeyv: I might suggest such a way. Now General Secretary Gorbachev has two advisors: Dobrynin and myself. We could
