588  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
I did not press question of linkage and finally made straight proposal 
for recess until January 12. Wang agreed consider and inform me later. 
I urged decision before tomorrow evening. In meanwhile we agreed 
inform press simply next meeting would be held December 22.
Gowen
416.	 Telegram 1288 from Geneva1
Geneva, December 15, 1955, 6 p.m.
1288. From Johnson.
1. We do not know what contents will be of CHICOM statement 
referred to by Wang today and how much impact it may have. Fact is of 
course Peiping propaganda has by interviews with returning students 
etc. been maintaining steady line of vague charges U.S. non-compliance 
with announcement, and dependent on content and context, new state­
ment may not attract much notice. I avoided getting into their previous 
propaganda line with Wang today in order not get led down side road 
of statements made by returning Americans and to accentuate serious­
ness with which we viewed present action. I of course made it clear 
that, while we regretted their step, we did not shrink from propaganda 
battle if that was their purpose and that we would probably issue state­
ment in reply although I did not commit ourselves to doing so.
2. If CHICOMS actually issue statement from Peiping and reply is 
considered desirable, believe it should be issued by Department.
3. Believe Wang’s statements last few meetings give clue to prob­
able content of statement, and amount of attention it attracts will be 
dependent on whether and to what degree it reiterates charges U.S. 
deliberately “stalling and entangling”. I did not receive impression 
statement would contain text their last draft proposal on renunciation 
of force and therefore made no effort to introduce our amendments for 
which the negotiating situation in the meeting was in any event by that 
time entirely unsuitable.
4. Statement will at least probably reiterate vague charges of 
“fears” Chinese students “apply” to return, contrast our refusal give 
list Chinese in U.S. including those who may be in jail to Indians with 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/12–1555. Secret; Priority; Lim­
ited Distribution. Repeated to Paris for the Secretary only as telegram 288.
