Honduras  805
3. DLF loan to National Development Bank (Banco Nacional De 
Fomento). $2 million to provide credit to the private sector, principally 
agriculture.
4. Housing-­total amount foreign assistance requested equal to $6.3 
million. During first year $2.4 million, second year $2.2 million, third 
year $1.7 million.
5. Health-­assistance to amount to $5.5 million during next four 
years. Although amount and type of foreign assistance not specified, 
U.S. grant aid for total implicit.
6. Education-­during next ten years total cost equal to $51.5 million. 
Honduran Government to provide $40 million and U.S. financial assis-
tance for balance. Although not explicit, U.S. grant aid implied.
In addition to requests for assistance, Honduran Government offi-
cials indicated interest in revising U.S.-Honduran trade treaty.4
At meeting with President and Cabinet Hondurans finally agreed 
to submit schedule of priorities, memorandum re proposed revision of 
U.S.-Honduran trade treaty, and full explanation of new proposal for 
central highway program. See above.
Dr. Eisenhower and Mission members avoided commitments to 
government although expressed sympathetic interest and understand-
ing Honduran economic development problems. Honduran officials 
understand no commitments possible but are hopeful for future.
Representatives of private enterprise presented request for estab-
lishing special $25 million fund over a period of years to be used for 
loans to industry and agriculture. Stated such action necessary to stimu-
late investment in private sector now short because of curtailing of flow 
of capital from U.S. formerly brought in by fruit and mining companies. 
They requested such loans to be repayable in lempiras not dollars with-
out maintenance of value clause or guaranty. Banking and financial 
members of mission told private sector representatives $25 million spe-
cial fund not possible and loans must be repayable in dollars or guar-
anteed or contain maintenance of value clause. Suggested that other 
alternatives be explored as means of stimulating private under-takings 
which contribute to national economy. Private sector representatives 
disappointed about special fund and terms of repayment but agreed 
other possible approaches to problem should be studied.
Newbegin
4 Presumably the reference is to the trade agreement that the United State and 
Honduras entered into on March 2, 1936. For the text, see 49 Stat. 3851.
