414
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
4. The two lawyers involved had been close to the Iranian exile
group for some time, particularly to the Khomeini group in Paris during
the revolution. One is himself a political exile from Argentina. The
other is a lawyer with human rights interests. He is a partner of Charon,
with whom we were in touch earlier, and has been associated earlier
with Amnesty International. Both probably have financial interests
with the Iranian Government. The one who had just come from Tehran
said he had seen Ghotbzadeh and Habibi (spokesman for the Revolu-
tionary Council). He says what he presented is also backed by Chamran
and Tabatabai. Ghotbzadeh did not see, but spoke to Khomeini’s son
(Ahmad) and son-in-law. The Frenchman believed Khomeini is aware
of the contact. He said he could not repeat not say the Revolution-
ary Council as a body was aware of our meeting, although some mem-
bers are. We believe he had these contacts, but it is apparent that
he is mainly representing a small group of individuals including
Ghotbzadeh.
5. The discussion focused in almost separate segments on two main
elements of a possible settlement.
A. On extradition, the lawyer just in from Tehran began by saying
that the release of the hostages would have to await a final decision
in the Panamanian courts on the extradition of the Shah. When the
Panamanians present made clear the Shah would not be extradited
and when we eventually turned to other elements of a settlement, he
indicated that it might be enough if progress was being made on the
other track (below) and for the extradition proceedings to have begun.
But he never fully retreated from his initial description of Iran’s posi-
tion. (He did state that the Council did not expect or want the Shah
back.) In this discussion, the Panamanians made it clear they would
cooperate on extradition only to the extent that beginning extradition
proceedings might contribute to creating an atmosphere in which the
hostages could be released.
B. On the formation of an international commission, Ghotbzadeh
has either misunderstood or misrepresented what they “agreed” with
Waldheim when he was in Tehran. The Iranians apparently chose to
believe that the international commission would be formed shortly
after Waldheim’s return to New York. They say they are still waiting.
Ghotbzadeh’s version of what they told Waldheim is this: Waldheim
would form the commission, and the Iranians would respond by saying
they accept the principle of releasing the hostages. After the commission
reports, the hostages could be released. We explained our position that
the hostages should be released simultaneously with the appointment
of the commission but our recognition that there might have to be a
series of steps by which each side tested the other’s readiness to move
toward a settlement.
