606
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
4. Bani-Sadr is mixing up what occurred today and what occurred
a few days ago and tells me that he spoke to the Imam’s son who
talked to his father and who also saw the students and convinced them.
5. Bani-Sadr states that two proposals have been worked out and
that the students are prepared to accept them:
(1) The Council proposes to Bani-Sadr that he requests that the
students place the hostages under control of the state. Comment: V et
Cheron had forewarned me against joint control of the condominium
(sic) kind (government, revolutionary council and students) therefore
I asked Bani-Sadr to clarify if this was under sole control of the state
excluding any other organization or parallel power. Bani-Sadr replied
that yes this would be under the sole control of the state.
(2) Second proposal: the hostages would remain in the custody of
the students, I stress “in the custody of”, who would pledge to the
state that they would completely improve their situation providing all
of them with excellent and adequate housing conditions with total
freedom of action within the compound and periodic visits of the Red
Lion and Sun. The second proposal is designed to give the hostages
all guarantees as to their safety and these guarantees would be checked
periodically by the government.
6. I was so flabbergasted by the second proposal that I asked Bani-
Sadr to repeat it three times and each time I told him that I could not
understand the difference between the two proposals since safety, care,
and comfort are in fact included in the first proposal since the hostages
would be under the control of the government in whom the other side
has full confidence. I had a hard time getting Bani-Sadr to speak clearly
on this because of his condition of extreme fatigue. What I got out of
him follows: he confessed that he is deeply perplexed as to the safety
of the hostages during their transfer to governmental control. He wor-
ries over provocations and attempts against them particularly on the
part of those he calls the “Russians”. I am astonished and asked for
clarifications, are there Russians in the compound? He says yes there
are. I assume he is alluding to a group close to Tudeh.
7. V advised me to be extremely firm. I therefore spoke accordingly
and stressed to Bani-Sadr the seriousness of the situation on the other
side. I stressed that I had no mandate from anyone nor did I have any
power but because of my dealings with my government and with my
colleague in Washington I understood the present situation in the
United States and the problem with which the President would be
faced and I thought therefore that only a radical change and not simply
psychological measures could be taken up by the other side. By radical
change one must understand a total and final break of any contact
between the hostages and their keepers the latter being replaced once
and for all by representatives of the legitimate power that is to say of
