World Hunger and Food Policy 885 265. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, January 17, 1980 SUBJECT International Program Uses of Excess Grain 1. Introduction. In your speech announcing the cutback in Soviet grain purchases, you said that “we will also increase amounts of grain devoted to the alleviation of hunger in poor countries”.2 To fulfill this pledge Cy Vance, Jim Williams, and Tom Ehrlich recommend, as do I, an increase in PL–480. OMB is opposed. They also recommend, as do all your advisers, pressing ahead with our existing proposal to establish the Food Security Reserve, an earmarked four million ton portion of CCC holdings of wheat, for restricted use in meeting severe food supply shortages under our PL–480 food aid program. Agriculture recommends, in addition, increasing commercial term export sales under the CCC credit program. Memoranda from Vance, Williams, and Ehrlich on the PL–480 proposals and from Williams on the Food Security Reserve and CCC credit sales proposals are at Tabs A, B, and C, respectively.3 Jim McIntyre is submitting an analysis of the budget implications.4 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 49, PL 480: 11/77–1/80. Confidential. Sent for action. A notation in Brzezinski’s handwriting on the first page of the memorandum reads: “I concur. ZB.” 2 The President addressed the nation the evening of January 4 to discuss the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. He announced a partial embargo on grain shipments to the Soviet Union, stating: “I am determined to minimize any adverse impact on the American farmer from this action. The undelivered grain will be removed from the market through storage and price support programs and through purchases at market prices. We will also increase amounts of grain devoted to the alleviation of hunger in poor countries, and we’ll have a massive increase of the use of grain for gasohol production here at home.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 21–24) 3 Not attached. Williams’ undated memoranda on the food security reserve and CCC sales are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects—Hazel Denton, Box 56, Food: 5/78–3/80. 4 In an undated memorandum to the President, McIntyre indicated OMB’s disinclination to approve increased spending levels for P.L. 480, noting, “I believe as firmly as anyone that we should take the steps necessary to fulfill our commitments to agriculture that it would not bear the full burden of your embargo decision. But I do believe firmly that these steps should (1) be as programmatically intelligent as possible, and (2) not simply be excuses to reraise issues we decided in the budget process. I disagree with the issues posed to you by Secretary Vance, Director Ehrlich, Acting Secretary Williams, and Henry Owens on both grounds.” In the right hand corner of McIntyre’s memorandum, the President wrote: “See Owen memo. J.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 49, PL 480: 11/77–1/80)
