Human Rights strongest reactions have come from governments which object to the very existence of the Reports as interference in their internal affairs. Brazil, for example, removed itself from the reporting requirement in previous years by rejecting U.S. assistance.3 (A Report on Brazil, as a UN member state, will, however, be prepared in 1979.) Most negative reactions to the Reports, however, reflect the continuing discomfort of some Latin American governments with our general human rights stance. East Asia and Pacific There has been little reaction to the Reports in East Asian and Pacific countries, from either the governments or the public, and they have had no significant impact on our bilateral relations. Some countries in this region have indicated to us indirectly that they regard the very existence of the Reports as an intrusion into internal affairs. In some cases where a Report was critical, supporters of the government concerned have attacked its veracity, while critics of the government have praised the Report or criticized it for not going far enough. While the Philippines sent the State Department a thirteen-page response from the Philippine Solicitor General attacking the Report as a rehash of “half-truths,” our Embassy in the Philippines believes the Report has been helpful to it in representations to the Government on human rights issues. The Republic of Korea and Indonesia have not reacted officially to the Reports. Africa Most African countries had little or no official comment on the Reports. In some cases where a country’s record has been good, the Report predictably had little impact. In others, where the government has displayed little sensitivity to human rights issues, the government apparently preferred not to engage us on this subject, and the local press was not free to comment. The Reports have, however, had a positive effect on our bilateral relations with a number of countries in the region, where they have provided a useful supplement to a continuing dialogue on human rights. One African President told our Embassy that the U.S. human rights policy was “useful” in “disturbing the conscience of government leaders everywhere.” In another country, which has had a poor human rights record, the Report contributed to an increased comprehension of the role human rights play in United States Government decisions. In a few countries in the region, the Reports have had a negative impact on our bilateral relations. For example, one government
