194 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III They had to invoke Article 19 of the GATT,4 since they could not tolerate this. But he has told visiting ministers from developing countries that France is not against the orderly growth of textile imports. If they could agree on an annual increase of textile imports of 10–12%—or something—that would be all right. Imports, after all, are good for fighting inflation, and for the international economy. But France cannot accept an “invasion”, with its disruptive social consequences. In the industrial countries—and in relations between the industrial and developing countries—there is benefit from know-how, technology, capital, low labor costs. But we need to find collective rules of the game, leading to an orderly growth of trade. They will give up this precise formula “Orderly freedom of trade” if this is seen as protectionist: that is not the object. The object is to discuss problems coming after the oil crisis, linked to nations’ eager competition to improve their balance of payments. We must get conditions for regular and orderly growth of trade. He hopes that collective rules of the game can be collectively accepted and implemented. This is absolutely necessary to maintain a satisfactory rate of growth of international trade. He is ready to answer questions. The President said that in his call to Schmidt, they had discussed the economic stimulus package. It was $3.5 billion in total: $1.5 billion in tax cuts, and $2.0 billion in public works—which depend on the regional governments. Getting them to go along would be difficult. After all, it is only possible to issue an order and have it done, in the United States!! It is important for this to be implemented in Germany—but he has doubts about it. The Opposition wants more stimulus—$6–7 billion. How it will come out, he doesn’t know. On Japan, this proposal for stimulus was at the middle of those suggested. He hopes they will do more to reduce their surplus. They have a favorable balance of trade, and we are trying to work more with them on a bilateral basis without protectionism. There has been a growth of Japanese exports as in TVs; and we have sought voluntary restraints. They were dumping in the U.S. market, which was against U.S. law. On French growth, Barre’s figures are encouraging: 3% or so. We had thought it would be only 2.5%. This is good news. We have similar problems with high unemployment, although in the U.S. it will go down about 1% this year. There are pockets of high unemployment— among blacks and the young—where unemployment is extremely high. Economic growth will be less in the second half of 1977 than in the first half—but will be about 5% for the year; and not too much lower 4 Article 19 of the GATT deals with “Emergency Action on Imports of Particular Products.”
