see why these nations should not urge upon plenary conference the
arguments advanced in the report.
(5) I do not think that we impliedly should advocate a plan even for other
nations which we would be unwilling to accept for ourselves.
(6) I cannot go over your statement in detail, but in many passages it seems
to me that idea of approval of international supervision for other countries
is conveyed. In section 2, for instance, you state that if in the reasoned
opinion of the Preparatory Commission complete League control will
accomplish purpose for which it was convened, the Government of the
United States would not wish its special position to be looked upon as
obstacle to general agreement; and that it is fully realized that a treaty
utilizing to fullest extent the machinery and authority of the League of
Nations could best be calculated to meet problem, even should the United
States not be able to be party to it. Our point is that we do not wish to be put
in position of saying that international supervision is good thing for other
nations but not for ourselves.
I have no objection to offer to your making conciliatory and diplomatic
statement within limits here set forth and stated already in our instructions.
The position of this Government, reduced to its lowest terms and stated in
language which perhaps can be modified and put in more conciliatory form
may be described thus: The Government of the United States cannot agree,
for its part, to any form of international supervision or control of
armaments. This Government holds that, as far as it is concerned, sole
sanction for execution and enforcement of any convention for reduction and
limitation of armaments lies in the good faith of all nations involved,
naturally obligating them to a scrupulous observance of their treaty
obligations. The United States would have no concern, therefore, in what
other powers may decide to do toward establishment of an international
supervision or control applicable to themselves.
Principle involved here is of broader significance than any question having
to do with efficacy of League machinery or of our nonmembership in
League of Nations. The Government of the United States is unable to find
itself in accord with proposals for any form of supervision or control of
armaments by any international body, whether League of Nations or any
