832
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
several places and inflicting some casualties. Since then, the province
has remained fairly calm.
Ghazni
The Pathans of Ghazni province did not become a serious problem
for the government until the spring of 1979, but by late that year
the city of Ghazni was besieged, and several smaller garrisons in the
southern part of the province were forced to surrender or defect. The
insurgents were able to block the main road from Qandahar to Kabul
at will; some government officials traveling on the road did so only
after buying passes from insurgent representatives.
Since the invasion, the Soviets have staged two major clearing
operations in the province aimed primarily at securing the road. The
first was in April and May, and the second is still under way. The
first, according to Afghan exiles, inflicted severe casualties on innocent
villagers in the southern part of the province. The current operation,
both larger and with a larger proportion of Soviet troops, began in
mid-July, and its initial stages were apparently complicated by a mutiny
in the Afghan garrison at Ghazni. The Soviets have been able to keep
the road open for convoys most of the time, and there has been no
serious insurgent threat to Ghazni city since the invasion.
Zabol
The Soviets have made little effort to deal with insurgency in most
of Zabol province and have left most of the responsibility for keeping
the Kabul-Qandahar road open to Afghan forces. As a result, insurgents
control most of the province and have been able to block the road in
the Qalat area repeatedly.
Qandahar
Insurgency in rural Qandahar has been less serious for the Soviets
than unrest in the provincial capital, the country’s second largest city.
For much of the time since the invasion, the city has been unsafe
for government officials and has been virtually under control of the
insurgents, especially after dark. At least twice, despite Soviet reluc-
tance to engage in urban fighting, Soviet troops have been sent in
to restore some semblance of government control. Elsewhere in the
province insurgency has been greatest along the Pakistani border north
of Spin Baldak and along the border with Oruzgun province. The
government has tended to ignore the desolate southern part of the
province.
Bamian, Oruzgun, and Ghowr
Bamian, Oruzgun, and Ghowr provinces in central Afghanistan
are inhabited largely by Hazaras, a Mongolian Shiah minority long the
