Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Moreover, further tightening of money at this time would certainly brake and might bring to a stop the economic recovery. Slowing down the recovery would be a serious error, both domestically and in terms of badly needed buoyancy it provides to the world economy. Even if we had an overall balance of payments problem, which we do not, the U.S. should not halt the recovery of its economy, which is still far from fully employing our resources. Such waste of human skills and capital is not an appropriate answer to a weak balance of payments. In sum, there is no reason, in today’s circumstances, to recommend tighter monetary policy for balance of payments reasons. Such a recommendation would only become appropriate if it became apparent that: (a) our energy policy was doomed to failure; (b) normal cyclical changes would not improve our current account; (c) adequate capital inflows did not appear to be forthcoming. Under such circumstances the dollar might begin to drop for a prolonged period. Then it might be judged that external factors required a tightening of monetary policy, but only after examining carefully the state of domestic production, unemployment, and inflation. Fortunately, the day when such choices must be faced is not imminent.3 Sincerely, Richard Cooper4 3 Mondale also requested the Department of the Treasury’s view on the link between monetary policy and the trade deficit. Bergsten and Brill forwarded a draft response to Blumenthal for his signature under cover of a July 29 memorandum. The draft asserts that the best way to address the deficit would be through “an effective energy program” and “continued vigorous growth and relative price stability for the American economy.” Asserting that “there is little justification on domestic grounds for a tightening of monetary policy,” the draft cautions against monetary contraction “purely for currency reasons,” unless, perhaps, “the dollar were to weaken so sharply as to cause (1) significant inflationary effects here and (2) important psychological effects internationally.” Blumenthal did not sign the draft memorandum. (National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten,
