528  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
include increasing their prestige as a superpower equal to the United 
States and reducing the prospects of increased US defense efforts.
25. Thus the Soviets could be reaching a major decision point, at 
which they might contemplate reductions in the growth of resources 
committed to strategic programs as part of an effort to reduce the 
defense burden they carry. Total military expenditures, which absorb 
an estimated 11 to 13 percent of the Soviet gross national product, will 
come under close scrutiny because the USSR’s economic growth rate 
is expected to decline in the 1980s because of manpower, energy, and 
productivity problems.12 Procurement and operation of strategic forces 
account for roughly one-­fifth of total defense spending. Strategic pro-
grams also absorb a large but unknown portion of the additional one-­
fourth of total defense spending which is allocated to R&D.
26. As the Soviets evaluate possible ways of reducing the burden 
of defense programs, they would seek alternatives which offered sig-
nificant returns to the economy without jeopardizing their military 
posture. Prospective SALT II limitations on strategic offensive forces 
would not by themselves significantly affect defense spending. The 
resources devoted to development, production, and deployment of 
these forces, moreover, tend to be highly specialized and not readily 
transferable to such critical civilian programs as energy. Reduction in 
strategic force manpower would be of marginal value because these 
forces are less manpower intensive than other elements of the armed 
forces. In addition, the Soviets already have committed large capital 
resources for strategic programs which will extend into the 1980s. The 
Soviets probably view some of these commitments as consolidating 
and reinforcing recent strategic gains, and some as offering the pros-
pect of overcoming current deficiencies. In sum, we believe that even if 
overall military spending were to be curbed, strategic programs would 
suffer least.
27. A number of countervailing factors lead us to conclude that, 
despite economic difficulties, the Soviets will continue their long-­term 
strategic force improvement programs. Chief among them are the 
following:
—In the Soviet view, even better strategic capabilities would 
enhance deterrence still further and foster strategic stability through 
Soviet advantage. The Soviets almost certainly make generous assump-
tions about potential US and NATO capabilities, and are also concerned 
about China and its prospective modernization. They can anticipate 
that in the mid-1980s and after, US programs now in the planning 
stages could erode the USSR’s earlier gains.
12 See NFAC Intelligence Assessment SR 78–10136, Estimated Soviet Defense Spending: 
Trends and Prospects, August 1978. [Footnote is in the original.]
