402  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
II. Findings
(TS) On the Survivability of the SRF
In the absence of specific guidance as to what number and kinds of 
weapons we want to survive, for how long and for what purpose, it is 
not obvious what an analysis of SRF survivability should concentrate 
on. What can be said, however, is that:
—The TRIAD approach, with its programmatic hedges, has been 
applied to the composition of the SRF. [2 lines not declassified]
—At least a portion of the SRF TRIAD is expected to survive and 
remain available [less than 1 line not declassified] after an initial nuclear 
exchange.
—The endurance of the SRF is the product of two factors: its ability 
to survive the initial enemy attack (“initial SRF survivability”) and its 
ability to surmount problems in post-­attack system support and main-
tenance (“long-­term SRF endurance”).
—Estimates of initial SRF survivability were based upon individ-
ual system survivability and SNDV alert status. These estimates indi-
cate that a militarily-­useful portion of the SRF can survive a massive 
Soviet attack, under both the “surprise attack” and “attack with warn-
ing” scenarios. The initial force drawdown was found to be primarily 
the result of (1) the fact that, whatever standard is applied, Minuteman 
survivability is decreasing rapidly, (2) the loss of non-­alert bombers, 
and (3) the loss of a non-­alert SSBN in the surprise attack scenario.
—Long-­term SRF endurance is estimated to be sufficient to pro-
vide militarily-­useful SRF capabilities [less than 1 line not declassified] 
following the initial attack. [4 lines not declassified]
—In addition, the temporary non-­availability of some weapons 
is expected, due to SSBN replenishment cycles and bomber recovery 
operations.
These survivability/endurability estimates were based upon the 
damage expected to result from a single massive Soviet attack. Addi-
tional Soviet or third country attacks could reduce SRF survival/
endurance. The assumption of a single-­wave attack makes the force 
endurance problem more manageable but does not understate the 
problem.
(TS) On NCA Survivability
—Current policy looks to emergency plans developed by the Fed-
eral Preparedness Agency [2 lines not declassified] There are 14 statutory 
successors to the President and 32 statutory successors to the Secretary 
of Defense.
—The adequacy of some of the current evacuation plans appear 
questionable. Furthermore, we cannot definitely conclude that they
