International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues really set forth an international health strategy which was initially the purpose of the entire exercise. The President in reading this decision paper does not, in fact, receive any analysis priorities, or basic strategy, i.e., a meaningful context in which to make decisions about initiatives and additional resource allocation. —Lack of Analysis of the Interrelationship of WHO and Related Programs to Those of Donor Countries, LDCs and Our Own Ongoing and Planned Health Activities: The decision memo does not relate existing and planned international health programs to those of the USG. There is no reference to programs by others or ourselves to deal with specific health problems. —Inaccurate Characterizations: In a number of cases the report characterizes ongoing policies, programs and views of USG agencies in ways which do not fully or accurately reflect the existing situation. In particular, a statement that international health activities address only agency specific missions is unsound. Nor does the report recognize that AID health and other programs in fact are increasingly focussed on the poor and the provision of basic health care. This has been the case over the last year. —Lack of Interrelationship/Coordination: The recommendations tend to be placed in isolation from associated strategies and programs in related areas. There is no recognition of ongoing policies and studies such as those dealing with AID development assistance. We may indeed want to increase AID funding for health programs proportionately to increased overall assistance levels, but no case has been made for this recommendation. —Creation of Overly Complex and Burdensome International Health Bureaucracy and Coordinating Mechanisms: The recommendations to establish a three-tier international health bureaucracy headed by Dr. Bourne does not seem the most efficient approach to developing and coordinating an international health strategy. A simpler structure, coordinated and staffed in the Department of State or alternatively within the White House as part of the NSC system may be more time and cost effective. Funding Recommendations Finally, the memorandum puts a total cost of $50 million the first year rising to $76 million five years annually from now on the overall recommendations. Unfortunately the paper nowhere indicates how much improvement in the health and well being of the very poor will be achieved by these increased figures. For example, would we not be better off in taking this money and pledging it directly to poorer LDC basic health care programs aimed directly at such diseases as schistosomiasis, malaria, or the typical childhood diseases. I suspect that the
