levy any taxes they might please upon foreigners and foreign
trade without fear of being called to account. The Ambassador
went on to say as his informal opinion that the Japanese
Government believed that encouragement would be given to the
Chinese by such a step to cease respecting any of the provisions
of China’s treaties with foreign countries.
5. The Ambassador declared that the suggestion to have the
surtaxes made generally applicable throughout the territory of
China was opposed by his Government because a situation such
as that would require that the powers authorize the payment of the
revenues collected by the Customs to one or another of the
warring factional leaders. In regard to leaving this question for
decision by the Customs, he believed there would be an
unfortunate effect upon the leaders of the Cantonese if the
collected monies were all placed in one fund by the Customs and
paid over to such government at Peking as might have control
there.
6. He further stated that the feeling of the Japanese Government
was that a decision as to how the situation in China was going to
develop could not yet be made. Therefore it preferred to wait,
meanwhile lodging protests against the levies of taxes contrary to
the provisions of existing treaties, with whatever factions might
levy such taxes. He declared that there was no intention on the
part of his Government to use force to make such protests good,
but that Japanese merchants would be directed to pay, subject to
protest, if such taxes against themselves or their goods were
levied and if it were necessary to pay the taxes.
7. I stated that this Government was informed that the Cantonese
taxes would be accepted by the British Government without
protest provided their collection was made by the Maritime
Customs; that this Government believed that on a question of this
kind, to enter into arrangements with one or another Chinese
faction was unwise because of the danger that a policy such as
that would result merely in dividing China more or less
