National Security Policy  655
f. What will be the requirement for small nuclear weapons to equip 
ground forces? Can this requirement be met by our programmed pro­
duction capabilities?
g. Is there an appropriate balance between the amount of resources 
being devoted to BW–CW procurement and those devoted to research?
139.	 Briefing Note for the February 26 NSC Meeting1
Washington, February 25, 1959
SUBJECT
Port Security (NSC Meeting, 2/26/59)
1. The next item for consideration is a report to the Council in 
response to an NSC Action of 2/19/58 in connection with the approval 
of U.S. Policy on Continental Defense. At that time, Treasury and Justice 
were requested to seek new legislation, and draft a new Executive 
Order. The objective was to increase the effectiveness of that portion of 
the Port Security Program which provides for the exclusion of subver­
sives from employment on U.S. merchant vessels, and from restricted 
port areas and waterfront facilities.
2. For reasons which Treasury and Justice may wish to elaborate 
upon today, they have recommended against the obtaining of legisla­
tion and the issuance of the Executive Order called for in the previous 
NSC Action.
3. The considerations which prompted the Council’s action of a 
year ago were as follows:
a. Under a present law passed in 1950, the President is empowered 
to adopt measures and issue regulations for the protection of vessels, 
ports, and waterfront facilities against sabotage and other subversive 
acts.
b. Pursuant to the 1950 statute, Executive Order 10173 was issued, 
providing in effect that no person shall be employed as a seaman on a 
U.S. merchant vessel, nor shall any person be given access to a restricted 
waterfront facility unless the Commandant of the Coast Guard is sat­
isfied that such persons are not security risks. This Executive Order is 
still in effect.
c. By 1956, the Coast Guard had checked hundreds of thousands of 
seamen and dockworkers against U.S. agency files, with the result that 
1 Source: Port security. Secret. 7 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File.
