1360 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Alfred Moses, Special Advisor to the President Richard Cooper, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Ambassador Henry Owen, Ambassador-at-Large, Special Representative of the President for International Economic Summits Deane Hinton, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs Les Goldmann, Assistant Secretary of Energy for International Affairs Robert Hunter, Staff Member, National Security Council (notetaker) Rutherford Poats, Staff Member, National Security Council David Korn, Director of Israel/Arab-Israel Affairs, Department of State Les Goldmann began by outlining a position on which agreement with Israel could be reached today: 1) that the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) could be activated if Israel were paying for oil more than the average of the top 20% of U.S. imports; 2) we would drop the spot market test; and 3) we would change our position that there would be a “strong presumption” for activation if Israel lost either of its two main suppliers (Egypt and Mexico), to a position in which triggering would be automatic under this circumstance. At the end of negotiations yesterday, our position was that Israel would have to pay a price equivalent to the top 15% of U.S. imports; it would have to buy 66% of its oil on the spot market; and the Mexican/Egyptian case would only lead to a “strong presumption” of activation. Secretaries Muskie and Duncan are seeing Minister Modai at 10:30 this morning.2 We have the following options: 1) We could move to the top 20% on price and shift the spot market requirement to 60%. This would not cost us much. If Israel were paying the equivalent of the top 20%, then it would have to be buying heavily in the spot market. And we would keep the strong presumption position. 2) If we want to shift to an automatic trigger, then we could permit triggering for a 90-day period if either Egypt or Mexico were lost, at the end of which Israel would have to meet the price test of 20%. The President asked whether the Israelis would be likely to accept a U.S. proposal for 20/60 and automatic triggering if it lost one of the two main suppliers? Les Goldmann said that there was a good chance. Deane Hinton said that he doubted it. Ambassador Owen asked whether this would be so if the spot market test were dropped. 2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. According to an October 8 memorandum from Owen to Carter, Modai “started pressing for further concessions, but he was told by our negotiators that this was the bottom line.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 22, Israel: 5–11/80) The resulting Agreement on Contingency Implementing Arrangements for the U.S.-Israeli Memorandum of Agreement on Oil Supply was signed October 17. A summary of this agreement is in telegram 276577 to multiple posts, October 17. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800494–0954)
