118
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Congressional meeting he expressed support for the Harkin amend-
ment, then opposed it at the press conference.20 This contributes to the
drift in the bureaucracy.
Finally, there is no forum in which all this can be straightened out.
I have attached at Tab A a revised draft of a PRM on this subject21
which I believe would go a long way toward providing the necessary
focus. Although we run the obvious risk of getting worthless mush out
of it, I believe that it would be useful to force even the more philosoph-
ical issues onto paper. Otherwise we will constantly be responding to
issues as they arise in an ad hoc manner and will probably continue to
drift into the kind of mess we are now in on the IFIs.
Among the questions this draft addresses are: whose conception of
human rights are we going to be concerned with (ours which is mostly
political, or the developing world’s which is primarily economic and
social); how do we define gross violators and can we realistically draw
up guidelines for making such determinations; how good are we at ac-
tually finding out what is going on and monitoring changes made in re-
sponse to our pressures; what concrete initiatives are available; and,
most important, what are our goals and what can we expect to accom-
plish within 4 or 8 years.
20 Not further identified.
21 Not found attached. According to the minutes of the April 25 Cabinet meeting,
Brzezinski “said that he believes we need a Presidential review memorandum on human
rights policy, and that he plans to have a proposal to the President on the subject this
week.” (Carter Library, Vertical File, Cabinet Meeting Minutes, 1/24/77–5/23/77, Box 7)
39.
Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts1
Washington, April 30, 1977, 214Z
98034. Inform Consuls. Subject: Secretary’s Human Rights Speech.
For Ambassador from Acting Secretary.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770151–0364.
Limited Official Use; Immediate. Drafted by Grose; cleared by Janeway, Neidle, and in
S/S, and in substance by Robert Oakley, Thurber, Holly, Seeyle, Derian, Todman, and
Hartman; approved by Christopher.
