728
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the fundamentals of American foreign policy are being carried forward
with consistency, with strength, and with determination.
The central reality that confronts America today is that of a com-
plex world, a world that is turbulent because it is politically awakened
in its entire breadth for the first time in its collective history.
Our world is one of conflicting hopes, ideologies, and powers. It’s
a revolutionary world which requires confident, stable, and powerful
American leadership—and that’s what it is getting and that’s what it
will continue to get—to shift the trend of history away from the specter
of fragmentation and toward the promise of genuinely global coopera-
tion and peace. So, we must strive in our foreign policy to blend com-
mitment to high ideals with a sober calculation of our own national
interests.
Unchanging American ideals are relevant to this troubling area of
foreign policy and to this troubled era in which we live. Our society has
always stood for political freedom. We have always fought for social
justice, and we have always recognized the necessity for pluralism.
Those values of ours have a real meaning, not just in the past, 200 years
ago or 20 years ago, but now, in a world that is no longer dominated by
colonial empires and that demands a more equitable distribution of po-
litical and economic power.
But in this age of revolutionary change, the opportunities for vio-
lence and for conflict have also grown. American power must be strong
enough to deal with that danger and to promote our ideals and to de-
fend our national interests. That’s why the foreign policy which we’ve
shaped over the last 3 years must be based simultaneously on the pri-
macy of certain basic moral principles—principles founded on the en-
hancement of human rights—and on the preservation of an American
military strength that is second to none. This fusion of principle and
power is the only way to ensure global stability and peace while we ac-
commodate to the inevitable and necessary reality of global change and
progress.
The complexity of interrelated and sometimes disturbing events
and circumstances requires that we in America increase the degree of
public understanding of our foreign policy and public support for it. It
is extremely complicated. It is rapidly changing in its tactical confronta-
tions on a day-by-day basis, and the degree in a democracy with which
Americans do understand these complex issues is a prerequisite for
success. Foreign policy no longer has a single or a simple focus, such as
defeating Nazi aggression or repelling a monolithic Stalinist threat. In-
stead, Americans must be mature enough to recognize that we need to
be strong and we need to be accommodating at the same time. We need
to protect our own interests vigorously while finding honorable ways
