Romania
559
President Carter: President Ceausescu has played a constructive role
in getting the meeting started. This shows the confidence that the two
parties have in your Presidents. I thought that President Sadat and
Prime Minister Begin would get along well, and that seems to have
been true.
I have been disappointed by the negative attitude of President
Assad. We have tried to encourage Assad to be moderate. He personally
has refrained from attacking Sadat, but his government has been very
negative. He had some news this morning that Sadat has asked the
PLO to leave Egypt. Your officials have relations with Arafat and we
do not. Arafat has also been reticent to attack Sadat, but others have
been very critical. I agree with you and President Ceausescu that the
time has come to move toward a comprehensive peace. We are pleased
with Jordan’s statement and if Syria were more positive, Jordan would
be able to go further. The Lebanese attitude also depends on Syria.
What do you suggest doing next?
Foreign Minister: My President has some suggestions. He thinks
that it is important to try to convince Begin to respond to Sadat with
flexibility. Sadat has played his big card. This is the right time for
Israel, with your help, to take steps to show flexibility and to move on
to the Geneva Conference. We have to go to Geneva in the near future.
We can’t lose momentum. Secondly, my President felt that it would
be a good idea to send Vice President Mondale or Mr. Vance to Egypt
to talk to Sadat and then to travel in the area to show your continued
interest in the region. Third, my President feels that the time has come
for you to talk to the PLO. Even Mr. Begin does not reject this idea.
President Carter: Perhaps you already know that we have a public
agreement that was signed between Mr. Ford and the Israeli Govern-
ment, and was reaffirmed by me that states that we will not meet with
the PLO unless the PLO abandons its insistence on the destruction of
Israel. We have asked Arafat to accept Resolution 242, and he can add
a statement of his concern that the Palestinian question is not included
in 242, because 242 only talks of refugees, and then we would be glad
to meet directly. But I can’t break a promise as long as the PLO calls
for Israel’s destruction.
Foreign Minister: I understand. But even Sadat used to say No for
a long time and now he has gone to Jerusalem. We need more flexibility.
You should tell the Israelis that you want some contacts and then the
PLO will become more flexible. We know them well and they are in
difficult positions. They don’t know how to react. It is also time for you
to discuss with the Soviets how to reconvene the Geneva Conference
as co-chairmen. We might send an invitation to the parties or do this
through the United Nations. We think it is best to talk to the Soviets
and to keep them in a positive frame of mind.
