3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
294
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
structions. Dobrynin said he is being called to Moscow for consulta-
tions on US-Soviet relations, leaving Washington about March 16.
Ambassador Dobrynin came in at his request March 6, and the fol-
lowing subjects were covered:
1. Dobrynin delivered an oral note (in Russian, with translation at-
tached) from Brezhnev to President Carter on the subject of South Af-
rican nuclear weapon capabilities. The note cites new Soviet data that
work is continuing in South Africa to develop nuclear weapons and
prepare test explosions. It asserts that one test site is being completed
and another has been started; that an industrial reactor is being built to
produce weapons-grade plutonium, and a facility is being planned for
the production of enriched uranium.
2. A second oral note2 (in Russian) conveyed Soviet agreement to
engage in consultations on the UN Special Session on Disarmament, of-
fering to meet in New York either in the course of the preparatory
meeting, April 4–21, or immediately afterwards.
3. A third oral note3 (also in Russian) proposed to continue the con-
sultations on the international sale and transfer of conventional
weapons. It proposes the meeting be in Moscow at the end of March or
the beginning of April, but expresses willingness to meet at any other
place of mutual convenience. The note adds that there will be a change
in leadership of the Soviet side; it will be headed by Lev Mendelevich,
and his assistant will be P. I. Galkin.
4. Dobrynin informed the Secretary that he was being recalled to
Moscow for consultations on the state of US-Soviet relations, and will
leave on or about March 16.
5. On the subject of the Horn, Dobrynin said that the Somalis had
approached the Soviet Union for assistance in bringing about a media-
tion effort, but had been told that no negotiations were possible until
there had been a Somali withdrawal from the Ogaden. He added that
he hoped the Horn problem would soon be over, and that this would
help to improve Soviet-American relations. In his side comments, Do-
brynin said the Soviet side was by no means happy with the course of
events in the Horn, but also made the point that people who thought
everything was done in accordance with a master strategic design in
Moscow tended to underestimate the degree of improvisation in-
volved. He added that the US seemed to be much more ideologically-
inclined than the Soviet Union these days.
6. On SALT, Dobrynin inquired whether Warnke was returning to
Geneva with new instructions, and was told that the matter was being
2 Not found attached.
3 Not found attached.
