242  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
NSC Staff Recommendation
That you approve Option 1.9
If the United States is to seek a ban on MIRV mobile ICBMs10: a lower 
value for the sublimit, perhaps 200–500 warheads, may be more appro-
priate. The United States is unlikely for fiscal reasons to be able to 
deploy more warheads than this under a MIRV mobile ban when only 
the single-RV variant of the Small ICBM would be allowed. We may 
also have a separate deterrence reason to limit the number of Soviet 
relocatable targets. It is thus in our interest not to allow the Soviets a 
greater number than the U.S. plans.
Option 1.  Advise the Soviets that, in the context of a ban on MIRVed 
mobiles, we expect to propose a mobile ICBM sublimit, and 
we expect that sublimit to be substantially smaller than the 
Soviet proposed 1600 sublimit; we are not prepared to dis-
cuss specific values until agreement has been reached on a 
verification approach. (favored by OSD and Ambassador 
Rowny)
Option 2.  Propose a mobile ICBM sublimit of 300–500 warheads.
Option 3.  Propose a mobile ICBM sublimit of 200–300 warheads 
nested within a 1540 warhead sublimit on combined mobile 
ICBM and heavy ICBM warheads.
NSC staff agree with the consensus that it is premature to propose 
to propose a specific numerical sublimit on mobiles.
NSC Staff Recommendation
That you approve Option 1.
2. Movable ICBMs. The issue is whether the U.S. should continue to 
insist that a START Treaty protect the option to deploy so-­called “mov-
able” ICBMs in the future.
Discussion
The United States has explained the concept of movable ICBMs as 
an alternate approach, different from both mobile ICBMs and silo-­based 
ICBMs, intended to enhance ICBM survivability. The movable ICBM 
concept involves a large number of low cost vertical shelters, among 
which a hardened capsule containing an ICBM is rotated. Survivability 
9 Scowcroft initialed his approval.
10 Scowcroft drew a slash through this paragraph and options, and wrote: “we 
should not be discussing this option with the Soviets unless other prior decisions are 
made.”
