Uruguay 1147 as did the attitudes of responsible and important American firms. What concerned him was that their attitude was based on the apparent facts involved which did not permit as much stress on the political factors as was the case in Uruguay and which he, the Vice President, understood as a man in public life himself. He emphasized that it would be most unfortunate for the impression to become current in the U.S. that Uruguay had changed its policy and friendly attitude toward private enterprise. He hoped that this could be averted by a prompt and equitable solution to the problem. Dr. Batlle Berres assured the Vice President repeatedly that there was no basis for such concern—­that Uruguay’s tradition and reputation for fair dealing themselves represented a guarantee against such unjustified fears. He stated that he personally guaranteed to the Vice President that the companies would be fairly treated and that he was always ready to speak to them. He just hoped that they would not convey a misleading impression in the U.S. since they themselves understood the necessity for the action taken and the certainty of fair treatment. The conversation continued in this vein until terminated by the commencement of after-­dinner toasts. Dr. Batlle Berres and Ambassador Lacarte later continued the conversation with Mr. Bernbaum. Dr. Batlle asked for confirmation that the Vice President has assured him that the U.S. Government would not intervene in the matter. Mr. Bernbaum stated that this was his understanding. He added, however, that the Vice President’s assurances had been accompanied by Dr. Batlle Berres’ assurances of fair treatment for the companies. It was his impression that the Vice President considered that Dr. Batlle Berres’ assurances represented a guarantee of fair treatment to the American firms. Dr. Batlle stated that this was a justified assumption. The companies were going to receive fair treatment, and he was ready to discuss the problem with them. He confirmed, when asked, that the Government’s proposal in Congress for authorization to pay the companies for their properties, would remain in Congress with the expectation of passage and eventual payment. He was most categorical on this point. The conversation terminated with Mr. Bernbaum’s request for Dr. Batlle’s authorization to convey his assurances to the companies. Dr. Battle gave that authorization with the statement that he had already conveyed such assurances directly and would continue to do so.
