16
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
not been quite so adventuresome; indeed, because organizing or joining
political groups is illegal, the Chartists have denied that they constitute
a political organization. How close the League and Charter 77 have the
attributes of real organization—active membership, coherent structure,
recognized leadership and thought-out programs, strategies, and tac-
tics—we do not know. Elsewhere in Eastern Europe the dissidents tend
to be small, loosely organized groups of dissatisfied persons, whose
political philosophy in many cases comes close to social democracy,
but who frequently have varying views, interests, and objectives.
By and large, the leading figures and spokesmen for the dissidents
are individuals who have had a history of fighting for increased free-
doms. No new charismatic figure has emerged. But a large number of
new people who have not previously been identified as dissidents
have signed letters and petitions in Czechoslovakia and Poland. The
emergence of such people must be of concern to the regimes. One
danger in instituting a harsh crackdown on the petition signers is that
these new people who have come forward will be turned into hard-
core activists.
There is evidence of some contacts among East European dissi-
dents, but it is doubtful that there has been much consultation or
coordination of tactics. Not surprisingly, the dissidents are not only
preoccupied with their own problems, but also must be aware of their
limited power to influence political developments elsewhere in Eastern
Europe. More important are the practical difficulties that stand in the
way of a coordinated effort.
Still, there is no question that, despite the problems of communica-
tion and the like imposed by operating in closed societies, a dissident
movement now exists in Eastern Europe. It finds expression in the
open support given to the Czechoslovak Chartists by dissident groups
in several East European states. The East European dissidents have
also learned from one another, and particularly from their Soviet coun-
terparts. The Soviet dissidents have led the way in showing how the
Western media, especially under the conditions of detente, can be used
to embarrass the regime and to promote the activities, and even well-
being, of the dissidents. More than that, Sakharov and others have
shown that it is possible to speak out and be heard and still survive.
The Soviet dissidents, for their part, have gone on record that they
share a common cause with like-minded individuals in Eastern Europe.
Sakharov, for example, recently noted that his efforts “are part of a
struggle throughout the world, a struggle that seems especially impor-
tant at this moment when in Czechoslovakia, Poland, and other coun-
tries of Eastern Europe the movement is reaching a new level.” A
statement signed by 62 Soviet dissidents, released in early March, spe-
cifically expressed support for the Chartists, and the so-called Helsinki
