Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 355 48. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, September 20, 1989, 10 a.m.–­noon MEETING Sub-group on the Nuclear and Space Talks of the U.S.-Soviet Ministerial Working Group on Arms Control PLACE Department of State, EUR conference room Ambassador Burt said he didn’t think the sub-­group needed to meet for long, but it could take stock and do some useful technical work. Ambassador Nazarkin agreed. He wanted to lead off by making two points. First, the Soviet side would have some reactions to the additional elements of common ground on mobile ICBM verification offered by the U.S. side. Second, the changes proposed by the U.S. to the Soviet draft umbrella agreement on verification and stability measures were acceptable. Burt said that was good and that a conforming group should be asked to provide final versions of English and Russian texts. Nazarkin agreed (and Neverev and Brown were designated to work on the final texts). Concerning the agreement on advanced notification of strategic exercises, Nazarkin said the Soviet side could agree to the English text handed over by the U.S. delegation in Geneva if the U.S. side could agree to the Russian text that was handed over earlier this week when the Soviet delegation arrived in Washington. Medas pointed out that the word “one” was used in the second line of Article I of the English text. There was a consensus that a comparable concept was not contained in the Russian version. The U.S. side had therefore proposed a change that would make the Russian text conform to the English one. Nazarkin said that the proposed change wouldn’t quite do so. In Russian, there was no singular equivalent of the English term “military exercise.” When the Russian plural word was put in the singular, it meant a philosophy or theory, or something like that. It was therefore preferable to keep the original Russian and English versions of the text. If changes had to be made, this would take time to get authority. Medas said there was ambiguity in the way the Russian version was constructed. It was possible to draw Nazarkin’s conclusion, but also to draw other conclusions. Therefore, it was better to clarify it. 1 Source: Department of State, Verification, Compliance and Implementation, Subject Files, 1983–2005, Lot 06D436, Wyoming Ministerial, Sept. 18–23, 1989. Secret. The meeting took place in the EUR conference room at the Department of State.
