Afghanistan worrisome. Not only does it confirm the enmity which Hafizullah Amin has for the United States (the secret police are under his direct control), but it raises a real concern about the safety of our American personnel. As Langley and SY can confirm, this govt is, quite aside from intimidating our employees, also making an all-out effort to plant listening devices in our residences, and we can only assume they have been successful in many instances. The experience too of the Pakistan Embassy here, wherein its Pak employees have been harassed and one abducted (in somewhat mysterious circumstances) shows that the DRA is not above ignoring diplomatic immunities and international standards of decency. In sum, I worry that at some point Hafizullah Amin may arrest one of our American employees, on doctored or circumstantial evidence, in order to “prove” some point of his or hold us hostage. 5. Third, we have a nettlesome problem with respect to the DRA’s apparent determination to reduce the size of this Mission. This is again, I suspect, related to Hafizullah Amin’s semi-psychopathic desire to humiliate and revenge himself against the United States.3 In this msg I do not want to prejudge the outcome, but I am not sanguine we can maintain a Mission of some 45 employees. Needless to say, I do not relish the prospect of presiding over a humiliating, forced reduction of the United States presence by a small and one of the most unsavory govts in the world today. 6. Complicating the above scenario is the still unfinished business of who was responsible for Ambassador Dubs’s death. I do not want in this msg to get into this subject either, but as the Dept knows, we continue to get disturbing reports about Hafizullah Amin’s role in the affair. 7. In sum, I send this msg because I am worried about our presence here, not only for the safety of our Americans but for the honor of the U.S. Govt in the face of Hafizullah’s enmity for us. One of the possible recommendations I am turning over in my mind, and the Dept may wish to mull this over as well, is whether we shouldn’t reduce our
