Afghanistan
175
worrisome. Not only does it confirm the enmity which Hafizullah
Amin has for the United States (the secret police are under his direct
control), but it raises a real concern about the safety of our American
personnel. As Langley and SY can confirm, this govt is, quite aside
from intimidating our employees, also making an all-out effort to plant
listening devices in our residences, and we can only assume they have
been successful in many instances. The experience too of the Pakistan
Embassy here, wherein its Pak employees have been harassed and one
abducted (in somewhat mysterious circumstances) shows that the DRA
is not above ignoring diplomatic immunities and international stand-
ards of decency. In sum, I worry that at some point Hafizullah Amin
may arrest one of our American employees, on doctored or circumstan-
tial evidence, in order to “prove” some point of his or hold us hostage.
5. Third, we have a nettlesome problem with respect to the DRA’s
apparent determination to reduce the size of this Mission. This is again,
I suspect, related to Hafizullah Amin’s semi-psychopathic desire to
humiliate and revenge himself against the United States.3 In this msg
I do not want to prejudge the outcome, but I am not sanguine we can
maintain a Mission of some 45 employees. Needless to say, I do not
relish the prospect of presiding over a humiliating, forced reduction
of the United States presence by a small and one of the most unsavory
govts in the world today.
6. Complicating the above scenario is the still unfinished business
of who was responsible for Ambassador Dubs’s death. I do not want
in this msg to get into this subject either, but as the Dept knows, we
continue to get disturbing reports about Hafizullah Amin’s role in
the affair.
7. In sum, I send this msg because I am worried about our presence
here, not only for the safety of our Americans but for the honor of the
U.S. Govt in the face of Hafizullah’s enmity for us. One of the possible
recommendations I am turning over in my mind, and the Dept may
wish to mull this over as well, is whether we shouldn’t reduce our
3 Three days later, the Embassy reported in telegram 6483 from Kabul, August 28,
that “anti-U.S. blasts were the order of the day” during the “International Conference
of Solidarity with the People of Afghanistan,” sponsored by what the Embassy character-
ized as the “Communist front” World Peace Council of Helsinki. Amin gave the keynote
speech on August 24, and the conference proceedings, which were published in the local
media and thus suggested official Afghan endorsement, included the charge that “armed
intervention from across Afghanistan’s borders is entirely the work of the United States”
and there was “no support within Afghanistan for this intervention.” (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790392–1083; a copy of the telegram was also found
in the Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghanistan
(August 79))
