418
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The Prime Minister read the language in the Israeli draft about
Jordan. He then emphasized that the beginning of West Bank/Gaza ne-
gotiations must follow the exchange of instruments of ratification and
not simply follow the signing of the treaty. The Secretary said we
would need to see if this was possible under Egyptian procedures.
Begin said Israel wanted to add a reference to “related issues,”
since other matters (e.g., security) were also covered in the Camp
David Framework. Continuing, the Prime Minister said Israel was pre-
pared to say that elections should be held “at an early date.” It is impos-
sible to predict when they could be held; could take three months or
seven months.
The Secretary replied that he wanted to make the counter-
argument. The letter could say that negotiations would take place
“with the objective” of holding elections by a given date. This would
not fix a date but only set a target. It would demonstrate that all parties
were serious about carrying out the Camp David Framework. It would
have a positive effect on people in the West Bank and Gaza and en-
courage their participation which is important for success of the negoti-
ations. It would have an important psychological effect in the region
generally. President Carter had asked the Secretary to stress this point.
Begin said one cannot pick a date out of the blue; it may take six
months. The Secretary asked why not say six months. Begin replied
that the phrase “at an early date” means Israel is serious. The Secretary
responded that it could do no harm to have a target date.
The Prime Minister said that “an early date” means months, not
years, but it could take three months or ten months. It will be necessary
to decide the form of the elections, constituencies, perhaps political
parties. Specifying the number of months would mean nothing but if a
time period were included in the letter and then not met, Israel would
be accused of bad faith. There was no predicting, Begin said, whether
the people would agree. The PLO may threaten them and force a
boycott.
The Secretary said he would need to consult the President; he per-
sonally continued to think that naming the number of months was pref-
erable and urged the Prime Minister to think further about our
suggestion.
Barak suggested using the phrase “within a short period.” The
Prime Minister said Israel cannot accept specifying the number of
months but would consider any other phrase.
Barak said since we don’t know how long the talks will take, we
should think in terms of a period of time following the end of the talks
rather than from the beginning of the talks. The Secretary replied that
this would not help and that he would have to talk to the President.
Dayan said Israel would consider it if the Secretary thought the phrase
