1956 689 10. Wang said it would not be difficult for me see that it PRC side which genuinely demonstrated self restraint and control. They always stood for peaceful settlement of dispute in Taiwan area between China and US by means of negotiation. In course our talks PRC side has repeatedly made major efforts and presented reasonable drafts for announcement renouncing use force by both sides. 11. Wang said their reason for holding of FonMin conference, which they still hold, exactly demonstrates their stand in this regard. How­ ever, confronted with circumstances in which US already using force against Chinese territory Taiwan, proposition of non-­employment of force cannot be used to induce China to accept US occupation Taiwan. 12. Wang said, in order realize principle of non-­use force in rela­ tions between China US, conference between ForMins two countries must be held to settle question of eliminating and relaxing tension between two countries. 13. Wang said we now spent four months on discussion second item agenda. If US genuinely willing renounce force and accept peace­ ful settlement dispute it should withdraw forces from Taiwan area. Unfortunately they had not yet seen any actions on part US to with­ draw forces and stop posing threats in Taiwan area, nor had they heard any remarks from me ponting towards that end. 14. Wang said, as if to add to this, Mr. Dulles who leading figure of US foreign policy recently declared that America had thrice gone to brink of launching atomic war, recently stepping up military activ­ ities in Taiwan area which aimed at creating tension. In recent months American military aircraft made repeated intrusions into China’s terri­ torial air. 15. Wang said US refuses touch on question of withdrawing its forces and ending threat, yet persists in demanding China accept its right self-­defense on Chinese territory Taiwan. Was this not resort to perversion of facts and turning argument upside down? 16. Wang said to respect right of state to individual collective self-­ defense in conformity with UN Charter one thing; to whitewash one­ self with false claim to self-­defense is quite another. Was this not clear enough? Could there be found any stipulation in UN Charter which could possibly be interpreted as granting aggressor state right of self-­ defense on territory of state which is victim of aggression? 17. Wang said I had stated that question of self-­defense is not sub­ stantive issue. This sheer sophistry. If US atttempts carry out so-­called right individual collective self-­defense on China’s territory Taiwan, this is what Chinese people would determinedly oppose. If Chinese peo­ ple were to accept such action of seizure as legal, what more remains between China and US which necessitates negotiations?
