3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
227
60.
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter1
November 15, 1977
Dear Mr. President,
The US Ambassador has delivered to me your message.2 In con-
versation with him I set forth,3 in a preliminary way, my considerations
on the questions you touched upon. Additionally I would like to say
the following.
We are also satisfied with the advance forward which was
achieved of late in the relations between our countries. The task now is
to carry it further on, to realize it in practical actions. Between us there
is an understanding that first of all it relates to the earliest completion
of the work on a new strategic arms limitation agreement.
The solutions of principle, found in the course of recent talks with
you in Washington4 on the remaining outstanding questions have
opened the way for an agreement to be prepared without delay for
signing. Our Delegation in Geneva is thus instructed. I believe that you
know about the constructive line which we follow at the negotiations.
The main thing is to adhere to the already achieved mutual under-
standing of principle, not to try to touch up or erode what has been
agreed upon. In one word, we are for the conclusion of the agreement
at the earliest possible date and we hope that the U.S., on its part, will
also do all necessary for it.
As is evident from the message you assess properly the readiness
expressed by us to agree that, along with a ban for a definite period on
all nuclear weapon tests, a moratorium on nuclear explosions for
peaceful purposes would be declared. We expect that the U.S. and the
United Kingdom would take at the negotiations such position which
would permit in the near future to agree on the complete cessation of
nuclear weapon tests.
1 Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 4, USSR
(Brezhnev Drafts/Letters), 4/77–9/80. No classification marking. Printed from an unoffi-
cial translation.
2 See Document 58.
3 See Document 59.
4 See Documents 50 and 51.
