956 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Significance of Panama Turning to the reason for the meeting, the Secretary pointed out that we had been looking at the Panama problem from a long-­range viewpoint and that we were considering Panama in the overall mosaic of Western hemisphere problems. Malcontents in the hemisphere today were not rallying around Lenin or Stalin or Khrushchev or Mao but rather had adopted Fidel Castro as their symbol. He observed that it was our wish to avoid particularly the increase of sentiment favorable to Castro in Panama where there was much social pressure on the part of unhappy elements. With this in mind he wanted to propose several changes which he thought would contribute to a more effective U.S. operation in that country. Panama Canal Company Board First of all, he stated we would like to have a State Department representative at a senior level on the Panama Canal Company Board of Directors which he understood now had thirteen members. We did not want to displace any current member but thought that, until an opening occurred, the State Department representative could be an observer with a political voice. Secretary Brucker replied that he had no objection to a State Department observer but that his concept of the Company was that the Company was strictly a business operation with a Board consisting of high level businessmen. He alluded to the appointment of Commerce Under Secretary John Allen to the Board which he had approved on the understanding that Mr. Allen, an experienced businessman, would conduct himself as a businessman rather than as an official of the Department of Commerce. Secretary Brucker questioned whether it would be a good thing from the Department of State standpoint to have an official on the Board. The Secretary asserted that our concept differed completely from Secretary Brucker’s. We had no desire to interfere with the business operation of the Board but we thought it important that one voice of the thirteen be a political voice, that there should be a member of the Board alert to political implications of the Board’s actions. The Secretary stated that, if requested to name the State Department Board member, he would nominate Mr. Merchant. Secretary Brucker then stated that if this was what the Secretary wanted it would be acceptable to him. (Note: Secretary Brucker seemed even happier when the Secretary pointed out that Mr. Merchant had considerable business experience before joining the Department of State.) Panama Canal Company Stock The Secretary then raised the question of the stock of the Panama Canal Company, the operation of which the President has delegated to the Secretary of the Army. The Secretary thought it would be a good thing, in order to avoid the military implications of ownership, to have this stock transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury. Secretary Brucker stated he was not prepared to discuss this subject and the matter was dropped.
