Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
455
We need an objective analysis of the proportion of the Soviet mili-
tary budget which is not comparable to our own needs. After all, we
don’t have to maintain a million men on the Canadian border.
Brown: Twenty-five percent of the Soviet budget goes for defense
against China. But the forces they maintain in Eastern Europe are the
forces they would use for attack on Western Europe.
The President: You have about got me convinced that we need to do
more on defense. We also have to compete in other areas for minds and
hearts in different countries—through trade, economic relations and
the like. We should delineate the things we can do above and beyond
the military, that would let us compete peacefully.
Brzezinski: We are developing with State a package of measures to
undercut the Soviets and Cubans in Africa.
The President: What can we do to assure the Saudis and Iran? We
need an NIE on the kinds of peaceful actions that can permit us to com-
pete around the world. It ought to assess the various nations and re-
gions, assess the use of our technology, and develop a propaganda ef-
fort designed to show that our strength is greater than now perceived.
We should all make an effort to do this and to sell our position.
Brzezinski: This must entail a strategic concept: 1) continued
strengthening of our relations with the European Allies; 2) stronger re-
lations with Saudi Arabia and Iran; 3) stronger relations with Japan,
China, and Korea.
The President: This should be in the spirit of peaceful competition
with the Soviets. We do have to make sure that there is no need for
apology on the military side. Maybe we are deficient on this, or have
been in the past. We should remedy the deficencies.
Brown: Military power won’t win for us. We have to rely on other
things to build our influence. For example, things are looking better
with Iraq—they are turning to us because we have things to offer.
The Vice President: We should involve the private sector more.
American businessmen see more people around the world than gov-
ernment officials do. Our world economic position is shrinking. We
ought to particularly enlarge and expand our position in Asia and help
the private sector to do this.
Vance: We are already doing a great deal. Chuck Robinson will be
leading an OPIC group to the Far East. John Moore will be going to
Japan.
The President: We ought to use the 50 state governors, for example,
ask them to organize trade missions to various countries. They would
be delighted.
We should put together a program on what we could do in the
peaceful competition, vis-a-vis various countries. We need to identify
the specific countries.
