National Security Policy 771 It was the consensus that this wording appeared to be a reason­ able compromise, and that it should be forwarded to the NSC for their consideration. There was further discussion of the first sentence in the paragraph, in particular the phrase, “to insure that the U.S. is a recog­ nized leader in this field.” It was proposed that the following be substi­ tuted for the first sentence: The U.S. should continue actively and with a sense of urgency to pursue programs to develop and exploit outer space capabilities as needed to insure the attainment of national objectives in scientific, mil­ itary and political areas. These programs should be designed to secure and maintain for the U.S. a position of supremacy in outer space activi­ ties without requiring that the U.S. be the leader in every phase of space exploitation. Discussion of this point resulted in agreement that the sense of the first sentence of the paragraph as proposed by NSC is that the U.S.should be at least on a par with the USSR, but not necessarily ahead. There was no agreement on re-­phrasing this sentence to further clarify this point. /S/ Franklyn W. Phillips Acting Secretary 174. Memorandum of Conversation with the President1 Washington, July 7, 1959, 12:10 p.m. PRESENT Bryce Harlow General Goodpaster Gordon Gray I first informed the President that Mr. McElroy had asked whether Admiral Radford might attend the meeting of the National Security Council on Thursday, July 9. I indicated to the President that I had some question about the wisdom of this course. The President felt to the contrary; that inasmuch as Mr. McElroy had made Admiral Radford his Military Advisor during the absence of General Twining; and if Mr. McElroy wished him present, he should be allowed to attend. 1 Source: President’s approval of attached guidelines for Harlow’s discussion with Jackson on Congressional hearings on the NSC. No classification marking. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Staff Memos. Drafted on July 8.
