Negotiating Channels and Carrington tells the Turks sanctions against Iran will not work. As a piece in the German press said on Friday, “even though he publicly calls him his friend, Schmidt’s doubt in the leadership qualities of the most powerful man in the Western world have increased rather than declined. On this point, Schmidt sees eye to eye with French President Giscard d’Estaing.” (S) Much of this on the Europeans’ part is sharply self serving. They are dependent on Iranian oil. Schmidt does want to protect FRG relations with the East. Giscard does want to maintain an independent stance and France’s special relationship with Moscow. Thatcher does think she understands the Soviets far better than Jimmy Carter, and the Tory banking community in Britain is opposed to sanctions against Iran. Nonetheless, our inherently conflicting objectives—to weaken Iran and to strengthen regional opposition to the Soviets—give the Europeans the perfect excuse to dismiss our entreaties for coordinated action against the Soviets. (S) What to do. First, we should not publicly rule out the use of force against Iran because that threat may have some utility in the Revolutionary Council. But we should send the most private Cabinet Line messages to Thatcher, Schmidt and Giscard telling them that we have drawn the proper strategic conclusions about the relationship between the hostages and Afghanistan, and that as long as our people in Tehran are not harmed, we will not use military force against Iran because we recognize that this would gravely undermine Western efforts to make the Soviets pay for the invasion of Afghanistan. And, although we cannot suddenly reverse ourselves on Allied sanctions against Iran, we should certainly not get into a fight with the Europeans over this, a fight which would lessen the likelihood we can get them to address the strategic implications of Afghanistan. (S) My Sunday paper has just hit the porch and I read John Goshko’s story2 that we are privately softening our position on Iran because of Afghanistan. Perhaps somebody should tell Warren Christopher and the Allies. In my judgment, the President’s comment on Meet the Press yesterday that Afghanistan and Iran are interrelated3 was not specific 2 John Goshko, “Stance on Iran Softening in Face of Soviet Threat,” New York Times,
