Chapter 2, January–June 1989 101 — If arms control is to be used to limit or reduce both the strategic and conventional threat, assess the contribution or disadvantages of: (1) seeking deep reductions in Soviet forces; (2) encouraging Soviet force restructuring; (3) reducing Soviet weapon-­to-target ratios; and (4) seeking to eliminate certain specific threats such as, for example, depressed trajectory missiles? (C) — Can other options for negotiated threat reduction be identified which differ from traditional approaches? In addition to negotiated agreements, are there less formal arms control approaches (e.g., parallel, informal restraints) that can contribute to threat reduction? In addition to traditional arms control restraints, such as limits on forces and force levels, are there additional devices (e.g., operational constraints, confidence-­building and openness measures, etc.) that could serve U.S. defense interests? (C) Specific Issues. The arms control review should either affirm or suggest options for modifying the premises underlying our approach to current or prospective negotiations. It should not, as part of this effort, address particular details of U.S. negotiating positions. The review should examine among other things: 1. START/Defense and Space — Is the existing U.S. approach to START consistent with the defense objectives and force structure analysis discussed in Sections II and III of this review? (C) — At what point do negotiated reductions in U.S. strategic force structure cease to be consistent with U.S. security requirements? What kind of force limitations should be sought, and what avoided, for their impact on the ability of the U.S. to develop and deploy systems that exploit our long-­term competitive advantages? (C) — What is the security relationship and dynamic, if any, between START and the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) talks? (C) — Is the existing U.S. approach to the D&S negotiations consistent with the defense objectives and force structure analysis discussed in Sections II and III of this review? (C) — To what extent are continued constraints on ballistic missile defense in the U.S. interest? (C) 2. Other Current or Prospective Arms Control Issues. The review should address security considerations that bear on: — Further negotiated reductions in theater nuclear systems in Europe; — Further restrictions on nuclear testing; — A global ban on chemical weapons; — Conventional arms reductions in Europe; and — Restraining the proliferation of destabilizing technologies (nuclear and chemical/biological weapons and ballistic missiles). (C)
