Afghanistan
601
219.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 26, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghan Muslims (U)
We should be careful in implying blank endorsement to the Muslim
forces in Afghanistan. First off, some of the groups are obscurantist at
best; most of them are quite literally reactionary. They have some noble
aspects and nobody who hates Russians can be all bad; nonetheless,
they tend to be a pretty ugly bunch. I shudder to think of the human
rights problems we would face if they came to power. Second, by
emphasizing the Muslim aspect, we are scaring the Indians—and per-
haps the Soviets counterproductively.2 Third, there is no reason to
assume that these people like us much more than they do the Soviets.
They are quite likely to take a Khomeini approach—or perhaps emulate
the theology of the fellow who tried to seize the Mecca mosque. Finally,
we get more than occasional reports that at least some of the insurgents
inside the country are very anti-American because they think we aren’t
helping them. (S)
Obviously, there is nobody in Afghanistan to deal with except
Muslims and we certainly want to support their right to exercise their
religion freely (as long as I don’t have to be around while they are
doing it!). We do not, however, need to convey the idea that we want
to see Afghanistan handed over to Muslims qua Muslims. If that
unhappy land is to regain any kind of order, it is more likely to be
from semi-secularists such as the royal family and any of the “modern-
izers” who are still alive. (S)3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 2/80. Secret. Sent for information.
2 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin beside this sentence.
3 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin beside this sentence and wrote
at the bottom of the memorandum: “that’s half the issue right now. The pt. is to mobilize
Moslem forces there and elsewhere. ZB.”
