Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
399
An interagency study (PRM–36)8 is currently reviewing other
measures we might take to limit or constrain the Soviets and Cubans,
ranging from improvement of diplomatic relations with countries cur-
rently under Soviet/Cuban influence to strengthening of the military
capability of key African states.
C. Public Statements
It is essential that we project publicly a sense of confidence and
consistency as we pursue a coherent and long-term strategy towards
the Soviets.
It is damaging when our policies are characterized as either “hard”
or “soft,” or as swinging between those poles. In either case, such char-
acterizations irritate one group or another in the United States; send the
wrong signals to the Soviets and our allies; give disproportionate em-
phasis to one aspect or another of our policies, which properly contain
both “hard” and “soft” elements; and tend to encourage the damaging
and unrealistic swings of public mood from gloom to euphoria and
back again.
We should give more attention than we have to the psychological
side of our relations with the Soviet Union. We are less likely to get the
Soviets to move in directions we want by demanding that they capitu-
late to public pressure, than by leaving the way open for them to move
with pride intact, having made our wishes known in private. While we
should continue to criticize the Soviet Union in appropriate ways when
it is called for, public expressions of indignation by themselves tend to
emphasize our apparent impotence, and to inflame public and Con-
gressional sentiment in ways that are unproductive. (Witness the decla-
ration of nine Senators last week9 that they will oppose the ratification
of a SALT treaty because of Soviet actions in Africa and the Orlov trial.)
In a more positive sense, we can help encourage a more coopera-
tive attitude on the part of the Soviet leaders by conspicuous attention
to the sense of equality to which they attach so much importance. And
if they respond positively, we should refrain from crowing about any
gestures they may make.
In protesting Soviet lack of restraint, it is important for us to be
precise in our complaints rather than general, tailoring our demands
for Soviet action to the seriousness of the situations and the real degree
8 PRM/NSC–36, issued on May 23, directed the Policy Review Committee to un-
dertake a review of U.S. policy concerning objectives in limiting Soviet and Cuban influ-
ence in Africa.
9 May 18. The Senators included Baker, Bellmon, Curtis, Danforth, Domenici, Garn,
Lugar, Morgan, and Zorinsky. (“Senators Link SALT Doubts To ‘Disturbing’ Soviet
Deeds,” The Washington Post, May 20, 1978, p. A–10)
