3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
836
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
282.
Letter From Secretary of State Muskie to Soviet Foreign
Minister Gromyko1
Washington, June 5, 1980
Dear Mr. Minister:
Since our meeting in Vienna,2 I have given a great deal of thought
to your views on the situation in Afghanistan and to our own concerns
about events there. I noted your indication of an interest in continuing
an exchange on this issue and on the importance of improving relations
between our two countries.
It is the position of the United States that any viable solution to the
problem of Afghanistan must be based on the principles of non-
intervention and non-interference in the domestic affairs of sovereign
nations. Accordingly, with the prompt withdrawal of all Soviet forces
from Afghanistan, the United States will be prepared to join in assur-
ances and arrangements to establish a truly independent and non-
aligned Afghanistan, administered by a government acceptable to the
Afghan people.
The United States has no interest in interfering in Afghanistan’s in-
ternal affairs. We will not endorse arrangements designed to perpetu-
ate a government imposed upon Afghanistan through foreign arms.
Nor could we agree to conditions which affect adversely our own vital
interests in the area or those of Afghanistan’s neighbors.
If the foregoing approach is accepted by the Soviet Union, the
United States would be prepared to explore some transitional arrange-
ment, to be implemented along with the prompt withdrawal of all So-
viet troops from Afghanistan, for the purpose of ensuring that peace
and tranquility are restored in Afghanistan. The creation of an interna-
tional peacekeeping force could be considered in this connection.
It is the US view that a solution based on such principles would fa-
cilitate the restoration of more cooperative relations between the
United States and the Soviet Union.
Sincerely,
Edmund S. Muskie
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 5, Muskie/Gromyko Letter, 6/5/80. Secret; Sensitive.
2 Document 278.
