Afghanistan
99
look only like “advisors”, and allowing the Afghan police to be in
charge. Flatin talked to the man who appeared to be a senior Soviet
advisor and asked whether he spoke English. He did not, but he did
speak a little German. Flatin tried to secure his understanding of the
urgent need for a delay. He replied this was an Afghan police matter.
27. At about 1215 p.m. Mr. Taylor called the Embassy to inform that
he still had not been allowed to see Taroon despite several reminders
to Taroon that he was waiting and that it was extremely important to
the USG to know what the Afghan Government was intending to do.
28. Back at the hotel: At 1217 additional security forces rushed
upstairs and took ready positions near room 117.
29. At approximately 1230 a military officer in the lobby who
seemed to be in charge of the operation gave instructions to Taroon’s
assistant who returned upstairs. At 1235 Taroon’s aide came downstairs
again and went into the room with the officer-in-charge who seemed
to be talking on the radio.
30. At 1230 p.m. still not having been allowed to see Taroon, Mr.
Taylor again called the DCM to ask if he should remain in Taroon’s
waiting room. The DCM advised Mr. Taylor to wait at the Ministry
for 30 more minutes but that Mr. Taylor was to insist that the following
message be passed to Taroon: “Above all else, the USG did not want
any action taken by the Afghan Government which would endanger
the welfare of Ambassador Dubs.” That message was given to Taroon’s
secretary, who claimed that he had passed it to Taroon.
31. Events again at the hotel: At the hotel, at 1237, Taroon’s aide
went outside the hotel but returned one minute later. The officer-in-
charge returned to the side room where there was a radio, after which
two plainclothes gunmen went upstairs.
32. At about 1245 p.m. Mr. Taylor called the Embassy from the
Interior Ministry, again saying that, in spite of repeated requests, he
had still not been allowed to see Taroon, and was advised by the
DCM that the foregoing message should be stressed again and that
the Embassy had information that the Afghan authorities were contem-
plating action within the next two minutes. Mr. Taylor reiterated the
U.S. position to Taroon’s secretary and stressed that that policy had
been specifically by Secretary Vance. Mr. Taylor also emphasized that
information available to the Embassy indicated that some kind of force-
ful action was imminent and that absolutely nothing should be done
that would endanger the welfare of the Ambassador. The secretary
entered Taroon’s office and upon emerging at 1250 said the message
had been given to the police commandant. The secretary added that
“not all information should be made available, everything is under
control, and Taroon is busy with the operation at the hotel.” He claimed
