123 M 221/127: Telegram [Document 471] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, May 6, 1925—4 p.m. [Received May 6—11:20 a.m.] 181. Department’s 91, May 2, 1 p.m. 1. The representatives of the powers signatory to the Washington treaty50 in a meeting this morning decided to send the following identic telegram to their respective Governments. Translation: “The British and Italian Governments consider that the presentation of letters implies de jure recognition. The American and Japanese Governments consider on the contrary that it does not entail de jure recognition and can consequently take place independently. The representatives of the Netherlands and of Portugal are without instructions. Since it results from the instructions from Washington that the new Minister of the United States of America will present his letters, the Ministers of Belgium and of France propose that their respective Governments shall consult with Rome, London, The Hague and Lisbon in order that the presentation of letters of credence may not imply in the eyes of these Governments de jure recognition of the Provisional Chinese Government.” 2. At this meeting after informing my colleagues of the Department’s 91, May 2, 1 p.m., I expressed myself as believing the Government of the United States had it in mind that, in view of the present abnormal conditions in China which might endure for a long period of time, the foreign powers should not be too technical or theoretical in dealing with such situations as presentation of letters of credence and the like; that the state of affairs here was entirely anomalous and should be treated accordingly. 3. French Minister stated gold franc settlement was not a treaty but merely the regularizing of current situation by an exchange of letters. All representatives except Japan and myself either by virtue of instructions or from personal opinion expressed themselves categorically to the effect that presentation of letters of credence If could not but imply de jure recognition unless such letters were from Minister of Foreign Affairs to Minister of Foreign Affairs, as in the case of a chargé d’affaires, or contained specific reservations concerning de jure recognition. General opinion was that unless such reservations were made Chinese Government would undoubtedly consider
