Hungary 445 Issues —Domestic: Congressional opinion is divided. However, there would be a strong negative reaction from the most vocal elements of the Hungarian-American community. This could be partially dealt with through consultations with Congress and through the method of return: a public ceremony in Budapest, a commitment from Hungary to display the regalia publicly, and perhaps even sending it back on August 20, St. Stephen’s Day. —Foreign Policy: the advantages listed by Secretary Vance must be seen in a broader perspective: —returning the Crown would show our “good faith” as we approach the CSCE meetings; —since there is consideration in both the Administration and Congress about extending MFN to Hungary, also returning the Crown would be a strong sign of our interest, that could be seen as a shift of our overall East European policy; —on the other hand, we still have not decided on a basic strategy for Eastern Europe. Returning the Crown before that process is completed foreshadows decisions you may want to consider, concerning trade, political relationships and policy toward the USSR. (An overall strategy will be considered in the context of follow-up to PRM–9, due on June 15.)3 RECOMMENDATION That you delay4 a decision on returning the Crown of St. Stephen until our overall East European strategy is decided, on an expedited basis:5 Delay decision, pending consideration of East European strategy Begin consulting with Congress in order to return the Crown (Secretary Vance’s recommendation) Do not return the Crown at this time 3 See Document 7. 4 In a June 12 memorandum to Brzezinski, Hyland and Hunter described the Vance memorandum as “one sided and lack[ing] perspective” and recommended that the decision be delayed until the broader decision on policy toward Eastern Europe is addressed in the context of PRM–9. Returning the Crown at this time, they argued, would raise questions about the administration’s message to East Europeans: Was Hungary being rewarded for being more liberal or was the United States putting the “seal of legitimacy on Kadar?” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 27, Hungary: 1–12/77) 5 Carter checked his approval of Brzezinski’s recommendation to delay a decision and defer returning the Crown and wrote in the margin “Don’t heat up now—J.” Brzezinski informed Vance of the President’s decision in a June 15 memorandum. (Ibid.)
