September 18–December 16, 1978 345 will always prevail. Dayan said that they would have to check how legally binding a statement in the preamble would be on Israel. The President suggested that at the end of the preamble language should be inserted saying that “in order to implement the framework [of] an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty the parties agree to the following provisions”. Rosenne said that this would help, but there should also be some mention that the validity of this treaty is not conditional upon any act or development under the control of the third party. Dayan said that the President might have to contact the Prime Minister directly on this point. The President then suggested that we leave the preamble as it is, and that we add some language referring to the second framework agreement toward the end. Then later in the section on priorities, there should be some reference to the treaty not depending upon any action or inaction by third parties. Barak said that they would have to go to the Cabinet to get agreement on this, but that he could accept it wholeheartedly. Dayan confirmed that they would all recommend this formulation to the Cabinet. The President said that he would try to sell it to Sadat. The Camp David agreement should also be appended to the treaty not the letter. Barak said that he felt bad about this whole discussion. The President said that he would then withdraw his suggestion that the Camp David agreement be appended to the treaty and that it could be attached to a letter in which the parties reaffirmed their commitment to the general framework. It might be appended to the letter on the talks beginning in one month. Dayan said that Boutros Ghali had agreed to a separate letter on the negotiations for the West Bank and Gaza beginning in one month. The President said that he wanted a joint text of that letter. It should say that the parties are prepared to carry out the provisions of the Camp David agreement, and that in order to do this Egypt and Israel would meet within one month to begin negotiations on establishing a self-governing authority. The Camp David agreements would be appended to that letter. Concerning the priority of obligations, language was suggested on page six, paragraph 2, which said that the treaty would stand “without regard to the action or inaction of any third party”. The President said he would try this with Sadat. Dayan said that this would be all right with the Israeli delegation. The President then turned to the question of free navigation in the Strait of Tiran, and whether the Egyptians could find some way to close those waters to Soviet ships. Barak said that the right of ships from all nations had to be respected or ships carrying cargoes to Israel might be prevented from passing through the Strait. Mr. Aaron suggested that the phrase “for access to either country” be included as a way of indicating that the free passage was for ships going to or from Israel or
