700
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ment fully to NTT or risk losing access to $16 billion in USG
procurement.
The President endorsed this tough line. He also asked Governor
Askew to maintain pressure on Japan to carry out its automobile trade
and investment commitments.
243.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, May 27, 1980
SUBJECT
Summit Preparations (U)
I have just returned from the second Summit Preparatory Meeting;
economic preparations are in good shape, although there are still some
disagreements. (C)
1. The draft communique’s section on macro-economic policy
stresses the need for (i) prolonged fiscal and monetary restraint, to
dampen inflationary expectations; (ii) policies that will encourage in-
vestment by shifting resources from the public to the private sector,
from consumption to investment, and from declining to growing in-
dustries. This is the most important part of the Summit as far as Mrs.
Thatcher is concerned. She believes that this kind of hortatory language
will help heads of government by showing that these painful policies
are regarded by all major industrial countries as the right recipe. (C)
2. The energy section includes strong commitments regarding in-
creased production of alternative energy sources, particularly coal and
synthetics. This section also blesses the agreements we got at the IEA
Ministerial Meeting (the Washington Post report notwithstanding) re-
garding (i) the establishment of national IEA annual oil import yard-
sticks, which can be converted into oil-import ceilings if the oil market
tightens, and (ii) reducing the Summit countries’ aggregate 1985 import
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 27, President, Europe, 6/19–26/80: Cables and Memos, 5/20–29/80. Confidential.
Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “good. J.” The memorandum
was sent to Carter under cover of a May 28 memorandum from Brzezinski, in which he
reported on the preparations for the discussion of political issues at the Venice G–7
Summit. (Ibid.)
