Government had unreservedly offered to negotiate a new treaty and to regard the old treaty as meanwhile no longer in force, provided only that pending the outcome of the negotiations Belgium be placed on a footing giving her equality with the other treaty powers. The very liberality of this offer not to insist upon treaty rights out of deference to the national aspirations of the Chinese had the effect, I am confident, of giving the Chinese encouragement to presume upon this indulgence. The significance of the action taken is emphasized further by the following fact: In the exceedingly disingenuous statement which the Foreign Office issued is an assertion that national aspirations are hardly fit matters to submit to adjudication. If in its context this has any meaning beyond impertinence or bombast, it constitutes a warning that the intention of the Peking administration is to take the position that abrogation of the so-called unequal treaties has become such a necessity for the nation as to give justification for treating the obligations of China as scraps of paper. Until 1934 our own treaty of 1903 is not due to be revised. But my belief, which I confidently venture to express, is that even though in the meanwhile we should make concessions beyond what the Washington Conference contemplated, by way of bowing to the storm, some specious occasion will have been made by the Chinese before that date to declare our treaty terminated. That is, unless in the meantime our intention not to tolerate such treatment of our rights has been made very clear. 2. The feasibility of having the Washington Conference powers make a protest to China against the denunciation has been discussed with me by the Belgian Minister. I expressed my own opinion to him that a protest such as that would not be welladvised, for it would be a prejudgment of the World Court’s decision on the question of interpretation which Belgium proposes to submit, and therefore it would be subjected to violent nationalistic propaganda along the line that China was being confronted by the Western powers with a choice between yielding to what we desire or taking the question before a court willing to serve our avowed interests.
