September 18–December 16, 1978
307
meetings between counterparts (Dayan-Boutros Ghali; Weizman-
Hassan Ali).
3. The rest of the day was devoted largely to bilateral meetings,
which focused on a draft treaty text that we had prepared and made
available to both delegations, and which both agreed to use as common
negotiating text. We met first with the Israelis who had done their
homework on our text and suggested a number of changes. (We are
aware that you do not have our draft text and so will not try to convey
the specific Israeli comments at this preliminary stage.) Unfortunately,
we do not have either side’s agreement at this stage to make public that
we are working from a US draft,2 so please don’t let cat out of bag.
4. We then met with the Egyptians, who were not yet prepared to
offer comments on our text. The Secretary shared with them most of the
Israeli suggestions, and when we resume in the morning the Egyptians
will offer theirs.
5. During our meeting with the Israelis, Weizman brought up their
concern about the speed with which they will be able to withdraw,
pointing out the importance of U.S. assistance in this regard. He ex-
pressed particular concern about their leaving “live installations” such
as Um Khasheib and wondered if a mobile American installation might
not be loaned to Israel while they are establishing an alternate site.
6. Egyptians raised two general concerns. (Osama al-Baz did most
of the talking for their side.) They obviously hope that a treaty will not
erect impediments to their conduct of relations with and obligations to
third parties—i.e., other Arabs. They are also hoping to achieve recip-
rocal gradualism in the implementation of the withdrawal and normal-
ization aspects of a treaty. Obvious Egyptian desire to avoid neglecting
West Bank and Palestinian issues was pre-empted by Secretary’s sug-
gesting that we must begin discussing West Bank/Gaza questions if
only for clarification purposes, with which Egyptian delegation imme-
diately agreed. Secretary will pursue this subject bilaterally with Dayan
Friday.3
7. Day ended with brief trilateral meeting of Secretary, Ali and
Dayan for purpose of summarizing day’s highlights and agreeing on
program for Friday.
8. You will appreciate impossibility of sending you daily detailed
accounts. Once main issues have begun to crystallize, we will try to
send you periodic summary of where matters stand and highlight
issues that might be raised with you in capitals.
Vance
2 See footnote 2, Document 83.
3 October 13.
