Chapter 4, February–April 1990 593 What we proposed and believed was agreed and to our mutual benefit was distinguishability not on the basis of your paragraph 5 but on the basis of external differences observable by NTM and differences visible to on-­site inspection. In other words, the US took a major step to meet the Soviets on on-­site inspection to solve this. And indeed to support this we proposed and believed it was agreed to an exchange of information and exhibitions to confirm the information and distinguishing features. Based on that we said non-­nuclear ALCMs not distinguishable by the differences we proposed would be permitted but treated as nuclear. In other words, if they were not distinguishable, if they did not have differences observable to NTM and to on-­site inspection, they would count as nuclear whatever they were. Finally, and this was an important step for us, we proposed and believed it was agreed that there would be access to designated storage areas at bases for non-ALCM heavy bombers and bases for converted heavy bombers to enable confirmation that any ALCMs at those bases are in fact non-­nuclear. We made an offer for access to the most sensitive areas of important bases. So we cannot accept this notion of functionally defined distinctions. We think our proposal in Moscow solved the problem on a basis acceptable to both. Bartholomew: I must ask you a question. What does the last phrase of paragraph 5 mean (and with regard to effective verification of the aggregate level of warheads on ALCMs)? Akhromeyev: I will explain it. This is a reference to the verification process to find out the exact number of nuclear-­armed long-­range ALCMs on each side. Both sides would exceed the limit. Burt: Are you talking about a limit on the inventory of ALCMs? Akhromeyev: This is verification, not a limit. Each party has the right to know the number on each side. Burt: Is this a non-­deployed ALCM limit? Akhromeyev: This is not a limit. Both sides will exceed the 6000 limit. Suppose the Soviet Union exceeds by 200. You would have the right to verify the number. We should have that right to verify the actual number of US ALCMs. As for what you have said on distinguishability, we will study your language overnight. Bartholomew: This concept of verifying the number of ALCMs is a totally new and totally unacceptable idea. Akhromeyev: I would like your language on distinguishability. Bartholomew: It is in the Moscow agreed elements of common ground. Akhromeyev: We will look at it tonight and reply tomorrow. Bartholomew: Paragraph 6 also directly contradicts the Moscow elements of common ground. Akhromeyev: This is unacceptable to you. We understand. Akhromeyev: Permit me to answer the questions you raised on SLCMs. Let me work from the position paper I gave you last night. The first paragraph is about a politically-­binding statement on SLCMs.
