194 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Enclosure Paper Prepared by the Chief of Naval Operations Washington, undated THE CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS’ VISION ON THE BASIC NATIONAL POLICY—NSC 5810 Basic National Security Policies—­as other statements of policies and objectives—­are frequently defined in such broad and ambiguous terms that, although everybody can agree to the wording, the language cannot serve as a guide in any specific case. Our major difficulty in writing a National Security Policy is to obtain specific language which will convey the same general thoughts to those who must plan for, and execute the policy. There are several different ways of losing Europe, the Middle East, Asia and other areas; one of them being destruction of the United States, another being by permitting any one of our allies to be attacked by any communist country without immediately coming to our allies’ aid; and another by permitting our allies to lose confidence in our intentions, or our strength, or our willingness to help, or our judgment; and as a result, accommodate themselves to communism. The main military elements of national strategy—­now—­are: To reject the concept of preventive war or acts intended to provoke war, while at the same time making it clear that we are determined to oppose aggression despite risk of general war. To deter the Soviets from starting general nuclear war by convinc­ ing them the United States has the nuclear power to destroy Russia, and will do so if they initiate general war. To maintain the various United States nuclear retaliatory forces in such deployment and posture that regardless of what Russia does, even with a surprise attack, Russia will be utterly destroyed by the retalia­ tory attacks. To build and maintain a defensive system for the continental U.S. of sufficient size and effectiveness that our military striking forces in the U.S. cannot be dealt a knock-­out blow by a Russian surprise attack and be sure that the Russians are convinced that this is true. To convince our allies that an overt military attack by Russia on any one of our allies will automatically cause the U.S. to unleash a nuclear retaliatory attack on Russia. To maintain United States military forces of appropriate types, ade­ quate and ready to defeat or hold, with the help of indigenous forces, local communist aggression in undeveloped areas of the world. To render direct economic and military assistance to allies in order to build up recipient nation’s ability to participate in its own defense.
