1955 165 further explanation. His conversation otherwise was very rational and sensible and the only explanation I have for that he had been rigidly instructed to say absolutely nothing more on this subject. The phrasing, to my mind, very much carries the marks of Chou. I asked him to dinner at the end of our meeting on Saturday, and he replied that he would let me know at 8 o’clock Sunday morning. This seemed a very short time to make an inquiry and get a reply from Peiping, but I suppose that he was able to do so. In any event, his inter­ preter telephoned Ekvall promptly at 8 o’clock to accept. I had the din­ ner out at the little pension-type of place on the outskirts of Geneva where Clough and Forman are living. In accordance with my sugges­ tion, he came in a car other than the one he usually uses and with­ out a flag. (Incidentally, he is normally driven around town in a big Zim, while I am using a Chevrolet.) We had drinks down in the garden before dinner. After dinner we retired to the sitting room the boys use. I am satisfied that it was carried off without any leak to the press and don’t believe that he will say anything. However, if it did come out, I would simply take the line that I am leaving no stone unturned in mak­ ing every possible effort to reach agreement on getting our people out. I should think that this would probably be well accepted by everybody except possibly Taipei. I feel that the dinner was a good idea and that now was exactly the right time to do it. They are, I am convinced, extremely sensitive on the subject of social ostracism and were particularly sensitive at our rejec­ tion of their little overtures at last year’s conference here. I think that Wang’s mention of Bedell Smith’s little gesture towards Chou towards the end of the meetings last year particularly significant in indicating their sensitivity to such little things. My having taken the initiative this year represents a major departure, and I believe that it gives me a sub­ tle, though distinct, advantage. Thanks very much for the information on what we have done with the Indians, as well as today’s telegram giving me the text of the Secre­ tary’s letter to U Nu. I think it was excellent and presented the situation exactly right. I will, of course, be extremely interested and hope I can promptly receive anything from any source on what the Chinese may tell the Indians or the Burmese in Peiping. I greatly appreciate the Department’s affirmation in 603 of the line that I had taken on “sovereignty and jurisdiction”. I had done this entirely ad lib in give and take during a meeting and was a little con­ cerned that the Department may have felt I had gone too far. We will keep plugging away but I fear that it is going to largely be a matter of saying the same thing over again as I have pretty much run out of ideas on new ways to say things.
