1116
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
356.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Foreign Aid—For the Last Time (U)
1. Discussions at the Summit Preparatory meeting in Paris last
week2 lead me to believe that the other Summit countries might well be
willing to match modest add-ons to US aid for food and energy produc-
tion, and for family planning. If such US add-ons are presented as our
response to the Venice Summit call for increased bilateral aid by
Summit countries in these three fields,3 the Canadians will urge our
allies to join us in forming food, energy, and family planning aid con-
sortia. These consortia would be an important Carter legacy, in a field
in which you have a good record. (C)
2. I therefore propose that your FY 82 bilateral development aid re-
quest to the Congress include a modest increase over the OMB mark, in
response to the Venice Summit. Your budget message would state that
this add-on was being proposed in the expectation that it would evoke
a comparable increase in other Summit countries’ aid for these pur-
poses, and that final Congressional action should hinge on whether
such a response seems likely to occur. OMB tells me that such a contin-
gent approach is feasible, and that at least one other item in the FY 82
budget (IFAD replenishment) will be handled in the same way. (C)
3. I propose the following:
a. A $65 million energy add-on, for increased production of fuel-
wood, as proposed by State and IDCA in the “leadership package”. Ac-
cording to IDCA, DOE, and World Bank estimates, this expenditure, if
continued for several years and matched by others, would reduce LDC
oil imports and reverse a growing deterioration in the energy supply
available to the world’s poor countries.
b. $40 million for aid to national agricultural research institutes in
food deficit countries and $60 million for food production aid to Africa,
half of the amounts proposed for these purposes in the leadership
package. Research has the highest pay-off of any agricultural aid; Af-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects,
Henry Owen, Box 1, Chron: 12/10–31/80. Confidential. Sent for information.
2 See Document 252.
3 See Document 247.
