218  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Mr. Sprague asked how it would help European nations’ confidence 
to have control over nuclear weapons since they would not have enough 
weapons to give them parity with the Soviet Union. In this situation, 
would not the same doubts about non-­use of nuclear weapons crop up?
Secretary Dulles agreed and said he felt that European nations 
would not long pursue individual programs to manufacture weapons. 
He feared they would then attempt to “stay out” of the conflict.
Mr. Quarles said that, as a matter of logic, if countries become neu­
tral they are in more danger than if they are in the alliance. If this is true, 
why would they drift to neutralism?
Secretary McElroy said that it appeared that we could not match 
the USSR in Europe without resorting to at least tactical nuclear weap­
ons, but use of such weapons would bring all-­out nuclear war unless 
the hostilities were quickly stopped by common consent.
Secretary Dulles said he thought a war in Europe could not be lim­
ited. Many people think that US involvement in a European war would 
be more likely if it developed gradually than if the US was faced sud­
denly with a “cold blood” decision looking to all-­out war, which might 
lead to the end of the US.
Secretary Dulles recalled being in Japan at the beginning of the 
Korean war when it was thought that no US ground forces would be 
needed—­only some air support. Later it was felt that small ground 
forces would be needed to stiffen the Korean forces. Later large US 
forces were required. In the first World War, American participation 
was in the beginning to be only logistical. Later large manpower contri­
butions had to be made. Once in a fight, emotions may lead to decisions 
different from those facing a nation in “cold blood” when a decision 
may have to be taken which would involve destruction of all life in the 
northern latitude.
Secretary McElroy said the important thing is the continued deploy­
ment of US troops in Europe. He recognized the possibility of American 
divisions being sacrificed in a European war, but failure in such situa­
tions to bombard the USSR would sit terribly with Americans. Secretary 
Dulles pointed out that the same was true in the case of the alternative.
Secretary McElroy pointed out that if we lost Western Europe, we 
would be isolated by the Communists.
Mr. Quarles said it would be poor tactics for the Soviets to destroy 
US forces in Europe. It would be a sure way to incur the destruction of 
Russia. Even if the Soviets felt that in the first instance we would not 
fight, an attack on American troops would lead to the opposite result.
Mr. Douglas asked if we would be able to hold allies if we could 
assure them of tactical nuclear weapons sufficient to meet Soviet attack 
with conventional forces. He recalled Secretary Dulles’ point that it
