1014  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
f. The degree of destruction which the Soviets might determine 
they should inflict (estimates range from 70% probability of destroying 
all soft targets through 90% to 99%)
g. The actual targeting which the Russians might choose, i.e., 
would they concentrate first on all aircraft bases, next on soft missile 
sites, and then on hardened missile sites, or would they choose some 
other order of destruction?
2. Nevertheless, nearly all of the studies show that all soft targets 
(bases and soft missile sites) could be destroyed by a comparatively 
few Russian missiles and indicate that our retaliatory capability, when 
the Russians achieve a significant number of missiles on launchers, is 
dependent upon getting Polaris submarines and hardened ICBM sites 
operational as soon as possible—before 1963. These studies show that 
after some conceivable attacks by the Russians, very few SAC aircraft 
on United States bases would be available.
3. The presentations indicate that only the capability within the 
United States is considered, and that the retaliatory capability of the attack 
carrier striking forces was not included. The exclusion was not because 
they were unimportant, but because they did not lend themselves read­
ily to mathematical analysis. It is submitted that the Russians, perhaps, 
would have the same difficulty in correctly appraising the capabilities of 
such forces. Still the possible actions that are usually recommended are 
confined to what can be done to achieve a greater retaliatory capability 
from these forces in the United States after an attack. No statements have 
been made as to how to increase the retaliatory capabilities which are not 
subject to Russian ballistic missile attack, i.e., carriers at sea.
4. To get an increase in surviving aircraft at bases in the United 
States, requires under some circumstances, considerable funds and 
effort. I believe that we may be overlooking a comparatively inexpen­
sive way of increasing our retaliatory capability during the next few 
years by increasing the number of attack planes available after an attack 
by increasing the number of attack carriers at sea.
5. Normally there are about 200 attack aircraft in the 6th and 7th 
fleets. The carriers and these aircraft are not subject to ballistic missile 
attack when at sea. If an air attack is launched against any of these car­
riers we will have considerable warning, much more than any 10 or 
15 minutes. This is because timing of an air attack against carriers in 
an unknown location could not be coordinated with an all-out missile 
attack for a predetermined specific time.
6. The 200 aircraft mentioned above are near the Soviet Union and, 
consequently, could attack quickly. There would be attrition in the car­
rier aircraft during the attacks, of course, but many of them will return 
to their carriers for use in succeeding attacks. Furthermore, in addition
