Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII while the brunt of counterinsurgency operations would remain with Afghan armed forces directed by Soviet advisors and planners. Believing that U.S.-Soviet relations were worsening and U.S.-Chinese relations improving, even without Afghanistan, and that the U.S.-Iranian crisis would minimize the Islamic countries’ reactions, they were undeterred by potential damage to their international interests. The Soviets failed to foresee that their flagrant intervention would accelerate the disintegration of the Afghan Army, undermine Babrak’s chances of gaining broad public support, and give new impetus to the insurgency. They also seriously underestimated the damage to their relations with the West and the Islamic world, but we believe they would have not changed their decision to go into Afghanistan had they more accurately assessed international reactions. In sum, we see no evidence that the Soviets have abandoned their objective of establishing a stable, pro- Soviet regime in Afghanistan through military means or that they are seriously interested at this time, in a political solution that would necessitate withdrawal of Soviet forces. They are keeping alive the possibility of negotiations, however, in order to deflect attention from their pursuit of a military solution, and are watching with detachment the West-West negotiations on neutralization and other political solutions, hoping that splits among the Western allies will widen and the U.S. will stand isolated in its measures taken in response to the invasion. End summary. 4. Two-and-a-half months after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, many questions remain about Soviet motives and objectives in that country. Since submitting our assessment of Soviet motives immediately after the invasion (reftel), we see no reason to alter fundamentally that analysis. Nevertheless, the intensity of Soviet efforts to justify their move in terms of an alleged threat to Soviet security caused by U.S. and Chinese intervention on their southern border, the “signals” they are sending of interest in a political settlement, and the willingness of some third parties, such as India, to accept the plausibility of the Soviet version lead us to take another look at Soviet motives and objectives and to update our original analysis. 5. The Soviets, in public and private statements, adamantly insist that their only objectives in Afghanistan were and are the perpetuation of a stable, friendly regime and preservation of the social achievements of the April revolution. Soviet charges of U.S., Chinese and other foreign instigation of the Afghan Muslim rebels, if not made out of whole cloth, are at the least grossly exaggerated. Nonetheless, the Soviets have been deeply concerned about the steady growth of an anti-Communist, anti-Soviet fundamentalist Muslim and nationalistic insurgent movement in Afghanistan since at least the time of the Herat uprising in March of 1979. Unable to admit publicly the possibility of widespread
