First Responses 9 White House Defense The Vice President Secretary Harold Brown Zbigniew Brzezinski W. Graham Claytor Hamilton Jordan JCS Jody Powell General David Jones NSC Energy Colonel William Odom Secretary Charles Duncan Gary Sick Justice Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS The SCC met to review the situation in Iran. The following issues were addressed: 1. Public statement. A statement was approved for immediate release from the White House press office.2 (U) 2. Emissaries. A Presidential letter is being drafted. The two emissaries (Ramsey Clark and William Miller) should be positioned as close as possible to Tehran in order to be able to respond quickly if we get an indication that they will be accepted by the authorities in Qom. (S) 3. Contacts with Foreign Governments. Secretary Vance briefed on the efforts being made to mobilize support from Islamic nations who may have influence with the Khomeini regime, our contacts with the Turkish Government about possible refuge for our Chargé, and our approach to the Red Crescent (through the ICRC) to visit the hostages at the U.S. Embassy compound in Tehran. (C) 4. Energy. The Department of Energy, together with State and the NSC, will examine the following: (1) the feasibility and desirability of triggering IEA allocation mechanisms in the event of an embargo or reduced production by Iran; (2) explore the possibility of arranging compensatory oil supplies from other oil producers which would permit us to reject any oil threats by Iran; and (3) Secretary Duncan and Chairman Miller will consult with the leaders of U.S. oil companies about steps they could take to minimize the effects of any oil cutoff by Iran. It was estimated that the U.S. share of Iranian production amounts to about 700,000 barrels per day. If Iran successfully shuts off these supplies, it would take several months to be felt in this country, but the effects would eventually be serious. (TS) 2 The White House issued the first public statement on the hostage crisis on November 9, after Carter met with members of the hostage families. Carter referred to the strong feelings, frustration, and “deep anger” felt by all Americans, feelings that he shared, as a result of the hostage situation, and asked U.S. citizens to “exercise restraint” and “refrain from any action that might increase the danger to the American hostages in Tehran.” For the full text of the statement, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 2102–2103.
