834 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement negotiation, and he would plan to return to Washington on December 8 for further discussions.2 2 According to Chaplin’s memorandum of conversation dated December 8, 1960, officials of the DLF informed Keefe and other representatives of the Chase Manhattan Bank that the DLF representatives had secured negotiating instructions along the lines of the proposals discussed on December 6 and were prepared to make specific proposals to the bank regarding political and repayment guarantees for any loans that the bank might make to the Standard Fruit Company. Keefe responded that the bank did not believe the DLF or ICA could offer political risk guarantees that would in practice satisfy the needs of Chase Manhattan. After an extended discussion of the question of economic guarantees, those present agreed that DLF would draft a guarantee agreement for the bank’s review. (815.05111/12–860) In a letter to Ambassador Burrows dated December 14, 1960, Chaplin summarized the results of the discussion that had occurred on December 8, informed the ambassador of Under Secretary of State Dillon’s determination to prevent Standard Fruit from going bankrupt, and stated that efforts were continuing to arrange a government loan if Chase Manhattan refused to offer additional financing to Standard Fruit. (ARA Files, Lot 66 D 94, “Correspondence, Ambassador Newbegin, Honduras 1960”) HO–22. Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the President1 Washington, December 8, 1960. SUBJECT Submission of the Dispute with Honduras concerning Sovereignty over Swan Islands to the International Court of Justice. A long-­standing dispute between the United States and Honduras concerning sovereignty over two small Caribbean islands, the Swan Islands, is now becoming so inflamed in Honduras that it threatens U.S.– Honduran relations, and even the stability of the moderate administration of President Villeda Morales. For almost 100 years, the islands have been occupied by United States citizens and utilized by United States interests. The Cuban Government, in its general propaganda campaign against the United States, has been agitating the dispute throughout the hemisphere, partly to aggravate an issue between the United States and Honduras, and partly because of anti-Castro broadcasts being made by a commercial radio station on one of the islands. The Hondurans have convinced themselves that their claim to these islands is unassailable. However, the U.S. has long claimed the 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. Confidential.
