El Salvador  583
In this respect U.S. aid, both direct and indirect, would be of definite 
assistance.
4. The second aspect of Communism was the urban. In the towns 
and cities, workers were much closer together, better organized, in 
many instances more intelligent than the campesino, and were more 
easily influenced by subversive propaganda. He mentioned both the 
labor groups and the university students. In connection with the former, 
he referred to communist-­dominated organizations; in the latter con-
nection, namely, the university, he was concerned about the perennial, 
as he described it, “eternal” student. Both he and the Foreign Minister 
appeared to have the same view as we do of the situation which con-
fronts El Salvador.
5. He briefly summarized what his Government was doing. He 
spoke of his displeasure with the newspapers for permitting various 
Communist articles or Communist-­slanted articles to appear in their 
publications. He mentioned the column “Sputnik”, and the relative 
softness of Viera Altamirano, editor and director of “El Diario de Hoy,” 
toward Communists and Communist articles appearing in his paper. 
I was surprised at the emotion that he generated on this subject and 
the feelings he harbored with respect to certain writers. It was proba-
bly understandable because he took the articles as a personal affront, 
speaking of them as being anti-­government.
6. He referred to the ease of movement across political frontiers 
by agitators and Communists in Central America. He felt further inter-
national cooperation was necessary, that no single government could 
take care of the problem by itself. He said that people had been granted 
visas for the U.S., Canada, and other countries, and within a few days it 
was common knowledge that they had reached Moscow.
7. In this connection he spoke of Cuba in derogatory terms. He 
and the Foreign Minister were in agreement that Castro was following 
tactics, especially in the liquidation of opposition, that were typically 
Communist and un-Latin. He said he was disturbed about the ease 
with which invasion of Central American areas could be engineered 
from other countries, and concluded by pointing out that the problem 
of Communism was extensive and involved.
8. He went on to say that the Communist objectives with respect to 
El Salvador were not hard to discern. The Foreign Minister concurred 
in Lemus’ view that the number-­one objective of the Communists in 
Central America was El Salvador. He believed this was so because of 
the stability which this country has had for several years, politically, 
economically, and otherwise—a stability resting in part upon the liqui-
dation in 1932 of the disturbing Communist element. Communist tac-
tics aimed first at disaffecting all of El Salvador’s neighbors: Guatemala, 
Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica. (He said that Costa Rica was a hotbed
