3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 July–December 1978 501 the treaty.” (The three added Soviet words are “including its encryption.”) 6. Finally, on the issue of unarmed, pilotless aircraft (PRVs), I noted that we had proposed a type rule that appears to meet what we understood to be our mutual concerns. I indicated that we hope for a prompt, affirmative answer, adding that I thought we should be able to settle this tomorrow. I expect Gromyko will be able to settle on the basis of a type rule, and I suspect that the only reason he could not agree on the spot is the need for Politburo approval of a change in a Politburoapproved position. 7. In private conversation, he confirmed an annual production rate of 30 for Backfire, and said he would recommend that Brezhnev confirm the same number, expressing his view that it was not certain that this could be done. 8. There was no further discussion of the ALCM average number or agreement to limit the number of ALCMs deployed on existing bombers (B–52, Bear, Bison) to 20. 9. My recommendations on these issues are as follows: A. Telemetry encryption: Earle “non-paper” language preserves all essential elements of US position. Only Soviet addition is “including its encryption.” Gromyko commented that additional words are already “buried” in “methods” and are countered by Soviet acceptance of “such as” and “denial.” Recommend that I be authorized to accept our revised formulation with non-substantive Soviet addition. This should be taken in context of Gromyko’s not disputing my assertion of relevance of telemetry to verification. B. Cruise missile definition: Also recommend that Earle be authorized to pursue separate definitions applicable to all cruise missiles in protocol and ALCMs only in treaty. In this context, I would plan to state that the inclusion of conventionally-armed cruise missiles in the definition of groundand sea-launched cruise missiles does not constitute a precedent for the scope of any limits on groundand sealaunched cruise missiles that might be agreed in the future. C. RPVs: Authorize Earle to pursue solutions to unarmed RPV/ cruise missile problem on basis of type rule. D. New types definition: Authorize Earle to use 20 percent downside rule as leverage for Soviet agreement to most important parts of US new types definition. Washington should forthwith define priorities in this area, including any areas in which 20 percent reduction not acceptable. 10. I intend to table language along the following lines for an exchange of letters on the number of cruise missiles on existing heavy bombers:
