Chapter 4, February–April 1990  489
following option. First, they reaffirmed what they had said regard-
ing Krasnoyarsk. Everything he had said in Wyoming still stood. The 
Soviets were talking about destroying the radar. Second, regarding vis-
its to radars, he suggested beginning with visits to two, Pechora and 
Thule. As for the second pair of radars, since this was tied up with the 
British government, we could look at the question later.
The Secretary said this was all right if the Soviets wanted to approach 
the subject in this way. As he had said before, the U.S. was willing to 
have the Soviets visit Fylingdales as well; he had simply stressed the 
need to coordinate such a visit closely with the British government. If 
the Soviet side decided to visit Fylingdales, we would want to visit the 
Soviet radar at Baranovichi. If the Soviets were not prepared to give 
their consent to a visit to Baranovichi at this time, however, we could 
return to the question later.
Bartholomew explained that the U.S. was required to consult with 
the UK and Denmark and had done so. Both governments had given 
their full agreement to visits. The Secretary’s point the previous day 
had been that, when the time for the visits was selected, there was a 
need to coordinate with the British and Danish governments. But both 
of those governments, he repeated, had given their consent.
Shevardnadze suggested that we announce that we had a favorable 
view on mutual visits to radar sites with the time and modalities to be 
worked out later.
The Secretary commented that we would not want to imply a 
general process of visiting radars. The Soviets in Wyoming had only 
expressed interest in seeing Thule and Fylingdales. He had thought that 
this was reasonable and the U.S. had now made all necessary arrange-
ments with the UK and Danish governments. As he now understood it, 
both the UK and Denmark were ready to receive Soviet visitors and we 
could make clear that four radars were involved.
Shevardnadze suggested registering agreement on a visit to one 
radar on each side. We could look at the second pair of radars later on.
The Secretary said that this concluded everything on arms control 
except for SLCMs. We still had to see what the working group had 
produced.
Shevardnadze commented that, despite the difficulties we had 
experienced the previous day and our disappointment with the initial 
results, we had now made considerable headway on arms control.
Kanter commented that our disappointment had been temporary. 
The Secretary said he agreed, although he was disappointed we had 
not completely closed out ALCMs. The CW agreement would be well 
received publicly. We now had put non-­deployed missiles behind 
us, telemetry encryption had been resolved in principle, most of the
