Arms Control and Disarmament 1609 d. It is somewhat remarkable that the shock predicted by our the­ ory is about 30 times less than earth shock observed from air explosions of the same yield. This paradox should be cleared up. 7. Construction of Cavity. A hole of one million cubic meters would be required to contain an explosion of about 7 kilotons at 50 atmo­ spheres pressure. One method of obtaining a hole of this size, which has been looked into in a preliminary manner, is to wash it out in a large salt dome. Salt is believed to have the required properties of high strength and freedom from cracks. In addition, there is some experience with excavating large holes in salt by dissolving out the solid material. The principal problem is to locate a salt dome near an adequate supply of water. (This can be sea water.) An estimate of the cost of excavating such a cavity on an urgent time scale was made in another connection. It was estimated that it would require 6 months to a year to do the excavation and would cost between 4 and 7 million dollars so that the cost is about a million dol­ lars per kiloton if the pressure has to be held to 50 atmospheres. It is probably possible to reduce the cost by increasing the time required, and a much more thorough investigation should be made to establish more accurate costs. It may be possible to use ice instead of salt for the containing media. This possibility should be investigated since it would increase the availability of sites and may decrease the cost. 8. Test Requirements. Because of the potential effect on the capa­ bility of a detection system, the Panel recommends an immediate experimental and theoretical program to evaluate quantitatively the possible decoupling by means of a properly designed cavity. The pro­ gram should include an extensive series of HE tests leading up to full-­scale nuclear shots. The HE tests should be closely coordinated with theoretical predictions to provide valuable information for the design of a nuclear test. Final verification that all of the conditions for decoupling are satisfied will undoubtedly require full-­scale nuclear shots. 9. Other Methods. The Panel has briefly considered a variety of additional concealment methods. These included: the use of noise cover from large earthquakes, from after shock sequences, from arti­ ficial explosions, from volcanic explosion, and from local meteoro­ logical conditions; the location of test sites to take advantage of such noise cover and to minimize the effectiveness of the control net; the introduction of confusing signals into the network by an explosion pattern; the effect of geologic structures on wave propagation; the possible effects of the surface reflection from flat and curved surfaces
