308 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 1. Review the PRM/NSC–32 conclusions on the scope, nature, and effectiveness of US and Soviet civil defense programs. The conclusions on these topics set forth in the Overview Report and the Summary are generally agreed to by all agencies, except for ACDA which dissents vigorously from almost everything, and possibly State, which questions many things in more muted fashion. The basic facts in Chapter II on Soviet civil defense come from the IIM on this subject; the basic facts about the US program are also not in dispute. What these mean, however, is highly contentious. ACDA makes four principal points. 1. Civil defense is meaningless because the amount of protection that any CD program can provide will be minor compared to the absolute levels of destruction resulting from a nuclear war. In fact, however, everyone is guessing when it comes to estimating the amount and character of the destruction resulting from a nuclear war, and it is better to provide some modest protection on the assumption that it may work, than do nothing at all. In addition, there is interagency agreement (set forth in Table S–2 on page 6 of the Summary and Table III–1 in the Report) that feasible and modest civil defense measures can make a difference in terms of tens of millions of lives. ACDA will then say that the survivors of a nuclear war will envy the dead; and the answer to that is that that is something for the survivors, not us, to decide. 2. ACDA will argue that the Report and the Summary neglect the longer-­term effects (after 30 days) of a nuclear war. In fact, however, these are not neglected; they are referred to in both the Report (page III–2) and Summary (pp. 4–5), but they cannot be described because any judgment as to what the world will be like 30 days after a nuclear war has to be 90 percent conjecture. The response to the previous point applies here. 3. ACDA will argue that the Report overestimates Soviet civil defense capabilities in that it makes a “best case” assumption that Soviet CD will work the way in which it is planned to work. In fact, with respect to some issues this is the case, and both the Report and the IIM, on which it is based, make that clear. On the most important issue, however, of population protection, the IIM and the Report (pp. II–10–14) emphasize how dependent the Soviet program is on warning time; they provide evidence for a variety of scenarios. 4. ACDA will say that unlike the Soviets, the US need not plan for population relocation because in the event of a crisis, Americans in target areas will hop into their automobiles and head for the hills as they do on the Fourth of July weekend. In fact, some spontaneous evacuation in a crisis undoubtedly will occur, and all the figures in the Report and
