Options Identified First, after the passage of the UN Resolution in the Security Council,3 Waldheim got in touch with the Iranians to see whether he, Waldheim, should send someone to Tehran or whether they would send someone to New York. Waldheim thought of sending Rafiuddin Ahmed, his Chef de Cabinet. As an alternative, Ghotbzadeh said he would prefer that discussions continue with the man he planned to send as Iran’s new representative in New York. This man’s name is Mansour Farhang and he was the Cultural Attaché in Washington after the revolution, but really no. 2 in the Iranian Mission in Washington. The Secretary said that he knows that Farhang has always opposed the taking of the hostages and has argued strongly with his own government that this would only isolate Iran from the rest of the world. [1 line not declassified] For example, we know that when he was asked to take the job in New York, he said he would do it only if he were allowed first to return to Tehran and talk to the Revolutionary Council and go to Qom and talk to Khomeini. He only decided to take the job, he has said to his friends, when these conditions were accepted. He has said that he wanted to convince the people in Qom that the Shah would never be returned by the United States. Our current information on the hostage situation is ambiguous. There seems to be a move to assemble what has been referred to as a “grand jury,” which will examine US policy from 1953 to the present and “investigate the crimes of the US”. Farhang has reported that the question of trying the prisoners is “dead.” Our view is that if he gets to New York, it will be a plus rather than a minus. Waldheim has also authorized the Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka to pick up again in Tehran talks he had on the way to the US and continue those discussions, once again looking toward the specific proposal of getting in to see the hostages themselves and verifying their condition. Waldheim is no longer considering sending his own representative to Tehran at this time. Second, today we have gone into the World Court asking that they grant us immediate interim relief by ordering the release of the hostages. We assume that Iran will boycott this proceeding and ignore its results. We will then face a situation in which Iran will have refused to obey a Security Council resolution and a World Court order—thus totally flouting international opinion. Third, we have been attempting to use the PLO. The Secretary said that he had been in almost daily contact with Arafat, who had been very helpful on gaining the release of the first thirteen hostages. We continue to work this channel and exchange views. There is still some
