Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
29
The Group cautions, however, that the operational problems asso-
ciated with electronic interference must be carefully controlled. US
testing of such a capability can compromise its effectiveness and would
be provocative if exercised against Soviet systems.
[1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified]
In general the nature of the US development program should be
influenced by potential arms control agreements as well as military re-
quirement. However, in this case it may not be easy to negotiate a
useful and verifiable agreement limiting anti-satellite activities. It is not
clear what kind of agreement would be in the US interests. Given the
nature of present assets, it would seem that an agreement that would
limit both the US and the Soviet Union to low-altitude ASAT capability
would be desirable. Such an agreement may be difficult to reach at
present. In contrast to the Soviets, we have no low altitude intercept ca-
pability while their high altitude space assets are more limited than
ours. In addition, because of the limited number of targets, there is no
real distinction between an effectively deployed ASAT system and one
that is still in the test stage of development. Further, the Group does not
believe that it is practical to obtain a verifiable and useful agreement
limiting electronic interference. These various factors must be clearly
and fully understood before entering into negotiations on ASAT
limitations.
[1 paragraph (5½ lines) not declassified]
This target list places enormous technical and operational de-
mands on a US system. The size and composition of the targets and the
time requirements imply a substantial system deployment including
non-conus basing, in the southern hemisphere. While the Group is not
in a position to present a definitive target list, we believe a more modest
system aimed at the critical military threat is appropriate. [2½ lines not
declassified]
The size of this target set and the time requirements must, of
course, be reassessed as the composition of the Soviet satellite fleet
evolves.
A system aimed only at low-orbit interception is also suggested by
the fact that a demonstration of a high-altitude capability by the US
would encourage the early development of a similar capability by the
USSR. This would negate the current US superiority of high altitude. In
summary, proceeding with development of a low-orbit intercept sys-
tem is appropriate. The decision to undertake flight testing at a suitable
time in the development cycle should consider the status of arms con-
trol negotiations or agreements. At present, it would be premature to
develop or demonstrate a high altitude intercept capability.
