National Security Policy 883 its full possibilities are known. Mr. McCone recalled to the President a recent review of the aircraft nuclear propulsion program and indicated that the development rather than the hardware stage of the program is being emphasized as a result of such review. He said we had developed a reactor which would fly a plane, but the reactor would not fly the plane very well. By postponing the hardware stage two or three years, we could probably develop a better reactor for aircraft propulsion. Mr. McCone thought that the Russians were probably coming to a similar conclusion. He noted that the Russians were somewhat evasive in this area, but believed they had been unable to solve the ceramics problem and did not consider it likely they would surprise us with a technical break-­through in aircraft nuclear propulsion. Mr. McCone then turned to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He displayed charts comparing the nuclear power program of the U.S. and the USSR. During his Moscow trip he had learned of various slippages in the Soviet power program and believed that these resulted from Russian awareness of the difficulties and the cost associated with the development of nuclear power. The Soviets are apparently cutting back or slowing down all phases of their power reactor program except for those projects which are already so far advanced in construction that it would be uneconomical to waste the work already done. The Chairman believed that we were well ahead of the Soviets in our domestic power program. He noted in particular that the DRESDEN Reactor was the largest in the world used exclusively for electrical power. When completed, the U.S. power reactor program would have a capacity of approximately one million KWE. The President said that Khrushchev during his visit here had remarked that the Russians were eliminating a large number of projects in their nuclear power program. Mr. McCone said the Soviet slow-­down did not, however, apply to the peaceful uses research program, which was broadly based and competently staffed. He had been particularly impressed during his trip to the USSR by the ability of the Soviets to manage and direct their technical personnel, to make prompt decisions, and to carry them out very quickly. He cited their completion of construction of the OGRA, a large controlled thermo-­nuclear device, within eleven months of the date of initiating design. The AEC was carefully reviewing means of improving U.S. ability to direct its technical effort, a review that might be helpful in other areas such as space. Mr. McCone concluded his briefing with a discussion of our high energy physics program, an area in which we are well ahead of the Russians. In connection with our four high energy accelerators, Mr. McCone said a careful review was being made of the Stanford accelera­ tor to resolve some technical problems, such as the question of whether the accelerator could withstand earthquakes.
