El Salvador 577 The Minister recalled how many civil wars had been fought in Central America toward the end of the last century and that these had been settled by the Pact of Washington in 1907,7 thanks to U.S. good offices. He hoped that we would be able to do the same in the economic field that we had done in the political sector back in that time. He stressed the need to raise living standards, since there is now no middle class in Central America. Governor Herter said that we had been somewhat distressed by some of the problems that have arisen in practice now that the European Common Market has actually been created. He said that Benelux had been a natural development, but that some new problems had been created or old ones accentuated, rather than helped, by the common market. Minister Rochac referred to the relatively stable financial situation of Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, adding that the other two (Costa Rica and Nicaragua) were not as well off. He thought it was advisable to start with three countries or two, just El Salvador and Honduras, and allow the others to come in gradually. Mr. Rubottom suggested that the future problems of the common market could be solved with good faith, hard work, and by devotion to sound principles in the beginning of the project, just as we are undertaking to do in the establishment of the Inter-American Bank. Governor Herter alluded to the United States’ interest in the Law of the Sea and the conference now foreseen a year from this month, expressing the hope that we would have the cooperation of El Salvador. The Foreign Minister, Sr. Ortiz Mancia, said that they thought we would have their cooperation. They have a constitutional rigidity with respect to the Law of the Sea, but they believe there is a way of harmonizing our two viewpoints. (Later on the Foreign Minister assured Mr. Rubottom that they would be able to do this.) The Economic Adviser to President Lemus, Mr. Jorge Sol, made a very strong plea for U.S. support of the economic integration of Central America.8 Without this, according to Mr. Sol, there is no economic future to Central America, since they are too dependent on just one or two products. 7 Reference is to the General Treaty of Peace and Amity signed at Washington by Representatives of Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador, December 20, 1907; for text, see William M. Mallory (Comp.), Treaties, Conventions, International Acts, Protocols and Agreements between the United States of America and Other
