860h.51/354
[Document 122]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
BELGRADE, February 12, 1923.
[Received March 9.]
No. 1795
SIR: In my Despatch No. 1588 of September 26th last,74 I had the honor to report upon
certain credits contained in the Yugoslav Budget Law for the present fiscal year and
particularly upon credits therein provided for the payment of one year’s interest upon
the advances of $25,000,000 and $15,000,000 respectively made by the Government of
the United States to the Serbian Government. I observed that notwithstanding these
credits, I had been unable to find any credit provided for the payment of interest on the
$12,000,000 advance made by the Government of the United States to the Serbian
Government and I stated that for my information as to the reason for this I had
addressed an informal inquiry to the then Minister of Finance, Dr. Kumanudi.
In Mr. Boal’s Despatch No. 1351 of May 11th last,75 he reported that, in accordance
with the Department’s Circular telegram dated April 21, 12 noon,76 he had
communicated to the Yugoslav Government the ratification of a Resolution adopted by
the World War Foreign Debt Commission on April 18th last and had informed this
Government that this Commission desired to receive any proposals or representations
which the Yugoslav Government might wish to make for the settlement or refunding of
its obligations under the provisions of the Act of Congress approved February 9th
1922. Having received no reply to Mr. Boal’s communication, I addressed on October
3rd last an informal letter to Mr. Gavrilovitch, Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs,
inviting his attention to this fact and requesting that a reply might be sent to me.
As I received no replies to either of my letters mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs, I
invited Mr. Gavrilovitch’s attention to them on several occasions and I was finally led
to the opinion, corroborated by Mr. Gavrilovitch, that Dr. Kumanudi had no intention
of replying to either of them. On the coming into office of the new Minister of Finance,
Dr. Stojadinovitch, I invited his attention to my two letters in the course of a
conversation and he requested me to send him copies of them, assuring me that they
would have his immediate attention. Having done so I finally received on the 10th
instant a letter dated the 7th instant, from Mr. Gavrilovitch in which he communicated
to me the reply to both of my letters of the Minister of Finance. I enclose a copy and
