202
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
More generally, is it possible to adopt the more extreme collective
economic sanctions (option 1(a)) without threatening more in the politi-
cal/military realm? Are our allies likely to support us in what is to
them a drastic economic measure if our political steps seem essentially
litigational? There is general agreement that only fear of some unpleas-
ant consequences is likely to get our allies to help us with the more
drastic economic steps.
3. Specific Military Preparation
Should AWACS proceed to Egypt? Should the rescue option be
reactivated and even some preliminary deployment undertaken? Both
steps could be useful signals of our seriousness. Finally, should F–111’s
be sent to Egypt?
4. Escalating Military/Economic Pressure
If your conclusion is that time is not working in our favor, we
could couple a request for collective financial sanctions by our allies
with the threat—which we should only make if we are serious about
it—to proceed with a direct blockade of our own. Alternatively, we
could begin to apply such a blockade ourselves (by mining), and simply ask
for allied support for that step, rather than insist on an allied initiative
in the economic area.
It is self-evident that any such step by the U.S. will raise the risks
to the hostages. It will have to be accompanied by a credible threat to
escalate military sanctions and by a prior decision to implement such
escalatory steps if the Iranian response to mining is physical harm to
any hostage.
I would urge you to consider such action only if you were prepared
to reach the following two judgments:
(a) That time is not working in our favor, and that
(b) Khomeini needs to be brought down expeditiously.
This leads me immediately into discussion of the next point.
5. Longer Term Political Strategy
At least a portion of the government has operated for almost a
year on the assumption that the U.S. could work with Khomeini. I
believe that recent events have demonstrated that this was, throughout,
a dangerous fallacy. We have to recognize that Khomeini is a dedicated
enemy of the United States, for he sees the U.S. as a greater danger
than even Marxism. To him, America is the embodiment of an anti-
religious and corrupt West, which is all the more dangerous because
its influence has been so pervasively felt in the changing Iranian life-
styles. He is determined to eradicate that influence at all costs and he
hopes to do so by creating a far-reaching rift between the U.S. and Islam.
