592
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Census of Claims. Treasury said that the census could be initiated
at any point, once a decision is made. (C)
Expulsion of Iranian Diplomats. Dr. Brzezinski asked how much time
we should give the Iranian diplomats to depart the U.S. Mr. Saunders
said that we should give them several days to get their affairs in order.
He suggested a deadline of Friday after the announcement is made.
That was acceptable to the SCC. Mr. Saunders added that we can
probably expect a number of the diplomats who hold green cards to
ask for permission to remain in the U.S. (S)
Approve departure deadline by Friday (April 4) after the
announcement.7
Other.
Students. Treasury pointed out that they are currently licensing
about $10 million every two weeks for financial support of Iranian
students in this country. That will be a problem once their consulates
are closed. Mr. Saunders said that the Iranians will have to devise a
method for supporting these students, probably through a protecting
power. It was agreed that a working group chaired by State and includ-
ing Treasury and Justice would meet to work out the details for han-
dling the students. Secretary Brown noted that we have the additional
question of Iranian military students training here. He believed that it
was to our advantage to let these students complete their training, but
this is likely to become a sore point again as it was in the past. [1 line
not declassified] Most of the students express no hostility toward the
U.S., and most of them say they want to return to Iran to help improve
the situation. They are understandably keeping their heads down. We
need to be prepared to deal with questions about their presence which
are certain to arise. The SCC agreed that the Iranian military students
should be permitted to remain to complete their training despite the
sanctions.8 (S)
Seizure of Assets. Although there is no present plan to seize Iranian
assets, draft legislation is being prepared in the event it is needed. (S)
2. Message to Allies. At this point the meeting was reduced to the
restricted group, which reviewed the message to be sent to the allies
informing them of our proposed steps on Iran. The message text was
provided separately to the President.9 (S)
[Omitted here is material on Diego Garcia and Pakistan.]
7 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and initialed in the margin.
8 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and initialed in the margin.
9 The draft is in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Country File, Box 31, Iran 3/80. See Document 223.
