February 1951–February 1952
203
Mosadeq and any other Persian politicians can use this national ir-
responsibility to frame and follow almost any policy. If they fail, they
and their people will blame the Unseen Hand.
IV. Mosadeq’s Political Realism
The Political Realist
Good speech-makers can easily arouse Iranian emotions. To ac-
quire and keep political power, they must be shrewd and realistic poli-
ticians. Mohammad Mosadeq won popular acclaim by easily emulated
techniques, but he showed unusual realism and ability in maintaining
his position and in overcoming the great forces ranged against him. Fa-
naticism leads him in strange channels but his manipulation of Iranian
politics has been masterful.
Understanding Mosadeq has real understanding of the character of
his people and of the factors in Iranian politics today. There is nothing
fuzzy in his thinking on how to overcome or turn to his advantage the
forces which are obstacles to his progress. He recognizes and exploits
the vulnerabilities of his opponents. A leader who does not have this
understanding of political affairs will waste his other talents.
Ruthlessness Mosadeq’s political fixations and ambitions have been
described. His ruthlessness in politics derives from these personal char-
acteristics and has proved a constant source of power in his handling of
previous governments, the Shah, the Majlis, entrenched interests and
foreign influence in Iran. Ruthlessness in action and in attitude is the
basis of his “realpolitik”.
Organization The greatest problems facing any leader in Iran are
the country’s apathy and anarchy. The first comes from public igno-
rance and frustration. The second rises from mutual distrust among all
Persians.37 One of Mosadeq’s most extraordinary feats has been his
welding of nine selfish, power-seeking politicians into a National Front
which acted in cooperation and submerged individual interest into
common purpose. Organization and refusal to disintegrate is probably
the greatest factor in the National Front’s political success.
Propaganda Advertising men agree that a sales campaign must
have a simple, heavily-repeated slogan. When Mosadeq first came to
power he said he had two programs: implementation of the oil nation-
alization law and electoral reform.38 Even this platform was soon re-
37 “I and my tribe against the nation; I and my clan against the tribe; I and my
brothers against the clan; and I against my brothers”—Old Persian Proverb. [Footnote is
in the original.]
38 Address to the Majlis May 3 (Embassy telegram 2661, May 3, 1951). [Footnote is
in the original.]
