1370
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
410.
Record of Meeting Between Israeli Prime Minister Begin and
President Carter1
Washington, November 13, 1980
President Carter’s Notes Regarding his November 13, 1980
Meeting with PRIME MINISTER MENACHEM BEGIN of Israel
(The White House, Washington, D.C.)
I met with Prime Minister Begin privately. He was ill at ease at
first. I told him that I had accepted the result of the election with equa-
nimity. This seemed to have a surprising effect on him for some reason,
and he mentioned it several times.
I expressed my appreciation for his participation and contribution
to the Camp David Accords and peace treaty, and my gratification that
our bilateral relationships had remained strong in spite of many poten-
tial reasons for disruption of them. I pointed out our own security ad-
vantages from having a strong and free, peaceful, independent Israel.
We discussed the political problems that had derived for us from the
Camp David Accords.
He expressed agreement that the oil commitment was very
satisfactory.
I told him that it would be a serious mistake for Israel to go for-
ward with annexation of the Golan Heights. This would in effect signal
to the rest of the world an abandonment by Israel of a commitment to
UN Resolution 242, and it would open up floodgates of demands from
other nations that the UN Resolution be abandoned or severely modi-
fied—something that we had tried to stop. I told him that in my opinion
it was also a violation of the commitment made in the Camp David Ac-
cords. He didn’t respond, but I think he was impressed.
He brought up the subject of military supplies to Iran, saying that
they had requested such help from Israel. He didn’t acknowledge that
they had already made one shipment of tires to Iran. He said that they
would like to make these shipments, they thought it would help
Iran-Israeli future relationships, and would give them an opening to
encourage the hostage release.
I told him immediately that this would be very bad for us, and I
strongly urged Israel not to make any sort of further trade with Iran
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2,
Israel, 4/79–11/81. No classification marking. According to the President’s Daily Diary,
Carter met with Begin in the Oval Office from 11:05 to 11:40 a.m. (Carter Library, Presi-
dential Materials)
