3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
368
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
public support of our efforts in Rhodesia and Namibia to exercising re-
straint in the Horn of Africa. He believed that elimination of Soviet-
Cuban involvement in Africa would be a contributing factor to the13
improvement14 of Soviet-American relations. We were quite concerned
and believed the Soviet Union knew that many other nations were
equally concerned over Soviet efforts15 to increase Soviet influence in
Africa by supply of weapons and by encouragement of Cuban involve-
ment. The President wanted to express this concern to Gromyko and
ask him to report to President Brezhnev that we considered this to be
an alarming development, one that was16 still in progress.
Gromyko said that the Soviet leadership had certainly noted17
some of the President’s recent statements on African matters, which,
whether the President liked18 it or not, also somewhat exacerbated and
heated up the atmosphere as regards relations between our two coun-
tries. In this connection he was now talking about the specific matters
the President had raised in connection with Africa.19 There was no in-
creasing Soviet presence in Africa. The Soviet Union did not have a
single soldier with a rifle in Africa and did not intend to send any to20
that area. The Soviet Union had indeed sent some quantities of arms to
some African countries, as well as a very small number of experts who
were helping the Africans master the use of the arms supplied. Not a
single Soviet individual had fired a single shot in the course of the latest
clashes in Africa, and not a single Soviet individual had taken part in
any operation in that part of the world.21 The Soviet Union had con-
demned the Somali invasion of Ethiopia, had called it open aggression
and had said so directly to the President of Somalia during his visit to
Moscow. Later on President Siad Barre had acknowledged that he had
committed aggression. He had asked the Soviet Union to help him ex-
tricate himself from that dirty war. The Soviets had told him by way of
13 Bartholomew put brackets around “involvement” and “would be a contributing
factor to the.” In the margin above “involvement,” he wrote “intrusion.” In the margin
above “would be a contributing factor to the” he wrote “could alleviate the tensions and
solve a major problem.”
14 Bartholomew added “for” before “improvement.”
15 Bartholomew put “efforts” in brackets and wrote “campaign” in the margin
above it and added “the” before “Soviet,” recommending that “Soviet efforts” be
changed to read “the Soviet campaign.”
16 Bartholomew added “apparently” after “one that was.”
17 Bartholomew added “and paid attention to” after “noted.”
18 Bartholomew put brackets around “liked” and wrote “wished” in the margin
above it.
19 Bartholomew added the sentence “He was discussing Africa quite separately
from SALT.”
20 Bartholomew added “a single African country in” after “send any to.”
21 Bartholomew added “in any other manner” after “world.”
