154 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Some believe that the inability to tag missiles would significantly undermine any NDM limits. These considerations led President Reagan to approve modifications that focus our NDM proposal on the types of missiles that pose the most significant refire threat; namely, mobiles and future missiles that could be designed to be made mobile. OSD sought successfully to have heavy ICBMs added to the list of constrained types. We still have not been able to agree internally what an appropriate numerical limit would be. The options reflect a wide range of agency views on the relative weight of the factors above. OSD believes we have retreated from an important objective in START—­to limit missiles, not launchers—­and is seeking to reinstate NDM limits on most, if not all, missiles. State and ACDA would drop heavy ICBMs from NDM limits and have proposed perfecting amendments to our existing position. JCS prefers no limits on NDMs because they worry about the economic impact and are not concerned about Soviet reloads. Your objective on this issue is to confirm that the issues and options are fairly stated. Although it would greatly facilitate subsequent consideration of this issue, we do not anticipate any narrowing of views at this point. The options (from most to least inclusive) are: — Option 1—Require numerical limits on mobile ICBMs, heavy ICBMs, modern ICBMs (including SS–17 and 19) and all future types of ICBMs or SLBMs. (OSD) Includes SS–17, 18, 19, 24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and all future systems; intended to avoid capturing the D–5. — Option 2—Require numerical limits on mobile ICBMs, heavy ICBMs, and modern ICBMs (excluding SS–17 and 19). (Current position) Includes SS–18, 24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and any future systems meeting the “modern ICBM” definition. — Option 3—Require numerical limits on mobile ICBMs and modern ICBMs and SLBMs (excluding SS–17 and SS–19). (ACDA) Includes SS–24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and any future modern SLBMs or ICBMs. — Option 4—Require numerical limits on mobile ICBMs and “modern” ICBMs (excluding SS–17 and 19). (State) Includes SS–24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and any future systems meeting a definition of “modern ICBM” which would be modified to capture only ICBMs that are transported fully fueled. — Option 5—Require numerical limits on ICBMs that have been deployed in a mobile mode. (JCS fallback)
