suggestion would come as a distinct shock to Peru and that the Peruvian
Government would not consider any proposition to divide the provinces. At
a later date I referred to the remarks made to me in the Embassy by Mr.
Mariategui, President of the Chamber of Deputies and one of the most
influential members of Congress, to the effect that Peru would not consider
any offer, no matter how favorable, from Chile on this subject and that the
Peruvian Government would insist that the whole matter be settled by the
United States. Still later I informed the Department that, in an interview
with President Leguía, he had expressed the hope that the plebiscitary
formula would be fulfilled to the letter; and that the leading Peruvian
newspaper, El Comercio, had denied an assertion appearing in New York
World that identity of the Arbitrator could be kept distinct from that of
Chief Executive of the United States and had made assertion that as
President of the United States had accepted task of arbitration the prestige
and good work of the United States is gravely involved.
No matter what the facts may be, the activity of Latin American countries
looking toward a further arbitration [or?] diplomatic settlement is regarded
here as Chilean intrigue. Any connection of the American representatives in
those several countries with such a movement would be prejudicial to
American prestige here. The question is asked what use would there be of a
further arbitration when Chile refuses, as it is alleged, to comply with the
award already made? The suggestion is then added that there is no more
reason to expect that Chile would comply with another award if it were
unfavorable to her, or not in accordance with her wishes, than there is to
expect a compliance with the one already rendered.
In regard to a diplomatic settlement, Mr. Mariategui and others point out
that futile efforts toward a settlement of that nature have been undertaken
from time to time during the last 40 years, and that in view of the recent
declarations made by Chilean spokesmen it is plainly less reasonable to
hope for a favorable result from further efforts to that end now than it was
heretofore. I believe that these expressions fairly represent all public
opinion of any weight here.
I am satisfied in my own mind, however, that if those Latin American
countries who may indicate an active interest in settlement of question
