712
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
new organization (FOA), there will of course be a limit to both the size
and kind of such programs with the probable result that there will be a
substantial area left open for consideration by a private company en-
gaged in this particular line of business. Moreover, the contribution of
advice and guidance which could be made at this time would be highly
valuable in and of itself alone and certainly any publicity which the
company would be willing to authorize concerning the interest which it
is taking would in all probability redound to the benefit and strength-
ening of the present regime which is understood to be rather favorably
regarded by our government.
295.
Memorandum From Acting Director of Central Intelligence
Cabell to President Eisenhower1
Washington, undated.
Comment on the Iranian situation:
An unexpected strong upsurge of popular and military reaction to
Prime Minister Mossadeq’s government has resulted according to late
dispatches from Teheran in the virtual occupation of that city by forces
proclaiming their loyalty to the Shah, and to his appointed Prime Min-
ister Zahedi.
Mossadeq and his chief of staff Riahi were reported still ensconced
in their respective headquarters but cut off from communications
which are in control of the royalist forces. The city appeared to be gen-
erally under control of royalist forces although some Mossadeq sup-
porters here reportedly still on the streets. The royalists in Teheran
were using the communications systems to urge the people and the
army to rise to the support of the Shah.
The strategic province of Azerbaijan according to radio dispatches
originating from Tabriz is held by royalists but Isfahan radio some two
hundred miles south of Tehran has in a single brief announcement pro-
claimed itself loyal to Mossadeq.
In this confused situation it appears that the tone and content of
the communique´s is definitely anti-communist. Tudeh overt activity
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Iran, 1953–58(8), Box 32. Secret. At the
end of the memorandum is a handwritten note that
reads:
“DDE has
seen
8/21/53—ACW.” Also printed in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954,
pp. 755–756 (Document 349).
