118
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
accuses the GOP of “connivance” in this anti-DRA activity, and says
such action could lead to “severe aggravation in Pak-Afghan relations.”
7. The note goes on to say that the “Soviet Union cannot remain
indifferent to such developments,” especially when “aimed at a country
with which the Soviet Union has a treaty of friendship which it values.”
Moscow “will not allow” Afghanistan to “become the object of attack
no matter what the source.”
8. The Soviet note concludes by saying that the USSR is delivering
this message “in a frank and friendly manner,” and that Moscow would
“not like to believe that the use of Pakistani territory” for dissident
activity “goes on with your knowledge.” The note says that the GOP
should consider the démarche with “all seriousness which this ques-
tion deserves.”
9. Shahi then read from what I presume is a written summary of
President Zia’s reply to Ambassador Azimov. According to Shahi, Zia
told the Soviet Ambassador that:
—he “strongly rejected” the Soviet accusation about the GOP’s
alleged connivance with anti-DRA dissidents; and that,
—the GOP has “scrupulously remained tied” to its policy of “non-
intervention,” and has “done everything possible to keep the refugees
from engaging in anti-DRA activities.”
10. Zia told Azimov that to try to keep the Afghan refugees under
control, the GOP has established two refugee camps—one at Warsak
and the other at Tarbela—and that Azimov could visit either of them
at any time to satisfy himself that no guerrilla training or other military
activity is taking place. Zia said that there are now 35,000 Afghan
refugees in Pakistan and that they are arriving at the rate of 5,000 per
month. The GOP, according to Zia, has been doing the best it can to
keep the groups under control, and has warned Pakistani politicians
not to make statements that will incite refugee activity, or be construed
as anti-Afghan. Zia said that the GOP has ordered the refugee groups
to cease holding press conferences, and that the GOP has provided
“no arms, no training, and no financial support, other than humanitar-
ian aid” to the refugees.
11. The President told the Soviet Ambassador that the real root of
the refugee problem is in the “repression carried out against the Afghan
population by the DRA”. Zia told Azimov that Moscow should
“impress upon Kabul” the need to avoid creating “the conditions that
cause the exodus.” According to Zia, Islamabad would be willing to
cooperate with Kabul in preventing the entry of refugees. (When I
queried Shahi about this later, he said that Zia meant that, if the Afghans
close their border, the Paks would cooperate. Shahi did not think this
a “very realistic proposition” because the border is so porous.)
