582 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV that enhanced our capability to attack hard targets came fairly naturally and at low cost with improving technology. Our ICBMs had improved steadily in accuracy, SLBMs were coming along behind them. The basic questions remain: what advantages would we derive from improved hard-­target capabilities? And how destabilizing might they be? Secretary Brown observed that, should the Soviets not believe their silos to be threatened, they derive a large cost saving because they can retain their present capability in silos for about a third of what it would cost them to buy and operate an equivalent capability in a mobile mode. On the other hand, they probably already believe that Mark 12A, and Trident will constitute effective hard target threats to which they will have to react somehow. It would appear that we are debating with ourselves about the stability issue aspects and hard target capabilities. Secretary Brown commented that the President’s latest speech containing remarks about the large fraction of Soviet capability in potentially vulnerable silos may have misconstrued the issue. With ¾’s of their capability in silos, should they double that capability, they would have 7/8’s of their vastly increased total capability in potentially vulnerable silos, but the invulnerable portion of their forces would remain the same in absolute size. He wondered which side would worry most about such a situation and speculated that we would. Deputy Secretary Christopher commented that stability remained the central issue. Secretary Brown put the question as to whether two hair trigger capabilities were more dangerous than one, if our increasing vulnerabilities made us more likely to preempt, and stated that he didn’t think so. Director Seignious noted that the Congress showed a lot of concern about the dangers of US hard target capability. Secretary Brown commented that the vulnerability of our ICBM force could in a crisis increase our incentives to go first [2 lines not declassified] or effecting concentrated attack on Soviet SS–18s. Mr. Slocombe added that targeting all our Mark 12A warheads on the SS–18 force would be quite effective and a strong incentive for our preempting. Mr. Aaron asked Stan Turner whether the Soviets showed any sign of sensitivity to our debates about stability. Director Turner replied that the Soviets seemed quite unconcerned about stability in a two-­sided sense. They appear to believe in war-­ fighting for meaningful military objectives, were concerned about the size of their residual force after an exchange, and seemed unconcerned that such a pursuit of an improved sense of security for themselves produces insecurity for their opponent.
