1978 345 They would see an American military base in the Sinai as separate from SALT. They don’t believe in linkage. They would not like it but they would accept it. It would not interfere with arms control. Vance: In my session with the SRFC, they went into the question of a military base in the Middle East at length. I said that the suggestion had been put to the U.S. but that we had made no decision. Glenn thought it would be very serious, that it would change the whole relationship with Israel and the Arabs and that it would increase the possibility of our being involved in a conflict. The question is very controversial. Brown: Details on any base in the Middle East will matter in reactions to it. One is whether Israel and Egypt each asked for it. Another is the kind of base—­for example, the JCS are examining a trilateral—U.S.- Israel-Egyptian—­base for training purposes. In any event, the chances of our being embroiled in a conflict in the area would go up if we have a base there. Vance: I think that if a base is critical to a security guarantee and the linchpin that will get us a peace agreement, then we should do it. But it should not just be thrown in at any point. Jones: We are looking at a trilateral training base that would be open to all. The President: Both Begin and Sadat raised the base with me. Sadat said that we should conclude a mutual security treaty with Israel. I need an answer on the base question for the Camp David meeting. The Israelis have always said they don’t want U.S. troops. But I might face a request on the base nonetheless. I don’t know whether we want the base option or not. Looking at our problem in reassuring Saudi Arabia, Iran, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, do we want a land presence in the Middle East or are our ships in the Eastern Mediterranean enough? Brown: We have done a paper which we have given to Zbig and to Cy’s people. There are marginal military advantages to an American military base in the Sinai. But it does mean that we are more likely to be involved in any conflict. If it is needed as a guarantee to secure a peace agreement, then it is sensible and there are military advantages in relation to the region. And a peace agreement in the Middle East cancels out the added risk that a base entails of getting involved in a conflict. Brzezinski: A base helps secure a Middle East agreement. It also gives Saudi Arabia and Iran reassurance. The President: Does the U.S. want a base in the Middle East if we can get a peace settlement without it? Do we want a base to reassure the Saudis and Iran? Brown: We have to be asked to establish a base by Egypt and Israel. If we have choices in the matter, we should not establish a base if it is not necessary to get a peace settlement.
