National Security Policy 187 New last sentence authorizes limited military assistance to uncom­ mitted nations in sufficient quantities and on terms adequate to prevent such nations from accepting Communist military assistance. Para. 20, third sentence (page 8) Estimates that achievement by USSR of relative nuclear parity will result in increasingly provocative actions by the Sino-Soviet Bloc with the corresponding increase in number of difficult decisions to be made by U.S. 50. Letter From Cutler to McElroy1 Washington, May 5, 1958 Dear Neil: The President has just approved the Record of Action of the Meeting of the National Security Council for May 1, relative to NSC 5810—the revision of Basic National Security Policy—and it is being transmitted to you formally. In addition, I thought it might be useful for me informally to summarize the points made by the President at the NSC Meeting which affect the Department of Defense (the following statement of which he has checked): (1) He doubted the validity of the concept that “mutual deter­ rence” provides an umbrella under which “small wars” could be waged in areas such as NATO without expanding into general nuclear war. Accordingly, he thought this concept required further study. (2) He asked for further study and debate on the view that it would be possible to withhold involving our massive nuclear retaliatory capa­ bility in the event that the Soviet Union attacked in the NATO area. (3) He thought there were various alternative courses of action, if we were to strengthen our forces and our capabilities for limited war. One alternative might be at the expense of our nuclear deterrent capa­ bility. If such an alternative were adopted, we would need a detailed accounting by the Joint Chiefs of Staff as to precisely what would con­ stitute a satisfactory deterrent. Another alternative could involve a massive increase in resources allocated to defense. If such a course were adopted, it would be necessary to study what methods might be found 1 President’s comments on NSC 5810. Top Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Office of the Special Assistant for National Security Affairs.
