Honduras  835
islands, and after careful study, we believe the U.S. has the better claim. 
A memorandum discussing more fully the dispute over sovereignty is 
enclosed.2
There is no way to resolve this issue by compromise, since each 
side believes that it has sovereignty. The only method by which it 
can now be resolved, in my judgment, is to have the question of sov-
ereignty decided by an impartial tribunal, the International Court of 
Justice. High officials of the Honduran Government have given indica-
tions that Honduras would probably agree to this course. A statement 
regarding the relevance of the Connelly Amendment3 is enclosed.4
It is likely that the United States will win the case if it is submitted. 
However, even if this were not the situation, I believe it would still 
be highly desirable for the United States to manifest, particularly in 
its relations with a small country such as Honduras, its readiness in 
appropriate cases to accept the resolution of a dispute by an impartial 
tribunal in accordance with international law.
Submission of the Swan Islands dispute to the International Court 
of Justice appears to offer the best available course of action for the 
United States in its relations with Honduras, and it has been the policy 
of the United States to support and foster the peaceful settlement of 
disputes by the International Court of Justice in appropriate cases. The 
Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency have no 
objection to such a course of action.
I request that you authorize me to seek agreement with the 
Government of Honduras for the submission of this dispute to the 
International Court of Justice.5
Christian A. Herter
2 Not printed.
3 On August 2, 1946, the United States Senate passed Senate Resolution 196 enabling 
the United States under certain conditions, to accept the jurisdiction of the International 
Court of Justice. In the course of the Senate’s consideration of this resolution, Sen. Tom 
Connally (D.-Tex.) obtained the adoption of an amendment to the resolution that permit-
ted the United States to reserve the right to exempt all disputes from the ICJ’s compulsory 
jurisdiction that involved the domestic jurisdiction of the United States and to determine 
the definition of the term “domestic jurisdiction.” For the text of Senate Resolution 196, 
79th Cong., 2nd Sess., see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. I, General; The United Nations, 
Document 34.
4 [The text of footnote 4 is missing in the source text.] 
5 According to a handwritten notation on a carbon copy of the source text, the 
Department of State was authorized on December 9, 1960, to proceed with this course of 
action. (Eisenhower Library, Project Clean-Up)
