March 1952–February 1953
425
procurement of such equipment as may be required. [less than 1 line not
declassified] should be maintained with respect to such operations.
d. Perfection of plans concerning the handling of the matter by the
United Nations if and when that becomes necessary.
6. In the event that a communist government achieves complete
control of Iran so rapidly that no non-communist Iranian Government
is available to request assistance, the position of the United States
would have to be determined in the light of the situation at the time, al-
though politico-military-economic discussions leading to plans for
meeting such a situation should be carried on with the British Govern-
ment and with such other governments as may be appropriate. In this
contingency, the United States should make every feasible effort, par-
ticularly through special political operations, to endeavor to develop or
maintain localized centers of resistance and to harass, undermine,
and if possible, to bring about the overthrow of the communist
government.
7. In the event of a Soviet attack by organized USSR military forces
against Iran, the United States in common prudence would have to pro-
ceed on the assumption that global war is probably imminent. Accord-
ingly, the United States should then immediately:
a. Decide in the light of the circumstances existing at the time
whether to attempt to localize the action or to treat it as a casus belli. In
either case necessary measures should include direct diplomatic action
and resort to the United Nations with the objectives of:
(1) Making clear to the world the aggressive character of the Soviet
action.
(2) Making clear to the world United States preference for a
peaceful solution and the conditions upon which the United States
would, in concert with other members of the United Nations, accept
such a settlement.
(3) Obtaining the authorization of the United Nations for member
nations to take appropriate action in the name of the United Nations to
assist Iran.
b. Consider a direct approach to the highest Soviet leaders.
c. Place itself in the best possible position to meet the increased
threat of global war.
d. Consult with selected allies to perfect coordinated plans.
e. Take action against the aggressor to the extent and in the manner
which would best contribute to the security of the United States.
f. Prepare to maintain, if necessary, an Iranian Government-
in-exile.
