Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
253
In the Indian Ocean, we are also ready to take a new initiative to sta-
bilize the situation immediately and then bring about some reductions;
next week we will present a new plan to the Soviet negotiators.
—In general, we are willing to restrict our activities, if the USSR is
ready to reciprocate.
—For example, we would give assurances that we do not intend to
deploy B–52s in the area if the USSR would, in turn, not deploy strike
aircraft.
—We will not alter our present submarine operations if the USSR
reciprocates.
In short, our approach reflects the basic principle of reciprocity, which
should govern all our relations, and above all be manifested in the SALT
negotiations.
—In SALT, you have had a chance to discuss our most recent
proposal.
—We are not seeking unilateral advantages over the USSR, but the
Soviet Union must recognize that we have some serious concerns about
future strategic relationships; no agreement that ignores these concerns
would ever pass the Congress or obtain popular support. Indeed, we
could not sign such a treaty.
—On the other hand, we have taken account of Soviet concerns,
and have gone more than half way to meet them. Our proposals on
cruise missiles have a far greater impact on US forces than on Soviet
forces.
—The Soviet response has been discouraging; we cannot engage in
a process in which the US makes a series of proposals but the USSR
simply rejects them or picks out an isolated element for agreement.
In sum, arms control and SALT in particular is an area where we
can give the relationship a more positive character. Or, it can become a
wedge that drives us apart and leads to actions that both sides may
regret.
As President, you will have to submit a new defense budget to the
Congress.
—If there is progress on the major arms control issues, you can re-
flect this in your budget.
—If not, then the American people will expect us to respond to the
challenge we see in the unconstrained build up of Soviet military
forces.
4. European Security and Cooperation (CSCE)
(The Soviets are quite nervous about the Belgrade Conference;
they frankly do not know what to expect, so whatever you say on this
issue will be a significant foreshadowing of our line in the Conference.)
