National Security Policy 73 63. The probable decline in the international economy during 1958 would increase the vulnerability of many underdeveloped countries to Soviet bloc economic penetration. In times of actual or expected declines in prices and foreign exchange earnings for their major export commodities, the receptivity of these countries to Sino-Soviet propaﺁﺝ ganda against the West increases, as does their willingness to expand trade relations with the bloc. Communist propaganda certainly can be expected to capitalize on the lower levels of economic activity which are in prospect. 64. Over the longer run, prospects for economic growth are favorﺁﺝ able for many areas of the non-Communist world, but rates of growth in most cases are likely to remain well below that projected for the USSR. In Western Europe, it appears likely that, barring a severe US recession, gross national product and levels of consumption will conﺁﺝ tinue to increase at only slightly lower rates than during the last five years. Although long-ﺁﺝterm inflationary pressures are likely to persist, the application of various schemes for trade liberalization and ecoﺁﺝ nomic integration will tend to moderate these pressures, since they will oblige the European countries to adjust their economic and fisﺁﺝ cal policies to those of their neighbors. To the extent that these inflaﺁﺝ tionary pressures are moderated, the European competitive position in other areas will be improved. The outlook is equally favorable for those underdeveloped countries which are rich in resources relative to their sparse populations (e.g., Australia, South Africa, and much of Latin America). 65. For the generally over-ﺁﺝpopulated and poverty-ﺁﺝstricken countries of Africa and Asia, the outlook is less favorable. Most of them lack the degree of political and economic organization necessary for achieving desired rates of economic growth. They are nevertheless committed to ambitious economic development programs which, in the absence of a strong indigenous business community, are largely state-ﺁﺝconducted and state-ﺁﺝfinanced. Government revenues and private savings are in general grossly insufficient to provide for these programs; in many countries inflation is rampant. Economic and political uncertainties, and in some places hostility to foreign investment, are discouraging private foreign lenders and investors and to some extent foreign governments and international institutions as well. In these circumstances, many underdeﺁﺝ veloped countries are becoming increasingly disposed to accept Soviet economic offers. Over the longer run, some of them may see no way to realize their ambitions for economic development, except by adopting the methods which appear to them to have been so conspicuously sucﺁﺝ cessful in the USSR and in Communist China.
