National Security Policy  73
63. The probable decline in the international economy during 1958 
would increase the vulnerability of many underdeveloped countries 
to Soviet bloc economic penetration. In times of actual or expected 
declines in prices and foreign exchange earnings for their major export 
commodities, the receptivity of these countries to Sino-Soviet propa­
ganda against the West increases, as does their willingness to expand 
trade relations with the bloc. Communist propaganda certainly can be 
expected to capitalize on the lower levels of economic activity which 
are in prospect.
64. Over the longer run, prospects for economic growth are favor­
able for many areas of the non-Communist world, but rates of growth 
in most cases are likely to remain well below that projected for the 
USSR. In Western Europe, it appears likely that, barring a severe US 
recession, gross national product and levels of consumption will con­
tinue to increase at only slightly lower rates than during the last five 
years. Although long-­term inflationary pressures are likely to persist, 
the application of various schemes for trade liberalization and eco­
nomic integration will tend to moderate these pressures, since they 
will oblige the European countries to adjust their economic and fis­
cal policies to those of their neighbors. To the extent that these infla­
tionary pressures are moderated, the European competitive position 
in other areas will be improved. The outlook is equally favorable for 
those underdeveloped countries which are rich in resources relative 
to their sparse populations (e.g., Australia, South Africa, and much of 
Latin America).
65. For the generally over-­populated and poverty-­stricken countries 
of Africa and Asia, the outlook is less favorable. Most of them lack the 
degree of political and economic organization necessary for achieving 
desired rates of economic growth. They are nevertheless committed to 
ambitious economic development programs which, in the absence of a 
strong indigenous business community, are largely state-­conducted and 
state-­financed. Government revenues and private savings are in general 
grossly insufficient to provide for these programs; in many countries 
inflation is rampant. Economic and political uncertainties, and in some 
places hostility to foreign investment, are discouraging private foreign 
lenders and investors and to some extent foreign governments and 
international institutions as well. In these circumstances, many underde­
veloped countries are becoming increasingly disposed to accept Soviet 
economic offers. Over the longer run, some of them may see no way to 
realize their ambitions for economic development, except by adopting 
the methods which appear to them to have been so conspicuously suc­
cessful in the USSR and in Communist China.
