XXVIII Summary of Print Volume III (90, 91) He also initially agreed with Defense Secretary McElroy that the Strategic Air Command, under JCS supervision, was the best single authority to plan the targeting of what was a complex, technical prob­ lem and required computer programs. (72, 107) But when McElroy’s successor, Thomas Gates, attempted to implement a single integrated plan in August 1960, he ran into stiff resistance from the Navy. Admiral Arleigh Burke, Chief of Naval Operations, opposed a detailed plan. He wanted more flexibility of arsenal as well as delivery for the unified commanders during a first retaliatory strike. (18, 113) President Eisenhower rejected these arguments, however, and stressed the importance of having a single, rigid plan. While plans for a second strike might allow commanders more leeway, he argued, “you can and must have a firm plan for the first strike” to make it simultaneous and avoid duplication of effort. Although the issue was somewhat different from the legislation to further centralize author­ ity in the Secretary of Defense, in order to tame interservice rivalries on budgetary and personnel matters, which Eisenhower had pushed through Congress in 1958 (3), the need for organizational reform of the military services was similar, and the President lectured the Joint Chiefs on their responsibility to subordinate their bureaucratic self-­ interest to “the nation’s interest.” (113) Believing that “something must be done before he leaves office, because he did not want to leave his successor with the monstrosity we now see in prospect as Polaris and other new weapons come into operating status,” he authorized Gates to set up a Joint Strategic Planning Staff (JSPS) under the direc­ tion of the SAC Commander in Omaha. By the end of the year the JSPS had developed a methodology for preparing a Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP), but Eisenhower expressed dismay over the emerging SIOP’s potential for “overkill.” (125, 127) Another concern was the status of the various U.S. missile systems. President Eisenhower frequently discussed with his senior defense advisers the progress in the Atlas, Thor-Jupiter, Polaris, Minuteman, and Titan programs, to all of which he gave “the highest priority” for research and development. (56, 72, 123) These conversations allowed him to monitor closely the progress in the entire missile field and to suggest improvements. He argued, for instance, that the NSC “ought to look at the costs, what we are doing, how we are doing it, and leave a legacy of thought, if not organization, on this subject.” (72) He was especially concerned that the missile race with the Soviet Union might undermine the U.S. economy. “We must cut the cost of our missile pro­ grams or go broke,” he warned. (56) During the triennium the administration received periodic intel­ ligence estimates of the Soviet Union’s military capabilities, especially its missile systems. (33, 48, 52, 75, 82, 84, 97, 98, 120) But because these
