Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 12. Shah Wali also declined to be pinned down as to whether the Peoples Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) was a Marxist- Leninist party. He said we could judge ourselves from the program of the party. The PDPA, he added, reflected the Socialist structure of the country. Newsom recalled his earlier discussion with then Foreign Minister Amin on the nature of the PDPA in light of U.S. legislation bearing on relations with nations dominated or controlled by the international Communist movement.7 Did Shah Wali consider the PDPA a part of the international socialist movement or as a purely Afghan entity? Shah Wali said the PDPA wanted relations with all parties, not just those in Socialist countries. He assured Newsom that his was a sovereign government not under the influence of another government or party. Afghanistan was faithful to the Non-Aligned Movement and wanted to have a policy of its own. Newsom commented that the U.S. respected “true non-alignment,” but that we had philosophical differences with some countries’ definition of non-alignment—specifically that of Cuba. 13. Saunders said we appreciated the DRA’s interest in controlling the flow of narcotics. Describing narcotics as a major national problem in the U.S., Saunders said we were prepared to work with Afghan authorities and would appreciate any cooperation the DRA might give. Shah Wali brightened visibly in thanking us for mentioning this matter. He said the DRA had burned a cache of hashish last year worth dols 25 million, but the Western press had paid this no heed. Newsom regretted the lack of publicity but said we in the USG had noticed. We recognized the difficulties countries faced in interfering with traditional narcotics culture and trafficking, particularly since narcotics could be an important source of income for poor farmers. It was an act of courage for a government in a country such as Afghanistan to take a strong stand, and we appreciated this. He added this was a positive element in our relations. 14. In closing, Newsom said he wanted to keep the lines of communication between our two countries open. He had asked a lot of questions, but this had been in the interest of finding a basis on which we could improve our relations. He had been encouraged by the reception President Amin had given to our Chargé earlier in the day and hoped this would signal continued improvement in our relations. Vance 7 See Document 26.
