Afghanistan 763 relative to their manpower pool and equipment resources. Probably the most painful element has been that the Soviets’ pride has been badly hurt. The Red Army is being hit hard by bands of irregulars and we doubt if the Soviets considered it possible that such groups could operate so successfully against their forces. 9. Given the resources the two sides have at their command, it seems probable that the Soviets will prevail, but the cost will be higher than they calculated both in military and political terms. The longer it drags out, the more painful it becomes for the Soviets. 10. Chargé’s comments: I agree entirely with this appraisal’s description of the current situation in Afghanistan (paras. 1–7) and with the general thrust of paras. 8 and 9. However, I am a little more optimistic than the COS that the Soviets can eventually be brought to the point where totally destroying the INI forces is not their “only course of action.” If the INI can keep enough pressure on the Soviets for a long enough period of time, and if in the meantime the Soviet diplomatic offensive to bring about acceptance of the status quo can be made to fail, the Soviets might reach the point where a compromise solution seems more attractive to them than an endless continuation of the blood-letting. This will probably require that the INI receive more and better military equipment from the outside than it is now getting, and that carries with it the chance that the Soviets might lash out in frustration at Pakistan, Iran or indirectly at the other “aggressors,” including this Embassy. If the point is eventually reached when the Soviets are ready for a genuine compromise solution, I do not believe their prospects are quite as bleak as para. 9 implies. It is not a given, for instance, that “the Soviets would be isolated from any new government;” Gailani and other resistance leaders have publicly acknowledged that any Kabul government would have to be on good terms with the USSR. Through tribal manipulation and bribery, the Soviets could probably ensure that someone minimally acceptable to them takes over when the point is reached that they are willing to withdraw their troops and the INI is exhausted from years of fighting. 11. [less than 1 line not declassified] Dissem: [5 lines not declassified]
