Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
39
a pioneer in shaping more decent and just relations among people and
among societies.
“Today, two hundred years later, we must address ourselves to
that role, both in what we do at home and how we act abroad—among
people everywhere who have become politically more alert, socially
more congested, and increasingly impatient with global inequities, and
who are now organized, as you know, into some one hundred and fifty
different nations. This calls for nothing less than a sustained architec-
tural effort to shape an international framework of peace within which
our own ideals gradually can become a global reality.
“Our nation should always derive its character directly from the
people and let this be the strength and the image to be presented to the
world—the character of the American people.
“To our friends and allies I say that what unites us through our
common dedication to democracy is much more important than that
which occasionally divides us on economics or politics. To the nations
that seek to lift themselves from poverty I say that America shares your
aspirations and extends its hand to you. To those nation-states that
wish to compete with us I say that we neither fear competition nor see it
as an obstacle to wider cooperation. To all people I say that after two
hundred years America still remains confident and youthful in its com-
mitment to freedom and equality, and we always will be.” (The Presi-
dential Campaign 1976, volume I, part I: Jimmy Carter, pages 351–352)
The full text of the speech was printed in The New York Times on
July 16. Memoranda and comments on the speech drafts are in the
Carter Library, 1976 Presidential Campaign, Issues Office, Issues
Office—Stuart Eizenstat, Box 1, Acceptance Speech, 7/76.
8.
Editorial Note
In the weeks following the July 1976 Democratic National Conven-
tion (see Document 7), Democratic Presidential nominee Jimmy Carter
and
Vice
Presidential
nominee
Senator
Walter
F.
Mondale
(DFL-Minnesota) took part in a series of domestic and foreign policy
meetings in Plains, Georgia, with their primary advisers. Following
each meeting, Carter and Mondale briefed the press and answered
various press queries. At the conclusion of the July 29 meeting with the
Carter–Mondale campaign’s foreign policy advisory group, Carter
commented to the press:
