342 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 3. Boycott of Iranian Products. A unilateral U.S. boycott of all Iranian products, e.g. carpet and agricultural goods, could be helpful in keeping world public attention focused on our seriousness of intent and could raise more public concern in Iran about our ultimate intentions. 4. Break Relations. We may be approaching the moment when this would be an effective gesture. Announcement of a break in relations on January 7 as we approach the next UN vote could help dramatize our seriousness. Covert Action CIA will present a paper to the SCC summarizing their views. It will focus on the following basic questions: 1. Should we focus on maintaining the territorial integrity of Iran or should we stimulate regional/tribal opposition to Khomeini? The paper recommends that our strategic objective should be to preserve Iran’s territorial integrity, but that tactically we must capitalize on regional and tribal opposition. This means walking a narrow line, but it is not impossible. In our contacts with opposition groups, we should make clear our interest in a united Iran. 2. Should we choose a single opposition leader or cooperate with a variety of possible leaders? In fact, there is no single leader in sight at the present time capable of overthrowing or replacing Khomeini. We must keep a number of lines out and capitalize on developments. 3. What groups or leaders appear most promising? The CIA paper examines the obvious candidates. [9½ lines not declassified] 4. What is the impact of a covert action program on the fate of the hostages? The more effective pressure we bring to bear on the regime in Tehran, the quicker they are likely to come to the conclusion that the hostage issue is an unproductive sideshow which must be ended. In addition, the CIA presentation will consider the value of possible military or paramilitary action in promoting political change. The following six areas of interest were identified by David Aaron’s group: 1. [1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified] 2. [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified] 3. [1 paragraph (1½ lines) not declassified] 4. Direct cooperation with Iraq. The Iraqis do not like Khomeini, but they also wish to avoid a return of U.S. influence in Iran. They have been very coy thus far. If we are to get their cooperation, we will have to offer them something more substantial than the promise of “talks” or emissaries. This needs more study. Could David’s group examine this in greater detail and report back to the SCC? 5. [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified] 6. How can a limited military action, e.g. a blockade, be made to work for us, rather than uniting the country against us? The elements of such
