contentions of the respective parties. The Arbitrator accepts the statement on behalf of Chile that only fiftytwo persons have been formally expelled in such a manner as to cause their cases to be formally recorded in the archives of the Ministry of Foreign Relations. But the Arbitrator can not overlook the fact that it is not necessary for the local Chilean officials to make a case of expulsion of record in order to accomplish it and that expulsions may be brought about informally by threats and intimidation without even being brought to the attention of the Chilean Government or made of record in the Ministry of Foreign Relations. In fact the evidence in the record indicates that the majority of the so-called cases of expulsion were brought about through the application or threatened application of the conscription laws and that in many of these cases there was no expulsion in any technical sense of the word. The affiant left “voluntarily” in order to escape the application of the law. The Arbitrator holds that the evidence indicates that the informal expulsions of various kinds have considerably outnumbered the formal expulsions which are admitted and justified by the Chilean agents. How many of these formal or informal expulsions were based on good cause it is impossible to say on the record presented, but it is reasonable to conclude that aside from the conscription cases there were also other cases in which justification could not be successfully established. When all this is said however, it is very far from justifying the picture of mass expulsion and depopulation painted in the Peruvian documents. The Arbitrator finds that Peru’s charges of wholesale expulsion and depopulation are not supported by the record. It is believed that Chile has underestimated the number of expulsions and that Peru has overestimated them. Taking the entire evidence into consideration, and the nature of the ultimate question presented for the determination of the Arbitrator and the principles that must be applied in its determination, as already stated, the Arbitrator is unable to find in the expulsions which have taken place any such serious and deliberate violation of Peru’s treaty rights as to justify Peru in repudiating the plebiscitary obligations of Article 3. The expulsions which have taken place are however relevant in connection with the further question submitted to the Arbitrator. General Persecution of Peruvians through mob violence and otherwise. Little need be said with respect to the question of mob violence which occupies a considerable place in the record. Unfortunately mob violence is not unknown in any country. It occurred in Chile at Iquique both in 1911 and in 1918 and Peruvians suffered. Iquique is some seventy-five miles south of the southern border of Tacna and Arica and what happened at Iquique has no direct bearing upon the matters with which this arbitration is concerned. Unfortunately again a little later on, both in 1911 and in 1918–1919, mob violence occurred in Tacna and Arica and again Peruvians were the sufferers. The responsibility for the mob violence in Tacna and Arica in 1911 and in 1918–1919 on the part of the Chilean Government is not established on this record. Again, the record is full of miscellaneous charges of official persecution of Peruvian citizens in Tacna and Arica. These charges in so far as they are serious, and some of them are very serious, are not sustained by credible and specific evidence. They rest on general
