120
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Our allies are determined to continue activist policies in Eastern
Europe; a hard-line US policy towards these countries would not be
supported by our allies and could lead to increased resistance to steps
against the Soviet Union.
—A policy of cutting back our ties with Eastern Europe would
ease Soviet efforts to enforce conformity in foreign and domestic policy
and leave the Romanians and Yugoslavs further isolated.
—At the same time a policy of business as usual with Eastern
European countries regardless of their position on issues of importance
to us such as Afghanistan or the US hostages in Iran would undermine
our credibility with the governments and peoples concerned.
These factors argue for an activist policy of engagement with East-
ern Europe, designed to preserve the gains we have made in the last
three years and to promote the goals of PD–21—domestic liberalization
and/or foreign policy independence. Such a policy would:
—Respond to the interest of the Eastern Europeans—as already
expressed to us in recent days on a number of occasions—in finding
ways to prevent U.S.-Soviet differences from adversely affecting their
relations with us and with the West as a whole;
—Preserve, to the degree possible, the progress (in trade, claims
negotiations, family reunification, etc.) we have achieved in our
relations with the Eastern European countries;
—Reassure the West Europeans by demonstrating that we remain
sensitive to their special stake in good East-West relations and their
desire to continue an activist policy in Eastern Europe;
—Remind Moscow that we do not concede Eastern Europe as their
sphere of influence and that we have interests and influence in Eastern
Europe that we intend to continue to assert actively.
In following such an overall policy approach, it will be necessary
to adjust our specific actions and initiatives, depending on the public
and private reactions of the individual Eastern European countries to
the situations in Afghanistan and Iran. Our actions should be tailored
to move us closer to our longer-term objective of strengthening Eastern
European independence from the Soviet Union. Our planned actions
are reversible, can be implemented or withheld to match the changing
situation and, while pegged to 1980, have meaning for the longer term.
We intend to make it plain to the governments of the individual Warsaw
Pact countries that we want to pursue a differential policy but our
ability to do so will inevitably depend to a considerable degree on
their behavior regarding the issues of Iran and Afghanistan and their
willingness to improve relations with us despite Soviet pressure to cut
back. We have already told the Bulgarians, East Germans, Czechoslo-
vaks, Poles and Hungarians that excessive rhetoric on Afghanistan will
have a negative effect on the climate of our bilateral relations.
