618
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Next Steps
The final impression of the meeting will be shaped by the commu-
nique issued jointly by the two parties. It must be prepared well in ad-
vance. We need your guidance, therefore, on how to proceed on the full
range of issues that are candidates for discussion.
In response to your admonition that we not be timid in our goals
for the Summit, Tab A contains a statement of our maximum objectives
organized around the agenda as it now stands. However, realism dic-
tates the conclusion that not all these objectives will be attained at the
Summit itself. The Soviets have also stressed to us that they desire “no
surprises.” It follows therefore that these objectives need to be priori-
tized and prepared in advance with the Soviets.
Accordingly, I would welcome your guidance as to which of the
items at Tab A you want us to pursue with particular vigor. Once I
know your priorities, and with your permission, I will ask Dobrynin to
join me and Christopher for a preliminary review of those items which
ought to be discussed with the Soviets in advance of the Vienna
Summit. In this manner, we will enhance the prospects of attaining not
only our broad strategic objectives, but also the more concrete goals
listed in Tab A.
Tab C
Paper Prepared by William Hyland of the National Security
Council Staff24
Washington, undated
Soviet-American Summitry
Summit meetings between the American President and the Soviet
leaders inevitably stimulate great expectations that a new and favor-
able turning point will be reached. Rarely have positive expectations
been justified; in those cases of a relatively “successful” summit, the re-
sults have been produced more by the surrounding or preceding cir-
cumstances than by the actual negotiations between the leaders.
One of the problems is the persistent American belief that such
meetings are of special significance because they: (1) create “goodwill”
among the participants; create a better “atmosphere” for resolving
issues and permit the American case to be made to the leaders that have
the power of decision. These attitudes explain in part why in retrospect
24 Secret. The President wrote “good. J” in the top right-hand corner of the paper.
