44
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Forum for Future Negotiations
Dr. Brzezinski, Secretary Vance and Secretary Brown will decide
later, among themselves, what forum the US will propose for con-
ducting ASAT Treaty negotiations.
18.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 24, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Position Regarding Anti-satellites (ASAT)
You will recall as a result of recommendations emanating from
PRM/NSC–23, “A Coherent Space Policy,” that you established several
principles related to Arms Control for ASAT Systems. These included:
—A goal for our negotiations with the Soviets of a relatively com-
prehensive agreement which would seek to ban all ASAT capabilities
except electronic warfare.
—Discontinuance of testing, use, and dismantling of projected or
current Soviet ASAT capabilities.
—Emphasis on verifiability of our proposals and any subsequent
agreement.
—Vigorous pursuit of our own comprehensive ASAT R&D pro-
gram short of operational or space based testing, carrying to produc-
tion those elements not included in a treaty, and continuing U.S. R&D
after a treaty as a hedge against breakout.
It is on this latter point that our additional deliberations have
caused me to recommend a change in tactics. I now have concerns that
our own prohibition in our directive on U.S. space base testing may in
fact be counterproductive. No doubt the contents of the restriction in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 20, PD/
NSC–33. Top Secret. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig—
on something like this always get DOD & State comment. J. p.s. It’s probably o.k.” On
February 25, Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum to Vance and Brzezinski and added
“I believe the timing is such that we should modify the existing PD before the Secretary of
State has his initial talks with the Soviets to assure that they have this message.” He also
requested “your views on this approach by 1 March.” (Library of Congress, Manuscript
Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82, Brown Files—General #1, ASAT Arms Control)
