3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
122
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
them on his recent trip to Moscow2 with regard to matters concerning
Soviet Jewry. He had met with the same group prior to the trip on
March 24.3 At the April 8 meeting he told them he had given Gromyko
a list of Soviet Jews refused exit visas for Israel as well as the US Exit
Visa Representation List.4 He had not presented any list of prisoners, or
raised any individual cases. During the visit the Soviets were told that
what happens with regard to Soviet-American trade will be affected by
what happens in arms control and emigration. The “drop-out” phe-
nomenon of Soviet emigrants to Israel not going to Israel did not come
up in any way during the visit. The Secretary described the Soviets’
sensitivity about the coming Belgrade CSCE Conference. He said there
had been a general review of the Middle East, and Gromyko had con-
firmed to him that the Soviets had not changed their positions. The
Jewish organizations leaders seemed genuinely very appreciative of
the Secretary’s efforts on behalf of Soviet Jewry. END SUMMARY.
Moscow Trip
Secretary Vance reported that he had personally delivered to For-
eign Minister Gromyko both the US Government Exit Visa Representa-
tion List of Soviet citizens refused exit visas to join relatives in the
United States, and a list of Soviet Jews refused exit visas for Israel. Gro-
myko received the lists and indicated he would look into the matter,
but made no promises. Gromyko had accepted them, though, and not
rejected them. The Secretary had not felt it advisable to present any lists
of prisoners. He had discussed in general terms with Gromyko the ef-
fect of the emigration issue on our bilateral relations, but could not pre-
dict what would happen in the emigration area in the future. The Secre-
tary said his guess was that the Soviets will act with a degree of caution.
It had been made clear to the Soviets that what happens with regard to
trade will be affected by what happens or does not happen in arms con-
trol and emigration.
Schindler asked whether the Soviets linked the human rights and
emigration issues. The Secretary replied that at the first meeting
Brezhnev read a long paper admonishing the US on the human rights
issue. The Secretary said he had responded that we were from different
societies and different systems with different values which produced
some inevitable conflicts, but we were not focusing any attack on the
USSR in our human rights efforts, which reflect universal principles.
After that exchange at the first meeting, human rights had not been dis-
2 See Documents 17–23.
3 The memorandum of conversation from the March 24 meeting is in the Depart-
ment of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—
1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, NODIS Memcons, 1977.
4 See Document 22
