234
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
are underway, will apply the factors Secretary Vance cited in his April
30, 1977, Law Day speech as important to the determination of human
rights policy in particular instances.
A. Diplomatic actions, public statements, and various symbolic acts.
Diplomatic exchanges, ranging from informal talks with officials
or government leaders to formal demarches, are a valuable tool.
Through them we can make our human rights policy understood by
other governments and provide notification of the sanctions or incen-
tives that may flow from our policy. As a general proposition, our ac-
tions with respect to the human rights conditions in any country ought
to begin with such approaches.
Diplomatic actions, of course, extend beyond demarches. In fla-
grant cases we may find it advisable and effective to reduce the level of
our presence in a given country.
Public statements can also promote our human rights goals. By
conveying publicly what we have previously said privately, they add
the force of world opinion to our efforts. Statements can be critical of
particular violations or general attitudes, or they can commend posi-
tive conduct or attitudes. Critical statements will be used sparingly
to preserve their effectiveness. A constant stream of criticism of for-
eign governments may cause the U.S. ultimately to be ignored as a
tiresome and ineffective international scold. While public statements
are an extremely important tool, they must be used with skill and
discrimination.
Symbolic acts can in certain circumstances be even more effective
than public statements and may not present the same risks. They can
encourage countries with good human rights records to persist. Invita-
tions to make state visits, Presidential letters, goodwill missions, spe-
cial visitor programs and the like are highly valued abroad. Directing
them to countries with good or improving human rights records will
send a very effective signal.
There will clearly be circumstances in which we should use sym-
bolic acts to identify the U.S. with representatives of human rights or-
ganizations, or with the victims of human rights abuses who seek or
would welcome such identification. We not only demonstrate thereby
our concern and communicate our support, but we may also add an
element of protection to the organizations and individuals involved. Of
course, there will be circumstances in which such symbolic acts on our
part would actually increase the risks to such organizations and
individuals.
B. Changes in Levels of Security and Economic Assistance and Food Aid.
If we genuinely seek to promote economic and social rights, we
should work to meet the Administration’s objective to increase sub-
