Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
671
leadership, NATO also took the crucial step of adopting a bold,
long-term defense program, which will extend over 15 years.2 That pro-
gram is helping us to increase our capacity to deter or to defeat any sur-
prise attack that may be launched against our European allies and,
therefore, against ourselves.
We are also taking steps to redress the balance in other theater nu-
clear forces. This action, as you know, we’ve been pursuing in the last
few days.
In the early 1960’s, the United States removed its medium-range
missiles from Europe. We could do this then because there was over-
whelming United States strategic superiority. But the Soviet Union did
not show similar restraint. The accelerating development of their rela-
tively long-range, mobile, multiwarhead SS–20 missile is a major esca-
lation in theater nuclear armaments. With the advent of rough strategic
parity, this new missile creates a potentially dangerous weakness in
NATO’s ability to deter aggression. In the SALT II negotiations, we
carefully protected our freedom to correct this weakness.
Just a few hours ago, I was informed that the NATO Alliance re-
solved to strengthen its theater nuclear weapons to offset actual Soviet
deployments. The agreement reached this afternoon in Europe was a
unanimous agreement very encouraging to all of us.3 Now, on the ba-
sis of strength, we can negotiate with the Warsaw Pact to reduce nu-
clear weapons and also to reduce, we hope, conventional weapons
throughout the European theater.
In the area of intercontinental or strategic forces, we also face ad-
verse trends that must be corrected. Improved Soviet air defenses now
threaten to make our strategic bombers vulnerable. The cruise missile
will be our solution to that problem. Production of the first generation
of air-launched cruise missiles will begin next year.
In addition, our land-based Minuteman ICBM’s are becoming in-
creasingly vulnerable because of the improved accuracy of the Soviet
Union’s multiwarhead missiles. That’s why we decided last spring to
produce the MX missile.4 The relatively small number of MX missiles to
be deployed will have mobility and a large number of shelters and will
be far less vulnerable than our present fixed-shelter Minutemen.
2 See footnote 10, Document 90.
3 Reference is to the communique´ issued on December 12 at a special meeting in
Brussels of NATO Foreign and Defense Ministers, the Ministers agreed to deploy 108
Pershing II launchers and 464 ground-launched cruise missiles in order to replace ex-
isting Pershing I–A missiles. In addition, as part of TNF modernization, 1,000 U.S. nu-
clear warheads would be withdrawn from Europe as soon as feasible. For the text of the
communique´, see Department of State Bulletin, February 1980, p. 16.
4 See Document 125.
