German Democratic Republic The Timing There are probably several reasons why the regime chose to act at this time, despite the risk to its efforts to expand economic ties with the West. Attheroot isits determination tomaintainits identity asa separate German state capable of controlling its internal affairs. The regime may have believed that this had to be emphasized at this time to the West Germans, whose ostpolitik is credited by some for the conditions the East Germans find uncomfortable. Inter-German intercourse has increased at the economic and personal level to a point where some West German quarters could speculate last month about the possibility of eventual German reunification. Such speculation is intolerable to the regime, which this year will celebrate the 30th anniversary of the creation of the East German state, because it raises the fundamental question of the permanence of that state and, thus, the obligation of its citizens to give it their allegiance. [classification not declassified] The measures were, no doubt, cleared with the USSR, which has ruled out German reunification. The political concessions made by East Germany to the West—and West Germans, in particular—in the 1970s have, in part, been in support of the USSR’s policy of detente with the West and improved relations with West Germany. The USSR may not be loath to see speculation on the reunification question because it emphasizes to the East German leaders—and to the Poles—their ultimate reliance on the USSR for the perpetuation and integrity of their state, and, thus, their obligation to follow Soviet dictates. But the Soviets would not wish reunification to become a credible notion in East Germany, where it strikes a responsive chord with the public and, perhaps, even with some in the bureaucracy. The Soviets could even have been responsible for the timing of the East German moves. [classification not declassified] A further impetus for instituting repressive measures now is the country’s deteriorating economic situation. Faced with a serious balance of payments problem with the West,the regime has critical resource allocation decisions to make, and the result could be a conscious reduction of economic growth, with all that would mean in terms of greater austerityforthepublic.Thiscouldleadtoapartialabandonmentoftheregime’s consumer-oriented policy, which has been the basic theme of its appeals forpopularsupport. Beforesuchareversalbecameobvious tothepublic, the regime would presumably wish to remind the people of the powers of the state to enforce public discipline.2 [classification not declassified] 2 According to a sources list, the memorandum was based on the following tele-
