German Democratic Republic
393
The Timing
There are probably several reasons why the regime chose to act at
this time, despite the risk to its efforts to expand economic ties with the
West. Attheroot isits determination tomaintainits identity asa separate
German state capable of controlling its internal affairs. The regime may
have believed that this had to be emphasized at this time to the West
Germans, whose ostpolitik is credited by some for the conditions the East
Germans find uncomfortable. Inter-German intercourse has increased at
the economic and personal level to a point where some West German
quarters could speculate last month about the possibility of eventual
German reunification. Such speculation is intolerable to the regime,
which this year will celebrate the 30th anniversary of the creation of the
East German state, because it raises the fundamental question of the per-
manence of that state and, thus, the obligation of its citizens to give it
their allegiance. [classification not declassified]
The measures were, no doubt, cleared with the USSR, which has
ruled out German reunification. The political concessions made by East
Germany to the West—and West Germans, in particular—in the 1970s
have, in part, been in support of the USSR’s policy of detente with the
West and improved relations with West Germany. The USSR may not
be loath to see speculation on the reunification question because it empha-
sizes to the East German leaders—and to the Poles—their ultimate reli-
ance on the USSR for the perpetuation and integrity of their state, and,
thus, their obligation to follow Soviet dictates. But the Soviets would not
wish reunification to become a credible notion in East Germany, where
it strikes a responsive chord with the public and, perhaps, even with
some in the bureaucracy. The Soviets could even have been responsible
for the timing of the East German moves. [classification not declassified]
A further impetus for instituting repressive measures now is the
country’s deteriorating economic situation. Faced with a serious balance
of payments problem with the West,the regime has critical resource allo-
cation decisions to make, and the result could be a conscious reduction
of economic growth, with all that would mean in terms of greater auster-
ityforthepublic.Thiscouldleadtoapartialabandonmentoftheregime’s
consumer-oriented policy, which has been the basic theme of its appeals
forpopularsupport. Beforesuchareversalbecameobvious tothepublic,
the regime would presumably wish to remind the people of the powers
of the state to enforce public discipline.2 [classification not declassified]
2 According to a sources list, the memorandum was based on the following tele-
grams: telegram 2158 from East Berlin, April 20, (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790184–1205); telegram 2176 from East Berlin, April 21, (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790185–0678); telegram 7089 from Bonn,
April 19, (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790180–0326); telegram
2249 from East Berlin, April 25, (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D790191–1118); and telegram 2265 from East Berlin, April 25, (National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790191–0838).
