Eastern Europe Region 45 issues and the fact that it is US registration procedures which are delaying commencement of talks, we have not made a claims settlement a condition for specific current movement in relations. Given the Belgrade CSCE meeting and the keen East German interest in developing its new relationship with the US, especially in the trade area, the GDR recently has undertaken to clear up all outstanding US humanitarian cases. However, the consular agreement, which otherwise is virtually completed, has been tied up over GDR insistence that the text include specific definition of East German nationality. Both Options III and IV would still require completion of a consular agreement before more significant steps could be taken with the GDR. As with Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia, we would require that gross violations of human rights be eliminated and that at least some concrete progress be achieved in the human rights area. Both options also would exclude MFN/credits eligibility for the GDR prior to conclusion of a satisfactory consular convention. The difference between the two options is that Option III would also require progress in the claims talks as a condition for further movement, while Option IV would be prepared to move toward progress in other areas before movement on a claims settlement, the completion of which is liable to take years. Proponents of Option III acknowledge the political and industrial importance of the GDR and share the Option IV wish for the gradual development of more normal relations with the East German government and people. Incremental movement to that end would be acceptable. But they believe that it would be unwise to move to structure or formalize our cultural, scientific or commercial relations, or to engage in political-level visits, before the consular convention were concluded and until progress also were made toward an acceptable claims agreement. This is because of our previous deferral of the consular and claims issues and the domestic political ramifications of the claims issue. Implementation of Option IV with the GDR would be based on three assumptions: (a) that both because of its strategic and its industrial potential, the GDR is a nation which deserves significant American attention; (b) that the East German desire for recognition and the need for increased trade with the West provide us with a certain amount of leverage; and (c) perhaps most importantly, that with a regime as suspicious and frightened as that of the GDR, taking the initiative to establish a broader basis from which to conduct relations will over the long run pay more dividends than a policy of demanding prior concessions for each forward step. Option IV, while also conditioning further programs in conclusion of a consular convention would represent a somewhat more flexible strategy, accepting on a limited basis
