350 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —from one another, through internal exile, voluntary and involuntary emigration, and intimidation; and —from the Soviet public, by moves ranging from press attacks to arrests and incarceration. Despite these measures, dissidents remain active, though some are disheartened. Others continue their personal contacts with Westerners, and new members are joining the small group monitoring the Helsinki accords. Soviet emigration to Israel rose to 17,146 in 1977, a 22-percent increase over 1976 (14,875). Eastern Europe. Life for non-conformists in Eastern Europe remains difficult. Some easing of restrictions has occurred in some countries, while the situation has retrogressed in others. Polish and Hungarian authorities broadened official tolerance of diversity in 1977, and in Poland, the authorities have engaged in an increasingly meaningful dialogue with regime critics. Yugoslavia continues to maintain a relatively liberal approach to individual rights. In contrast, the official Czechoslovak approach to human rights has been extremely strict, involving trials, harassment, intimidation, and job denials. Three countries (Yugoslavia, Poland, and Romania) declared broad amnesties affecting a number of political prisoners. Most of the East European countries, however, have sought to deal with human rights concerns through a variety of expedients designed to minimize international criticism while precluding meaningful internal change. A favorite device has been to pressure dissidents to emigrate, thereby avoiding the need for further sanctions against the individual while at the same time reducing domestic dissidence. East Asia and the Pacific Key non-Communist countries in the area demonstrated marked sensitivity, and in some cases, responsiveness to foreign human rights criticism and pressures. The primary human rights violators in the area, however, continued to be the Communist states, particularly Cambodia, North Korea, Vietnam, and Laos. South Korea. In response to international opinion and pressures during 1977, the government relaxed press censorship, improved living conditions for imprisoned dissidents, and handled student protests in October with restraint. While the government continued to arrest and try violators of Emergency Measure 9 (EM–9), by year’s end it released 16 well-known political prisoners in exchange for statements of repentance. Other EM–9 prisoners, including Kim Tae Chung, are expected to either be released or have their sentences reduced in 1978. Indonesia. The government on December 20 carried out its pledge to release 10,000 prisoners who had been arrested and detained fol-
