Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
55
27.
Presidential Directive/NSC–371
Washington, May 11, 1978
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Interior
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Secretary of Commerce
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs
Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Director of Central Intelligence
Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
SUBJECT
National Space Policy (U)
This directive establishes national policies which shall guide the
conduct of United States activities in and related to the space programs
and activities discussed below. The objectives of these policies are (1) to
advance the interests of the United States through the exploration and
use of space and (2) to cooperate with other nations in maintaining the
freedom of space for all activities which enhance the security and wel-
fare of mankind. (C)
1. The United States space program shall be conducted in accord-
ance with the following basic principles. (U)
a. Commitment to the principles of the exploration and use of
outer space by all nations for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of
all mankind. “Peaceful purposes” allow for military and intelligence-
related activities in pursuit of national security and other goals. (C)
b. The exploration and use of outer space in support of the national
well-being and policies of the United States. (U)
c. Rejection of any claims to sovereignty over outer space or over
celestial bodies, or any portion thereof, and rejection of any limitations
on the fundamental right to acquire data from space. (U)
d. The space systems of any nation are national property and have
the right of passage through and operations in space without interfer-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 20,
Folder 1, PD/NSC–37. Top Secret.
