Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —We have offered several first line systems to Yugoslavia, and the denials were not discriminatory, given restraints we have placed on arms transfers. 2. Terrorism U.S. Objectives: To seek to minimize the impact of anti-Yugoslav emigre activity on our bilateral relationship; to affirm publicly and privately that the U.S. supports neither the methods nor the goals of anti-Yugoslav terrorists; to gain Yugoslav support for effective international measures to eliminate terrorism in all forms. Yugoslav Objectives: To urge more effective U.S. action to prevent anti-Yugoslav acts by emigre terrorists and to prosecute those responsible. Essential Factors: The activities of anti-Yugoslav emigres in the U.S. have bedevilled our relations for years, and the prospect of massive demonstrations against Tito could seriously undermine whatever gains derive from the visit. The number and seriousness of anti-Yugoslav acts over the past two years are alarming, but in two cases the perpretrators were convicted and given stiff sentences. On the international level, Yugoslavia acknowledges the seriousness of the problem but has been reluctant to break stride with the nonaligned majority and the radical Arabs by agreeing to tough measures. Points to be Made: —We support neither the separatist goals nor the terrorist means of anti-Yugoslav extremists. —(if necessary) We deeply regret the presence of demonstrators during this visit, but urge that their importance not be exaggerated. We have a highly diverse population, and the “anti” voices often ring loudest. But the vast majority of Americans support good relations with Yugoslavia and feel great respect for President Tito. —We are actively concerned about the number and seriousness of anti-Yugoslav incidents in this country and will make every effort to catch the perpetrators. —The seriousness of this issue on the international level requires effective action by the entire world community without regard to the alleged motives of the terrorists. —Our position is not politically motivated; we oppose terrorism in all forms and for whatever alleged purposes. —We seek Yugoslav support for effective UN action to suppress international terrorism. 3. Nuclear Non-proliferation and the Krsko Fuel License U.S. Objectives: To convince Tito that our efforts to obtain additional assurances covering the export of fuel for the Krsko (KERSH-ko) reactor
