preferred to make was that if we entered into an agreement to renounce war
we did so because we intended to keep it, and that having entered into such
an agreement we would not thereupon seek its violation through
committing an act of war. What we were talking about was, after all, the
renunciation of war, not a search to determine just how far one nation could
push another without bringing on war. Chamberlain agreed, but went on to
say that this doubt was the one which Briand had in mind. He closed our
interview by saying that as soon as the British attitude was determined he
would send for me; at that time he would wish to ask me certain questions
by way of interpretation.
There are two suggestions which I am venturing to make:
1. Would the addition of a further argument to paragraph headed
“Covenant” in your telegram No. 97, April 23,41 not be helpful?
Obviously the League of Nations can function only as soon as the
great powers or a sufficient majority of them agree. The entire
League structure falls when they seriously disagree. Your
proposal takes on special significance at precisely this point; for,
as it covers a wider field than the Covenant covers, it thereupon
brings into operation the pledges to renounce war made with
nations which are not in the League. Therefore it is a new and
added security.
2. As Briand has now made counterproposals, I am strongly of
opinion that Chamberlain will endeavor to act as mediator
between him and you, and thus by degrees gain for himself and
Great Britain full credit for whatever treaty may result. My
suggestion is, therefore, that it might possibly be expedient to
give to American press such a statement as that which is
embraced in your telegram No. 97. Its form and tone are
admirable, and it is most convincing. As far as we are concerned
it defines the possible limits of negotiations, and if a treaty results
from them it can be only along the lines that you and not
Chamberlain have laid down. Publication would also serve to
strengthen popular sentiment in all quarters in favor of your
proposal.
