793.00/57 [Document 642] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State MANCHESTER, MASS., July 3, 1925. [Received July 6.] No. 677 SIR: On instructions from His Majesty’s Government, I have the honour to draw your attention to the note recently addressed by the Chinese Government to the Corps Diplomatique at Peking—the text of which you will no doubt have received from the United States representative at that capital, as also the suggested reply thereto submitted in the form of an identic telegram to their respective Governments by the heads of the Legations concerned. 2. His Majesty’s Government are impressed by the magnitude of the issues raised by this note, which include the question of extraterritoriality in all its aspects and the future attitude of the Powers towards the demands of China in such matters as the revision of treaties, the suppression of mixed courts, the retrocession of leased territories and fiscal autonomy. They have consequently devoted the most careful study to the suggestions contained in the identic telegram and I now have the honour to lay before you their comments thereon to which His Majesty’s Representative at Peking has been instructed to conform his action. 3. In the first place, His Majesty’s Government are of opinion that the reply to the note of the Chinese Government should make it clear that the Powers are not prepared to discuss particular reforms, much less to review their Treaty relations with China until order has been fully restored and the Chinese Government have given proof of their determination to repress antiforeign agitations and to enforce respect for the safety of foreign lives and property. Provided that these conditions are emphasized and placed in the fore-front of the reply, His Majesty’s Government approve the reference to the meeting of the Tariff Conference as worded in the identic telegram. 4. As regards the question of extra-territoriality, His Majesty’s Government are apprehensive lest the Chinese Government interpret a promise to expedite the meeting of the Commission as a sign of weakness on the part of the Powers. In these circumstances, they are disposed to think that the Powers
