Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Memorandum From Gregory Treverton of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, July 15, 1977 SUBJECT Policy Toward Eastern Europe This memorandum is a response to your request, sent along by Rick,2 for the status of policy toward Eastern Europe. Eastern Europe was one of four PRM–9 (Europe) follow-on studies we commissioned3 (the others were CSCE, European Communism, and general approach toward Western Europe). I think only two of those four—Eastern Europe and CSCE—should go forward for PRC consideration. The Western Europe response raises some interesting longer-term issues, but they are not the sort that require, or are ready for, immediate decision. Similarly, the European Communism is a good description of our current approach, and I doubt that we can say much more in a general way until we have a better analytic base for understanding the implications of those powers sharing power in Western Europe. More specific, short-term decisions—for instance with regard to France or Italy—should, I think we all agree, be handled in frameworks more restricted than PRM processes. However, the Eastern Europe and CSCE studies should be brought rapidly to PRC consideration and then, I think, to Presidential decision.4 We badly need Presidential determinations in both cases. David5 and Bob6 talked about the timing of a PRC meeting on CSCE, and Bob and I met with George Vest today. We agree that the meeting should be soon, but after the preparatory conference in Belgrade ends so that Sherer can participate. That will probably mean the very end of July.7 We will continue to consult with State. A meeting on Eastern Europe might be coupled with CSCE, but CSCE probably will require a meeting 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 27, PRM– 9 [2]. Confidential. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum: “RI, GFT—good memo—push for a paper and meeting. ZB” and indicated that the memorandum should be returned to Treverton and Inderfurth. 2 Inderfurth.
