January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1229
365.
Editorial Note
On April 30, 1980, in a vote taken by the United Nations Security
Council, the Tunisian-sponsored draft resolution S/13911 on Pales-
tinian rights, proposed on April 28, was vetoed by the United States.
Under the proposed draft resolution, introduction of which restarted
the round of Security Council consideration of the issue of Palestinian
rights that had occurred from March 31 to April 9, the Security Council
would affirm “that the Palestinian people should be enabled to exercise
the inalienable right to self-determination, including the right to estab-
lish an independent state in Palestine; the right of Palestinian refugees
to return to their homes and live in peace with their neighbors; and the
right of those choosing not to return to receive equitable compensation
for their property.” Moreover, the draft resolution reaffirmed the prin-
ciple that Israel “should withdraw from all Arab territories occupied
since June 1967, including Jerusalem; decide that appropriate arrange-
ments should be established to guarantee the sovereignty, territorial in-
tegrity and political independence of all States in the area, including the
sovereign independent State of Palestine, and the right to live within
secure and recognized boundaries; decide that these provisions should
be taken fully into account in all international efforts and conferences
organized within the United Nations framework for the establishment
of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East; and re-
quest the Secretary-General to take all the necessary steps, as soon as
possible, for the implementation of the resolution and to report on the
progress achieved.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, page 380) For
the full text of the draft resolution, see telegram 1672, from the U.S. Mis-
sion to the United Nations, April 29. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800262–0961)
With the introduction of the Tunisian resolution impending, the
U.S. preference was to “avoid” a veto of the proposed text, as the per-
ceived “decision” of the Palestine Liberation Organization to “force a
vote” on the resolution “could provide a pretext for calling an emer-
gency special session of the General Assembly.” “To do so” the Depart-
ment of State observed, “it will be necessary to prevent the resolution
from obtaining nine yes votes.” The United States could count on four
abstentions, but some delegations previously thought to be abstaining,
such as the Philippines and Mexico were “wavering” after revisions
proposed by the resolution’s sponsors. The text, from the U.S. perspec-
tive was also problematic as it did not “specifically reaffirm Resolution
242,” though a paragraph critical of Camp David had previously been
deleted. (Telegram 112025 to multiple posts, April 28; National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800212–1008) In his state-
ment to the Security Council issued in connection with the U.S. veto,
