768 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Unites States know that it is difficult to fully control political activities against other countries and that the regrettable expedition against Haiti in July 1958 which had left from Unites States soil was an example of this (Mr. Rubottom again expressed our deep regret over this occurrence). Mr. Rubottom noted that we understand that Haiti has been brining to the attention of other governments any information it has on activities in those other countries which it believes threaten Haiti. Mr. Rubottom expressed our hope that effective action will be taken through the Organization of American States to allay present Caribbean tensions. He said, however, that should this recourse not prove to be adequate then the United States would have to consider whether other measures would be required. He remarked that we are disturbed over the irresponsible attitude taken by a small number of individuals, or governments, in Latin America. Concluding the foregoing remarks, Mr. Rubottom asked for the Ambassador’s views on the present situation to which the latter replied that the Haitian Government is still very concerned over reports of impending invasions. The Ambassador said that the situation in Haiti is “volatile” and that some persons, even in the Cabinet, think anything might happen. The visits of U.S. Naval ships to Haitian ports was also mentioned by Mr. Rubottom as a gesture of U.S. friendly concern for Haiti in present circumstances. In response to Mr. Rubottom’s query as to the crop outlook, the Ambassador said that it looks like a “bumper” coffee crop which will ripen early. The Ambassador mentioned also his Government’s hopes that the proposed sugar mill in northern Haiti will be financed by the Development Loan Fund since completion and operation of this mill would furnish new employment in that area and make an important contribution to Haiti’s economy generally. Mr. Rubottom recalled his discussion of this with Ambassador Bonhomme last month and noted that the Department has done what it can to move this matter forward as rapidly as possible. He said that he does not like to make predictions but he hopes that a decision will be reached shortly. In response to Mr. Rubottom’s inquiry as to President Duvalier’s health, Ambassador Bonhomme said he had seen the President when he was in Haiti two weeks ago and found him looking better than he had expected. He said the President has been getting around town in an automobile and even had a slight accident. The Ambassador believes the President will have to avoid henceforth the “killing pace” he had set for himself before and that the President will have to delegate more responsibly to others. The Ambassador said that the President feels that Ambassador Drew saved his life by getting a specialist over from Guantanamo to examine him.5 He described the relations between the President and 5 The emphasis appears in the source text.
