122  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
PROGRAM FOR LATIN AMERICA
The United States and its neighbors in Latin America enjoy a special 
relationship rooted in unique and enduring ties of history, geography 
and trade. As neighbors we have worked in close political association 
through the Organization of American States. We have jointly devel-
oped and strengthened our economic and financial relationships. We 
now propose to join forces to deal with the pressing needs for social 
progress with which so many of our neighbors are confronted.
Despite notable and substantial economic growth in much of Latin 
America, despite rapid industrial development in many areas, despite 
some increases in agricultural production, the great majority of the peo-
ples of these nations have achieved little improvement in their standard 
of living.
Among the reasons for this situation, several have particular sig-
nificance. A very high rate of population growth has consumed a large 
part of increasing production. The general living standard has been so 
low that large percentage increases have involved only small gains in 
absolute terms. Productivity has been greatly hampered by the lack of 
education and training. Finally, outdated economic, legal and social 
practices and institutions have frequently impeded growth.
Thus, we find masses of people still living in extreme poverty, 
without adequate prospect of favorable change. At the same time there 
is wide popular appreciation in Latin America that such conditions 
need not exist and mounting demands that they be improved. Unless 
hope for improvement can be given, the prospect is for increasing frus-
tration and unrest which can only lead to violence and destruction.
To provide an adequate response to these pressing needs is a task 
which will take effort, money and time. It will require initiative, effort 
and courage on the part of the Latin American governments to adopt 
and adhere to policies and actions which will assure their peoples a rea-
sonable degree of social progress. We believe that the governments of 
Latin America recognize this need and that they have the will and the 
determination to take the necessary actions. This is a primary require-
ment for success.
While it is the Latin American countries themselves which of 
necessity must find the ways to solve these problems, few if any of 
them possess the means to do so alone. They need help—­help in devel-
oping effective programs and help in the form of outside financing.
To provide such help is the purpose of the new social develop-
ment program which we are proposing. We would contribute cap-
ital resources and technical assistance to support the efforts of those 
Latin American countries which are prepared to initiate effective insti-
tutional improvements and self-­help measures in the field of social
