450
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
technical limits on containment, only to nuclear experiments whose
yield limits would be about 100 tons.
(S) Quota and Phase-out Alternatives. Both the quota and phase-out
alternatives are variants on the permitted experiments theme. How-
ever, as presently conceptualized, both approaches would permit
testing at a much higher kiloton threshold than envisaged under the
permitted experiments option.
(S) The quota approach would apply a stringent limit on the num-
ber of tests allowed each year (e.g., 2–5). The purpose of the testing
would be stockpile maintenance, i.e., tests only for conversion to
“woodenized” warheads, recertifying rebuilt warheads, or fixing
problems. If no lower limit were imposed, the 150 KT threshold of the
TTBT could govern, but this approach could be coupled with a reduc-
tion of the 150 KT threshold.
(S) The phase-out approach would be constructed explicitly to at-
tempt transition to “wooden” warheads which might be designed to be
replaceable with only limited design guidance or testing. As in the al-
ternative above, the TTBT could govern yield unless otherwise speci-
fied. The duration could be specified by the number of years or tests or
both (e.g., 10 years or 25 tests, whichever comes first).
(S/RD) Combination of Alternatives. Possibly more attractive than
any of the individual alternatives—both for achieving the “tightest”
possible CTB for non-proliferation purposes and for achieving high
stockpile reliability—would be a combination. For example, a quota (5
tests per year) at a reduced yield threshold (15 KT) for a phase-out pe-
riod (5 years), followed by permitted experiments (sub-kiloton), and
with the purpose of all tests being rigorously limited by description to
stockpile maintenance. During the phase-out period, a periodic review
would be conducted to assess the progress in achieving the desired
goal. If success was not likely, it might not follow that the transition
would be made to the “permitted experiments” phase. If it made nego-
tiating strategy easier, this could be approached on a “Phase I, Phase II”
basis. In all alternatives nuclear effects testing could be “piggy-backed”
on weapons tests. (Note that this combination will not allow high-yield
testing to resolve problems that may occur with secondaries.)
(S/FRD) Implications of the Alternatives (U)
[1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified]
(S) Non-Proliferation. The implications of the various alternatives to
maintain stockpile reliability under a CTB for our non-proliferation ob-
jectives are difficult to determine. By agreeing to a CTB, the U.S.,
U.S.S.R., and U.K. will have taken a major step toward achieving the
over-all objectives of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. We will be severely
constrained in the development of new weapons even if nuclear experi-
