International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1053 are to meet the basic needs of poor people in the developing world and to give them a chance to improve their standard of living by their own efforts. The Act of 1954 requires consideration of the extent to which a recipient country is undertaking self-help measures to increase per capita production, including carrying out voluntary programs to control population growth. This is consistent with and reinforces NSC approved policy concerning the Ambassador’s role in making more effective use of our food assistance in stimulating countries to deal more effectively with their population/food problems. 2. We believe it is necessary to focus host countries’ attention on this issue. We have in mind (A) long term projected worldwide food shortages, based on FAO, USDA and other data, and (B) the Congressional requirement stated in Section 103(A) that our assistance be increasingly concentrated on countries that make effective use of such assistance, including their performance in improving agricultural output and nutrition and reducing population growth. 3. This administration’s emphasis that food and other assistance serve all development interests, to which population is integrally linked, reinforces the need for these instructions. 4. As appropriate in your normal contacts with top leadership of host government, you should discuss need for cooperation of Third World countries to resolve pressing global problems that affect all nations, including rapid population growth and inadequate food production. The principal purposes of our assistance programs are to meet the basic needs of the poor people in the developing world and to give them a chance to improve their standard of living by their own efforts. 5. In your presentation, you should make clear that we are not attempting to establish a condition for U.S. assistance. On other hand, projections of food/production trends suggest that U.S. and other major food-exporting countries (of which there are only five: Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Argentina and Thailand) as well as EEC will not be able in the long run to meet projected world food demand. As determined by the International Food Policy Research Institute, population in developing countries (excluding People’s Republic of China and other Asian Communist countries) will exceed 2.5 billion by 1985. Of them, 2.2 billion may well be living in food deficit countries, making the present precarious situation much more alarming in the absence of corrective actions. In addition, the logistics of food transport and storage will become an increasingly difficult problem. 6. We suggest you make point that, in a situation in which supplies may simply be inadequate to meet demands, prudence suggests that we jointly cooperate with food-deficit countries to explore ways in which their domestic supply and demand can be brought into balance. Efforts to increase agricultural production are a vital part of such solu-
