280  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
83.	
Briefing Note for the 374th NSC Meeting1
Washington, July 31, 1958
ITEM 3—OPERATIONAL CAPABILITY OF RECONNAISSANCE 
SATELLITES
1. Last January, the Council noted (NSC Action No. 1846) that the 
President had established certain missile and related programs “as hav­
ing the highest priority above all others for research and development 
and for achieving operational capability; scope of the operational capa­
bility to be as approved by the President.”
2. Included were “satellite programs (other than VANGUARD and 
JUPITER C determined by the Secretary of Defense to have objectives 
having key political scientific, psychological or military import.”
3. On April 10, 1958, Defense advised that pursuant to delegated 
authority, the Secretary of Defense had determined that the Air Force 
reconnaissance satellite vehicle program was a satellite program having 
key political, scientific, psychological or military import.
4. Before proceeding to the question of operational capability, I am 
going to call on Mr. Quarles to give the Council a brief report on the 
status of the reconnaissance satellite program—­its progress, objectives, 
potentials, and priority.
5. There has been circulated to you a table which shows a proposed 
launching schedule. I should point out, however, that the Council is not 
being asked to approve any specific number of test shots. That decision will be 
worked out in due course through the normal budgetary process. Mr. Stans 
understands this.
(CALL ON MR. QUARLES)
6. On July 3, there came before the Council the question of Presidential 
approval of the “scope of the operational capability” of the reconnais­
sance satellite. The Council noted and discussed a Defense Department 
recommendation on operational capability, but deferred action on the 
recommendation pending study and report back to the Council by Dr. 
Killian on July 31 (NSC Action No. 1941).
7. Before the Council today is the original Defense recommenda­
tion and Dr. Killian’s proposed amendment thereto, as shown on the 
sheet before you. The JCS have indicated their concurrence with Dr. 
Killian’s modification, which clarifies the language and makes clear that 
Presidential authorization will be sought before any actual launching 
1 Source: Operational capability of reconnaissance satellites. Top Secret. 4 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
