Yugoslavia 909 277. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Vest), the Director of Policy Planning (Lake), and the Assistant Secretary of State for Politico- Military Affairs (Bartholomew) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, January 18, 1980 SUBJECT Yugoslavia, the Tito Succession, and the Afghan Crisis The short-term prospects for an orderly transition following Tito’s death are good—but we cannot be certain. A collective Presidency will take over power, rotating jobs on an annual basis. With their current preoccupation with Southwest Asia, the Soviets may, particularly if they pursue an active Euro-detente policy, take a reasonable, hands-off posture toward Yugoslavia. However, the Soviets will view the post-Tito period as a singular opportunity to influence Yugoslav policies in their favor. They will pay special attention, through inducements and threats, to interest groups within the government, party, and military establishments, and may provide covert support to divisive elements. The overriding Soviet objective will be to keep the Yugoslav Communist Party in power, preferably with a leadership group more friendly to Soviet interests than Tito has been. They would like to do this without force or any appearance of Soviet intervention so that any countermeasures by the U.S. and its NATO allies would appear interventionist. Afghanistan has united the Yugoslavs against the Soviet threat as never before. This mood may relax in time, but, barring unforeseen chaos, the Yugoslavs themselves will in the foreseeable future pose a formidable obstacle to Soviet aspirations. Thus the immediate prospect is for the country to hold together. But we’re not certain how long this relatively stable situation will prevail, and we’re concerned that none of the potential successors has much stature. Tito set up a mechanism supposedly to help with the succession, but he refused to let a single strong leader emerge. The regime’s efforts to control, monitor, and eliminate opposition betray its nervousness about separatists and Cominformists. Moreover, several 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers, S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–Jan 1981, Lot 82D298, Box 6, TL 1/16–31/80. Secret. Drafted by McCormack, Barry, and Palmer on January 17; cleared by Harrison and Kamman.
