Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 Near East. Morocco moved toward political liberalization after nearly a decade of rule by decree. Restrictions on freedom of the press were lifted and significant numbers of political prisoners were released. Tunisia authorized establishment of the Tunisian League for the Rights of Man which has been permitted to investigate allegations of human rights violations. Iran released a substantial number of political prisoners and agreed to a visit by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). South Asia. There was in India a magnificent resurrection of democracy. Nepal released political prisoners and lifted newspaper curbs. Sri Lanka changed its government for the sixth time since independence through the free choice of its people. Pakistan released over 11,000 political prisoners. East Asia. The Indonesian Government released 10,000 political detainees, confirmed its intent to release 20,000 more in accordance with its previously announced release schedule, and agreed to resumption of ICRC visits. South Korea released all but one of the Myong Dong prisoners—opposition political and religious leaders who had opposed the government. The Philippine Government eased some of its martial law restrictions and released some detainees. The new Government of Thailand has eased press restrictions, improved trial procedures, and stated its intent to seek general elections early next year. Latin America. Political prisoners were released in Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Paraguay, Argentina, and Peru. The military governments of Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia announced that elections will be held in 1978. States of siege were lifted in El Salvador and Nicaragua. Most Latin American governments have allocated increased resources to improving the living standards and productivity of their poor farmers. Some restrictive laws have been repealed in Panama. And El Salvador, Haiti, and Paraguay agreed to visits by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Europe. For the first time in NATO’s history, every member of the alliance is a democracy. New churches have been constructed in Poland. Certain countries of Eastern Europe have eased their restrictions on emigration and family reunification. Some human rights activists in Poland and Romania have been released from prison. And live television programs in Hungary have allowed prominent Westerners to voice their views on political issues. Problems Despite these many improvements and others like them, the fact remains that the distance covered is dwarfed by the distance that remains to be traveled. I could recount in detail the retrograde human rights developments of the past year, as well as the horrendous human
