Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
335
Near East. Morocco moved toward political liberalization after
nearly a decade of rule by decree. Restrictions on freedom of the press
were lifted and significant numbers of political prisoners were re-
leased. Tunisia authorized establishment of the Tunisian League for the
Rights of Man which has been permitted to investigate allegations of
human rights violations. Iran released a substantial number of political
prisoners and agreed to a visit by the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC).
South Asia. There was in India a magnificent resurrection of de-
mocracy. Nepal released political prisoners and lifted newspaper
curbs. Sri Lanka changed its government for the sixth time since inde-
pendence through the free choice of its people. Pakistan released over
11,000 political prisoners.
East Asia. The Indonesian Government released 10,000 political de-
tainees, confirmed its intent to release 20,000 more in accordance with
its previously announced release schedule, and agreed to resumption
of ICRC visits. South Korea released all but one of the Myong Dong
prisoners—opposition political and religious leaders who had opposed
the government. The Philippine Government eased some of its martial
law restrictions and released some detainees. The new Government of
Thailand has eased press restrictions, improved trial procedures, and
stated its intent to seek general elections early next year.
Latin America. Political prisoners were released in Haiti, the Do-
minican Republic, Paraguay, Argentina, and Peru. The military gov-
ernments of Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia announced that elections will
be held in 1978. States of siege were lifted in El Salvador and Nicaragua.
Most Latin American governments have allocated increased resources
to improving the living standards and productivity of their poor
farmers. Some restrictive laws have been repealed in Panama. And El
Salvador, Haiti, and Paraguay agreed to visits by the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights.
Europe. For the first time in NATO’s history, every member of the
alliance is a democracy. New churches have been constructed in Po-
land. Certain countries of Eastern Europe have eased their restrictions
on emigration and family reunification. Some human rights activists in
Poland and Romania have been released from prison. And live televi-
sion programs in Hungary have allowed prominent Westerners to
voice their views on political issues.
Problems
Despite these many improvements and others like them, the fact
remains that the distance covered is dwarfed by the distance that re-
mains to be traveled. I could recount in detail the retrograde human
rights developments of the past year, as well as the horrendous human
