In the cases of Shanghai and Amoy where the consular property is owned,
the property consists of antiquated residence buildings in a dilapidated
condition which have been converted to office use. The condition of these
buildings is such that frequent repairs are necessary to keep them in a
habitable condition. In all of the other points in China, the American
Government follows the shortsighted policy of renting property usually
from native landlords and in very few cases is the property suitable for the
purpose desired. In Tientsin a few years ago, the American Consul was
forced to vacate his premises at short notice because the property was
desired for other purposes by a Japanese landlord. In the city of Antung, the
house occupied by the American Consul in 1923 collapsed during a heavy
rain storm and had it not been for the hospitality offered by the
Commissioner of the Chinese Customs, the official representative of the
United States Government would have had no place to go At one station in
South China the house occupied by the American Consul is located on
ground so poorly located as to be frequently flooded at high tide. In
Hankow the foreign concession where the American Consulate is located
has become so congested that it is questionable whether the present lease
can be renewed on any terms.
The examples above, which are typical of the situation, point to the
necessity of the United States Government acquiring its own consular
property in China. The present rented property in use at most of the ports is
inadequate from the standpoint of efficient conduct of the business of the
United States which has grown proportionately with the rapid increase of
American interests in this part of the world. America’s share in the direct
foreign trade of China has increased from 6½ per cent in 1910 to 16.3 per
cent in 1922. The amount of money expended for rentals would pay for
suitable consular property in a few years and when the rapid increase in
property values at all of the Chinese ports is considered, there can be no
question of the benefit of property ownership from the standpoint of
investment.
In addition to the foregoing obvious reasons for the ownership of its own
consular property on the part of the United States Government, there is the
additional element of prestige which would accrue to America through the
ownership of suitable structures for the residences and office requirements
