1980 767 SUBJECT Mobilization Planning (U) I. Policy. It is of fundamental importance to the national security that the United States maintain the capability to mobilize its national resources in a timely and efficient manner in order to respond effectively to crises that might arise. (U) Such maintenance requires consistency and coordination within the United States government in all civil and military mobilization planning activities. Accordingly, the President directs: (1) that the broadly-­defined crisis scenarios, emergency actions and preparedness activities developed in the NSC Mobilization Study are to serve as the principal basis for future US civil and military mobilization planning;4 and (2) that all such future planning is to be fully coordinated among all interested Federal agencies. (U) II. Implementation. The Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) will ensure that all existing and pending Executive Orders pertaining to mobilization are made consistent with this directive. (U) Implementation plans for each emergency action identified in the NSC Mobilization Study will be developed by the designated responsible and coordinating agencies based on the funds, personnel and other physical resources expected to be available in FY 1980. The implementation plans should be based on the NSC Mobilization Study crisis scenarios, but should also be sufficiently flexible to facilitate their use over a wider range of scenarios where possible. The Director of FEMA will arbitrate among the responsible and coordinating agencies wherever necessary to eliminate overlap among individual implementation plans, to conserve resources, and to resolve any jurisdictional conflicts. The implementation plans pertaining to Continuity of Government, the Selective Service System, and US Telecommunications Facilities are to reflect the policies and guidance resulting from the ongoing Presidentially-­directed studies in these areas. (C) The Director of FEMA will combine the completed individual implementation plans into a Federal Master Mobilization Plan and ensure that necessary standby legislation is drafted and execution procedures are promulgated to facilitate use of the plan during crises. The initial Master Plan should be provided to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs for NSC review by June 1, 1980. (U) The following tasks are to be added to the NSC Mobilization Study charter: 4 Not found.
