902
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Deng has been less successful in devising an ideological framework
within which to revise policies to suit his pragmatic approach while
still proclaiming ideological opposition to the Soviet Union. This has
forced Beijing to impose heavyhanded measures to ensure conformity
on discussion of the Soviet brand of socialism. Nonetheless, allegorical
articles debating foreign policy have continued to appear in China’s
media, and some middle level officials are known to be in favor of
new approaches to China’s Soviet policy. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Beijing is sensitive to foreign awareness of the internal Chinese
debate over policy toward the USSR and the United States. Deng seems
to fear that the appearance of less than unanimous support for China’s
foreign policy will undercut the willingness of the United States, Japan,
and the West to cooperate with Beijing. This sensitivity has led to a
succession of extraordinary efforts in the past year to demonstrate that
China will not deal with the Soviets in ways that Moscow might use
to portray a lessening of Sino-Soviet hostility. ([classification marking
not declassified])
US actions are central to the Chinese foreign policy equation. Deng,
having closely identified himself with the US connection over the past
several years, has had to demonstrate to skeptics at home that the
benefits of the deepening US-Chinese relationship outweigh the costs
of continuing hostility toward the USSR. He also has appeared anxious
to prove the value of the US connection at times when Washington
seemed to be improving relations with the USSR or when Taiwan-
related issues have emerged—developments that strengthen critics of
Deng’s foreign policy. Some Chinese, moreover, may calculate that
Washington’s concern about possible improvements in Sino-Soviet
relations can be manipulated to induce the United States to provide
China with technology, equipment, and political support to forestall a
Chinese move toward accommodation with the Soviets. ([classification
marking not declassified])
Sino-Soviet relations since Afghanistan have worsened despite
Soviet efforts to portray progress. Beijing remains eager to rally opposi-
tion to Soviet “hegemonism,” to explore sales of US civilian and military
technology, and to portray the Chinese leadership as unified as it goes
through the transition from older to younger leaders. ([classification
marking not declassified])
Nonetheless, Beijing has maintained minimal, correct diplomatic
dealings with Moscow, and has reserved the option to reopen political
negotiations. The chances that Beijing would exercise that option would
increase from the current low if political turmoil arises in China as it
did in April 1979, or if Deng has to placate elements in the Chinese
leadership who are skeptical of the US relationship. Circumstances that
