6
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
With your agreement, I will make clear your interest in early consulta-
tions on North-South issues, and I will assure the Europeans and Japanese
that there will be no surprise proposals from the United States.15
Energy: In each capital I will state that your Administration will
give high priority to establishment of a comprehensive U.S. national
energy program to reduce import dependence on Middle East oil, and I
will review the initial steps—including your plans for a Department of
Energy—that you are taking. I will further state that we strongly sup-
port cooperation among the industrialized countries in the Interna-
tional Energy Agency in behalf of concerted long-term efforts to reduce
collective reliance on OPEC oil and the imbalances in the world energy
market. I will suggest that technical cooperation on research and devel-
opment of new sources of energy might be particularly fruitful. I will
point out that, at present, the details of energy policy in your Adminis-
tration are being developed as a matter of great urgency. In this regard,
Jim Schlesinger is preparing specific talking points for the trip which I
will ensure coordination within the Administration prior to my depar-
ture. With your agreement, I will stress the importance you are according to
energy policy, the importance you attach to cooperation among the industrial-
ized countries on energy issues, and the value we see in cooperative research
and development programs on new energy sources.16
15 Carter indicated his approval of this position. At the January 22 NSC meeting (see
footnote 11 above), during a discussion of North-South issues, Carter asked whether the
U.S. position was “to shift to a multi-national approach.” Vance replied, “On the provi-
sion of capital funds, I believe we should,” while Blumenthal noted that, “Many of the so-
lutions in the US involve multi-national fora.” Vance raised the issue of CIEC timing,
asking, “Would we like a CIEC meeting before or after the summit? If after, their expecta-
tions will be raised and they may not be met. I would prefer early April.” Blumenthal re-
plied, “They already have great expectations about the new Administration. We will
have to disappoint them in some regard.” He also suggested that “If others are anxious
about it we should have a meeting in April. We could listen but say we have not yet
firmed up our views.” Vance agreed.
16 Carter indicated his approval of this position.
