National Security Policy 947 After concluding his presentation of the recommendations from the Department of Defense report, Mr. Dougles observed that the draft policy paper (NSC 5919) was consistent with the Defense report, pro­ vided the splits in the policy paper were resolved as Defense desired. However, Mr. Douglas was concerned that in the present situation, with MATS not too large and heaving no surplus above the JCS require­ ments, we not lead the airline industry to expect a rapid decrease in MATS operation or traffic, even though over a period of time MATS traffic could be expected to decrease substantially. The Department of Defense was interested in the development of a good cargo aircraft, but it should be understood that such a modern cargo airplane would not for some years produce a substantial capacity to meet wartime needs. Mr. Gray then briefed the Council on the divergence of views in Paragraph 1 of NSC 5919. Mr. Stans felt this difference could be resolved by deleting the word “security” in the first sentence of Paragraph 1 of NSC 5919 and referring at the end of the paragraph to “instru­ ments of national security and other national policies.” This revision would change the emphasis from national security to national interest. Mr. Stans believed General Quesada and the Secretary of the Treasury would be satisfied with this revision. Secretary Gates said he could also accept the change proposed by Mr. Stans. The President remarked that since he was budget-­minded these days he wanted to know a little more about cost factors, particularly the cost of keeping MATS in operation and the cost of moving cargo by means other than MATS. Secretary Gates reported that last year MATS operations had been put on an industrial funding basis; accordingly, MATS was now run as a business enterprise. One feature of the cost fac­ tor was the Department of Defense practice of asking for competitive bidding for carrying personnel overseas. Sometimes, the low bids have penalized the “flag” lines. Under a low bid of $75–80 for a one-­way trip across the North Atlantic some lines are losing money. The flag lines and other operators are at odds on this question. The President said if the equipment used were subject to the same inspection and if the pilots had similar certificates, he would be inclined to route the traffic by the cheapest means. General Quesada said the difficulty was that the air transport industry was a regulated industry, which made it monop­ olistic to a degree. Under the competitive bidding system, the concept of a regulated, monopolistic industry was cast aside. He felt the con­ cept of the air transport industry as a regulated industry should apply to Department of Defense operations. As far as safety was concerned, in his view some operators were approaching conditions which he could not approve. He noted that some companies engage in competitive bid­ ding at a time when they do not have any equipment or pilots, so if they obtain the contract by means of a low bid they have to lease equipment
