460 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Foreign Minister Shevardnadze opened the discussion by noting that the previous night2 he and the Secretary had discussed preparations for the June summit. He had recalled the U.S.-Soviet agreement at Malta to prepare agreements for signature. There were some major and complicated problems involved. It was clear that on nuclear and space arms we needed to take a stand by mid-­summer. On strategic offensive arms, Shevardnadze said, we had a directive from our two presidents to complete agreement on the main issues in the first half of the year so that the whole agreement could be finished by the end of 1990. The second task was to facilitate preparation of an agreement on conventional arms so that such a treaty could be signed in Vienna, preferably at a summit meeting of the leaders of all 35 CSCE countries. This event could include signature of an agreement on confidence-­building measures as well. Shevardnadze said the Soviets also believed that we should resolve all fundamental issues on chemical weapons this year. Good progress had been made in this area and there was a good basis for comprehensive and mutual understanding. Our delegations, however, were in a difficult situation at the present time; they had exhausted all their reserves and had no additional instructions. New guidance would be needed to resolve the numerous brackets that remained in the draft convention. Accomplishing this depended on him and Secretary Baker, as well as on our two leaders. Regarding future ministerials and other contacts, Shevardnadze thought that it would be necessary for him and Secretary Baker to meet at least two times in expanded composition before the summit. The next meeting could be in the United States and another would be at some location to be determined in the Soviet Union. Shevardnadze offered the floor to Secretary Baker since he was the guest. Secretary Baker said he looked forward to receiving Shevardnadze in the U.S. for the next ministerial. He was inclined to agree that we would need two ministerials for proper preparation of the summit. As he had said the previous evening, we saw several possible accomplishments for the meeting. First, we wanted to resolve all remaining START issues so that we could be reasonably confident of completing the drafting of a treaty by the end of year. Second, we wanted to sign a bilateral agreement on chemical weapons destruction. Third, we wanted to sign the protocols to the two nuclear testing treaties. In addition, we should push for progress on the multilateral CFE negotiations and Open Skies; we believed we had made substantial progress on CFE and we should try to resolve all the remaining issues before the summit. As he had said 2 See Document 71.
