International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
711
particular configurations on a case-by-case basis. Customs has not yet
received a formal request for a new ruling.
Options
Option I: Seek to negotiate the best possible package of concessions
from Japan before reclassification is implemented August 21, 1980.
Whatever concessions are obtained will be accepted as adequate. Be-
fore reclassification is implemented, the 25 percent tariff would be per-
manently reduced or suspended for 2–3 years to 8.5 percent. Suspen-
sion for 2½ years would give Nissan time to complete its U.S. truck
plant and keep the pressure on Toyota to build in the U.S. In reducing
the duty your proclamation would: a) note Japan’s recent liberalization
of automotive standards and auto parts tariffs; b) note that a six-fold in-
crease in the tariff on this $1.4 billion item would aggravate inflation
and provide only minor immediate benefit to U.S. industry or labor;
and c) note that the 25 percent penalty duty was directed at the EC, not
Japan. (Given the large volume of trade, if the 25 percent truck tariff is
maintained, reclassification would result in an increase of the average
U.S. tariff on dutiable imports of all Japanese products of 1.08 per-
centage points, eliminating almost half of the 2.2 percentage point re-
duction which will result from tariff cuts agreed to in the MTN.)
Pros
—Avoids the inflationary effects of reclassification.
—Reduces political and trade friction with Japan during a time of
political transition in Japan.
—Consistent with the open market position you have taken on
auto imports.
—A suspension for 2½ years would help Nissan in moving pro-
duction to the U.S.
Cons
—At a time of falling auto sales and increased auto unemploy-
ment, would be criticized by the UAW, most of the domestic auto in-
dustry, and many Congressmen; would increase pressure for restric-
tive legislation on autos.
—Reduces the negotiating leverage that the 25 percent duty
provides.
Option II: Use the bargaining leverage to negotiate a significant
package of acceptable concessions from Japan in return for lowering
the 25 percent duty on trucks. Any concessions package would be sub-
mitted to you for approval. If negotiations are successful, then reduce
the duty from 25 percent to a lower level—not less than 6.8 percent. The
reclassification would go into effect if no agreement were reached by
August 21, 1980.
