339 3 0/ 8 S/800 8 Sources Sources for the Foreign Relations Series The 1991 Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major U.S. foreign policy decisions and significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It also requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support, cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. U.S. foreign policy agencies and departments—the Department of State, National Security Council, Department of Defense, Central Intelligence Agency, and the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library—have complied fully with this law and provided complete access to their relevant records. Research for Foreign Relations volumes is undertaken through special access to restricted documents at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, and other agencies. While all the material printed in this volume has been declassified, some of it is extracted from still-classified documents. The staff of the Jimmy Carter Library is processing and declassifying many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be available in their entirety at the time of publication. Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI The files at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, in Atlanta, Georgia, are the single most important source of documentation for those interested in U.S.-Soviet relations during the Carter administration. Foreign policy research in the Carter Presidential Library centers on two collections: National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, and National Security Affairs, Staff Material. In addition, Marshall Shulman’s lot file at the Department of State offers a nearly complete record of U.S.-Soviet relations during the Carter administration, and should be consulted by anyone who is researching the U.S.–U.S.S.R. bilateral relationship. Additionally, the Country files in the Brzezinski Material and the Brzezinski Donated Material provided important documentation. The editor also had access to the Carter Intelligence Files at the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Department of Defense. The files of the Central Intelligence Agency, particularly the NIC Registry of NIE, SNIE and NIAM files, were essential XI
