339 3 0/
8 S/800 8
Sources
Sources for the Foreign Relations Series
The 1991 Foreign Relations statute requires that the published rec-
ord in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide
comprehensive documentation on major U.S. foreign policy decisions
and significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It also requires that gov-
ernment agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Govern-
ment engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support,
cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and
complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and ac-
tions and by providing copies of selected records. U.S. foreign policy
agencies and departments—the Department of State, National Security
Council, Department of Defense, Central Intelligence Agency, and the
Jimmy Carter Presidential Library—have complied fully with this law
and provided complete access to their relevant records.
Research for Foreign Relations volumes is undertaken through spe-
cial access to restricted documents at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Li-
brary, and other agencies. While all the material printed in this volume
has been declassified, some of it is extracted from still-classified docu-
ments. The staff of the Jimmy Carter Library is processing and declassi-
fying many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be
available in their entirety at the time of publication.
Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
The files at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, in Atlanta, 
Georgia, are the single most important source of documentation for 
those interested in U.S.-Soviet relations during the Carter administra-
tion. Foreign policy research in the Carter Presidential Library centers 
on two collections: National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, and 
National Security Affairs, Staff Material. In addition, Marshall 
Shulman’s lot file at the Department of State offers a nearly complete 
record of U.S.-Soviet relations during the Carter administration, and 
should be consulted by anyone who is researching the U.S.–U.S.S.R. bi-
lateral relationship. Additionally, the Country files in the Brzezinski 
Material and the Brzezinski Donated Material provided important 
documentation.
The editor also had access to the Carter Intelligence Files at the Na-
tional Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the De-
partment of Defense. The files of the Central Intelligence Agency, par-
ticularly the NIC Registry of NIE, SNIE and NIAM files, were essential
XI
