International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 ORGANIZATION SUPPORT We have obtained written, published endorsements from at least 38 different trade and business associations, 25 major U.S. corporations and 16 agricultural organizations (lists attached).3 A large number of others have also indicated support to us in more general terms. With the listed group we have seen specific announcements or communications directly to their membership or to Members of Congress concerning the agreements. Special follow-up activities on the Hill have also been scheduled prior to the vote by a number of these groups including the U.S. Council of the ICC, the Farm Bureau, the aircraft manufacturers and the Business Roundtable. Our staff is in regular discussion with the supporting groups who also stand ready to be of any assistance to us as needed if unexpected trouble looms in the days ahead. It is a superb group of organizations, exactly the ones we hope will not only be useful in this particular effort but provide a good support base for the effective implementation of the Tokyo Round results and the pursuit of an aggressive trade policy by the Administration. We have 12 other organizations that have indicated that they plan to issue endorsements during the coming days, but we have not received them yet. That list is also attached for your information.4 SPEAKING ACTIVITIES Although we followed a very selective outreach program as part of our MTN approval strategy, the task force has maintained a roster of some 80 Administration speakers on the MTN and provided them with relevant materials either for complete speeches or for appropriate inserts. Special efforts were particularly made to focus on geographic areas of initial concern, such as New England and the Middle West. Our Speakers Bureau estimates that we have now had more than 400 speaking engagements on the MTN since February 1, with more than 200 of these being handled directly by the Office of the Special Trade Representative, the majority of these by you, Alan and myself. EDITORIAL SUPPORT We have also carried out an extensive series of personal briefings for editorial boards around the country in connection with speaking trips. As an illustration, I have met personally with some 20 editorial boards of major newspapers covering every region except your Southwest. These visits were usually followed by favorable editorials. 3 Attached but not printed is an undated list entitled “MTN Supporters.” 4 Attached but not printed is an undated list entitled “Anticipated Endorsements.”
