316  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
241.	 Telegram 789 to Geneva1
Washington, September 27, 1955, 10:36 a.m.
789. Verbatim text. For Johnson.
New York’s 4, paragraph 5. Following is text of statement on 
renunciation use of force:
“One of the practical matters for discussion between us is that we 
should reciprocally renounce the use of force to achieve our policies 
when they conflict. The U.S. and the PRC confront each other with poli­
cies which are in certain respects incompatible. This fact need not, how­
ever, mean armed conflict, and the most important single thing we can 
do is first of all to be sure that it will not lead to armed conflict.
Then and only then can other matters causing tension between the 
parties in the Taiwan area and the Far East be hopefully discussed.
It is not suggested that either of us should renounce any policy 
objectives which we consider we are legitimately entitled to achieve, 
but only that we renounce the use of force to implement these policies.
Neither of us wants to negotiate under the threat of force. The free 
discussion of differences, and their fair and equitable solution, become 
impossible under the overhanging threat that force may be resorted to 
when one party does not agree with the other.
The United States as a member of the United Nations has agreed 
to refrain in its international relations from the threat or use of force. 
This has been its policy for many years and is its guiding principle of 
conduct in the Far East, as throughout the world.
The use of force to achieve national objectives does not accord with 
accepted standards of conduct under international law.
The Government of the League of Nations, the Kellogg-Briand 
Treaties, and the Charter of the United Nations reflect the universal 
view of the civilized community of nations that the use of force as an 
instrument of national policy violates international law, constitutes a 
threat to international peace, and prejudices the interests of the entire 
world community.
There are in the world today many situations which tempt those 
who have force to use it to achieve what they believe to be legitimate 
policy objectives. Many countries are abnormally divided or con­
tain what some consider to be abnormal intrusions. Nevertheless, 
the responsible governments of the world have in each of these cases 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2755. Secret; Niact. Drafted by 
Phleger and McConaughy; statement revised and approved by Dulles.
