932  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Conditions Which Would Stimulate the Development of a Modern Civil Air 
Cargo Fleet
7. The conditions may now exist whereby, with minimum measures 
of government encouragement, the development of an uncompromised 
civil air cargo fleet would be given the initial incentive it needs.
8. Some U.S. air cargo operators are buying a Canadian-­manufactured 
all-­cargo aircraft of advanced turbo-­prop design. Direct operating costs of 
this aircraft will be approximately 3.5 cents per ton-­mile, and user costs, 
approximately 10 cents per ten-­mile. Such costs will be competitive with 
those of other modes of transportation for many types of cargo and are 
significantly lower than those for any cargo aircraft currently in produc­
tion in the United States. The efficiency of this aircraft reflects an import­
ant technical advance and the related Canadian government program 
guaranteeing purchase loans up to 80 percent of the investment (avail­
able to U.S. purchasers), constitutes an important financial initiative. The 
potential air cargo market will be greatly stimulated by the introduction 
of this aircraft.
9. Many of the commercial advantages to be derived from operation 
of a modern civil air cargo fleet could be achieved by the procurement 
and use of this Canadian-­manufactured aircraft by U.S. civil airlines. 
Such procurement and use would accord with the principle of sharing 
the resources of the United States and Canada on a continental rather 
than a national basis. On the other hand, stimulation of the cargo aircraft 
manufacturing industry in the United States would encourage (a) devel­
opment of more efficient cargo aircraft; and (b) retention of U.S. leader­
ship in civil aircraft production to the extent that is considered desirable.
10. a. The progressive transfer of non-­hard-­core traffic to civil car­
riers is now underway and will be continued as civil aircraft of modern 
types (e.g., the DC–­7F and the L–­1049H) become available. Limiting 
MATS peacetime operation to that required by the war-­time “hard-­
core”4 mission would permit the transfer of additional cargo business 
to civil carriers and could assist in the development of an uncompro­
mised air cargo fleet. As civil air carriers equip themselves with uncom­
promised cargo aircraft, this orientation of MATS to the “hard-­core” 
function can be further effected, and increased use can be made of the 
services of such civil carriers.
b. The foregoing would present no risk to the national security, if 
coupled with guarantees that the civil air cargo potential, as achieved, 
4 “Hard-­core” requirements are those military requirements which, because of their 
nature or timing, must move in military aircraft manned by military crews. These “hard-­
core” requirements include highly sensitive operations from the standpoint of security, 
importance, and quick reaction, such as deployment of initial elements of strategic and 
tactical units and emergency positioning of support personnel and equipment in antici­
pation of maximum effort operations. [Footnote is in the original.]
