Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II “We will continue to assert human rights concerns as vigorously as we have during the past 2 years in our dealings with all governments. The fundamental objective of this policy is to do what we can as a government and as a people to improve the observation of human rights by governments toward their people. That is essentially what it is that this policy is to do, and we do that in all the ways that you know. “At the same time, the human rights policy has another important effect; it strengthens our position and influence in the world. Human rights is an area where our ideals and our self-interest strongly coincide. “The fact of it is that that is a side effect and the only way we really get that side benefit is to be as straight as it is possible to be with our policy implementation. That is our intention. That is our endeavor. That is our constant struggle, because I don’t need to tell anyone in this room that it is also incredibly complex to balance all of the things that are of great concern to the United States with all the other things. Human rights now sits at the table and that is a change. “Our well-being and security are enhanced when there is greater respect for human rights in the world. Our policy is important to the health and integrity of this society within the United States. Support for or indifference to oppression in other countries weakens the foundation of our democracy at home. “We have increased awareness of and concern for human rights among governments and peoples throughout the world and in international organizations such as the United Nations. “Finally, besides growing awareness, there are indications of concrete progress for many regions. The U.S. Government is careful not to claim credit for influencing specific steps. When a country is making improvements, it is the result of decisions made by its government and people. And how many events would have occurred in the absence of U.S. human rights policy, we have no idea. But the policy has helped to create a climate in which such changes are more likely.” (Ibid., pages 6–7) Following Derian’s remarks, President Carter reaffirmed his previous public statements regarding human rights, asserting: “As long as I am President, the Government of the United States will continue, throughout the world, to enhance human rights. No force on Earth can separate us from that commitment.” After highlighting his administration’s redoubled focus on rights, Carter expressed his hope that Congress, during the next legislative session, would ratify the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, noting that the United Nations had adopted it at the same time it adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and that 83 nations had ratified it during the intervening 30 years. The President also
