National Security Policy 103 (2) Preparation and maintenance of standby orders and organization -----$0.5 Million (annually) 5. Incorporation of shelter in civilian Federal buildings The Committee agrees that Federal example is an indispensable element in any combination of measures designed to stimulate State, local government, and private spending for fallout shelters. $Millions a. New Construction $6.5 (annually) Projections of new Federal construction activity (including the Post Office construction program, but excluding military construction) indicate a potential level of about 125,000 shelter spaces annually at an average cost of $52 per shelter space. This assumes utilization of new buildings for community shelter where practicable, thereby setting an example to local Government and business, and avoiding charges of favored treatment for Federal employees. $Millions b. Modification of Existing Federal Buildings $90.6 (3 year  program) $30.2 (annually) Federal example is as important in providing shelters in existing buildings as in construction of new buildings, since it is hoped that a large part of all fallout shelter can be provided through renovation and alteration of existing structures. The program proposed at this time is limited to provision of community fallout shelter in existing Post Offices on a 3-­year sched­ ule. Based on an average of 2 shelter spaces for every full time postal employee, and an average weighted cost of $113 per shelter space, the total program would cost approximately $90.6 million. Annual rate, $30.2 million for 3 years. 6. Incorporation of Fallout Shelters in Military Construction5 The Committee believes that an effective Federal program must include selective shelter construction at military installations. In the absence of such action it is very unlikely that private individuals, cor­ porations and local governments could be induced to finance their own shelter construction. Emphasis in the programs proposed is on military facilities whose location and function is such as to make them most effective as an example to the general public. However, the proposed 5 Department of Defense support of the military programs proposed herein is contin­ gent on NSC approval of generally parallel programs of shelter construction for the pro­ tection of the civil population. These proposals are made without prejudice to the current protective construction policy of the Department of Defense. [Footnote is in the original.]
