2 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Each of the three leaders will be accompanied by a small number of their principal advisors. No specific time has been set for the duration of the meeting.” 2. Special National Intelligence Estimate Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 SNIE 36.4–1–78 Washington, August 8, 1978 LEBANON: PROSPECTS FOR EXPANDED CONFLICT INTRODUCTION The intense Syrian-Christian fighting that broke out in Beirut on 1 July 1978 and that has continued intermittently since has set the stage for a major confrontation between Syria and the principal Lebanese Christian militias. Israel’s aim in the current situation is to prevent Lebanon from becoming a confrontation state responsive to Syria—support of the Christian militias is part of Israel’s preventative measures. We believe that the Israelis would intervene if the fighting intensified and they perceived that the Christian militias were being defeated by the Syrians.2 We do not believe that it would matter to the Israelis who initiated the fighting. A new and more serious round of fighting could occur at any time. Syria’s overall objective in Lebanon is to maintain a unified Lebanese state, relatively stable and responsive to Damascus’ influence. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, History Staff Files, SNIE 36.4–1–78 Lebanon: Prospects for Expanded Conflict. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A note on the first page reads: “The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, the Department of Defense, and the NSA, along with the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy; and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force, participated in the preparation of this estimate. The DCI submitted this estimate with the concurrence of the National Foreign Intelligence Board except where noted in the text.” 2 On August 7, Vance wrote in a letter to Boutros that the “Israeli government feels it has an obligation to the inhabitants” of South Lebanon “and to Major Haddad in particular to see to it that their sense of security is maintained.” However, Vance pointed out, following his discussions with the Israelis during his recent visit, the Begin government “has no objection” to the deployment of Lebanese army forces to South Lebanon, hitherto opposed by Christian militias, an “immediate task” that “should be seriously considered.” (Secto 9023 to Beirut, August 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780332–0106)
