December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
583
8. Revolutionary changes in Iran, Begin said, had made it impera-
tive that oil issue be resolved in Egyptian-Israeli negotiations in a way
which gives Israel guaranteed supply of oil from Egypt of 2.5 million
tons annually. Dayan added that, without such guarantee, Knesset
would say that Israel was “committing suicide” and would not ap-
prove peace treaty involving relinquishment of Gulf of Suez oil fields. I
told Begin and Dayan that we were sensitive to their heightened con-
cerns about secure oil supply in light of Iranian developments, that I
had already met with Energy Minister Modai Wednesday afternoon
(septel),7 and that I would be discussing this issue also in Cairo.
9. Both Begin and Dayan expressed considerable unhappiness over
recent statements by Boutros Ghali that Camp David Framework
would lead to independent Palestinian state; this greatly complicated
their job of selling peace treaty to Israeli public. They both also raised
statement by Khalil in Khartoum, reported in yesterday’s press, that
Egypt could not stand idly by if Israel attacked Syrian forces in Leb-
anon. Dayan said that this statement, which had been made in context
of latest Israeli military retaliation against PLO in Lebanon, was in com-
plete contradiction to assurances Khalil had given him in conversation
between them in your presence in Brussels.
10. In course of conversation, Begin also made strong pitch that re-
cent trends in area underline strategic importance to the US of a strong
and stable Israel. US should be strengthening Israel, not weakening it.
In this context, Begin referred to, but did not press, Israel’s request for
increased US economic assistance.
11. At the end of our talk with Begin, I reemphasized our judgment
that it was important in current round of talks here to deal with Egyp-
tian proposals on treaty articles as a reality and look for ways to make
them acceptable to Israel while preserving essential elements of polit-
ical importance to Sadat. I said that if Israel simply took the position
that the interpretations and legal opinion now on the table should be
eliminated, we would get nowhere. Begin did not say he agreed, but
Sam Lewis believes the fact that Begin did not argue the point may
be an encouraging sign. Dayan suggested and Begin agreed that we
meet with Begin again on Friday8 morning to assess progress on
negotiations.
Newlin
(Christopher S. Wren, “Hussein Appears to Oppose Israel-Egypt Dealings,” The New York
Times, January 12, 1979, p. A2)
7 Atherton summarized his January 17 meeting with Modai in telegram 175 from Je-
rusalem, January 18. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790038–
0040)
8 January 19. Telegram 214 from Jerusalem, January 19, reported the meeting be-
tween the U.S. delegation and Begin. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P840171–0612.
