702 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV are in 1980 dollars. Harold noted that while these amounts are large, they should be compared to the roughly $40 billion it would cost to replicate the POSEIDON or MINUTEMAN forces today. Harold admitted that, historically, costs for major systems have risen as the programs have progressed from their initial stages to deployment. Generally, however, most of these cost increases are associated with add-­ons that become attractive as the system development progresses. (U) In response to McIntyre’s comments on the feasibility of building so large and agile a transporter, Harold noted that its horsepower was only twice that of the M–X tank, and stated his conviction that construction of this vehicle is feasible. He stated that he was very much against leaving out the dash capability—­that it would to deter Soviet efforts to develop means for discovering which shelters contain missiles. (U) The President asked if we would want to move the M–X missiles upon detection of a Soviet attack. Dr. Brzezinski answered that this would depend on how you want to respond. Secretary Brown added that suspiciously small attacks might suggest that the missiles should be moved (a point that Stan Turner supported). (U) The Vice President noted that without the dash capability, you would not be able to shift missile locations if you wanted to, upon warning of a Soviet attack. He noted that the ability to quickly shift positions of the missiles is one of the best arguments on the Hill for adopting this particular basing scheme. (U) The President asked if there is a comparable ground vehicle in existence. Harold Brown answered the proposed vehicle is similar to a locomotive. The President responded that Harold Brown’s response suggests that he doesn’t know the answer. Harold responded that he did indeed know that comparable tracked vehicles exist. The President added that strip mining equipment is somewhat comparable. (U) Jim McIntyre noted that OMB had presented the President with an alternative basing plan that he thought would be a safer choice for the President. He noted that we will need good answers now for the questions raised about Harold’s proposal, or we will be in trouble later on the Hill. Harold Brown asked what particular questions McIntyre was referring to. (U) Jim McIntyre said that he was skeptical about whether a million pound vehicle could run on gravel. He added that Harold’s figure of $2.1 billion for 10,000 miles of gravel road seemed optimistic, and that these roads would cost more to maintain than Harold had assumed. Finally Jim said that his staff believes that some shelters had not counted in Harold’s costing. (U)
