14
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
for circumventing the Israelis now will lose us what little confidence
we still enjoy. (And furthermore won’t work with the Israelis. Begin
understands quite well what we are aiming at. He won’t go along and
is probably encouraged in his resistance by the knowledge that we are
looking for expedients rather than taking him on directly.)
Kamel and Saud, and many other Arabs who regard themselves as
our friends and feel they have a stake in Sadat’s future, fear that at
Camp David we will strike a middle ground between the Egyptian and
Israeli position and will try to persuade Sadat to agree to “compro-
mise”. They obviously think we might succeed in doing so. What they
in fact mean is that they fear we will try to persuade Sadat to accept
something that is less than a firm Israeli commitment to withdraw after
five years.
The Camp David Meetings
Broadly speaking, there are two things that we have to decide:
a) —what we want to end up with; and
b) —how we can best go about getting where we want.
What do we want to end up with?
Ideally we would like to close the Camp David meeting with
agreement between Sadat and Begin on a broad framework of prin-
ciples for a settlement, covering all the main elements—peace, with-
drawal, security and the Palestinians—which serve as a basis for a
series of continuing negotiations to hammer out the details in each of
these areas.
We know in advance, however, that it is not going to be possible to
get such agreement. We also know several other things; they might be
called the ground rules of the game:
—We cannot allow Camp David to be seen as a failure. The blow to
the President’s prestige and authority and the consequences for sta-
bility in the area would be too serious.
—Since it cannot succeed in achieving its ideal goal, we must have
an acceptable fallback.
—Somebody is going to go home disappointed, probably mad,
from Camp David. There will be no way to please both sides at this
point (but the temptation to try will be strong and should be guarded
against). Any effort to do so is likely to please the Israelis but alienate
the Arabs.
—The Arabs do not really expect that at Camp David Begin will
make the concessions that will be needed to achieve a Declaration on
terms minimally acceptable to Sadat. They will, however, be satisfied
and consider the meeting a success if it ends with the US taking a posi-
tion on the issues minimally acceptable to Sadat.
If we do this, the Israelis will be unhappy and the Administration
will be attacked by Israel’s supporters in Congress and various Jewish
