Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 591 For all these reasons, we have a capacity for leadership in the world that surpasses that of any other nation. That leadership imposes many responsibilities on us, on me as President, and on you, other leaders who shape opinion and the character of our country. But our noblest duty is to use our strength to serve our highest interest—the building of a secure, stable, and a peaceful world. We perform that duty in the spirit proclaimed by John F. Kennedy in 1963, the year he died. “Confident and unafraid,” he said, “we labor on—not toward a strategy of annihilation, but toward a strategy of peace.”3 In our relations with the Soviet Union, the possibility of mutual annihilation makes a strategy of peace the only rational choice for both sides. Because our values are so different, it is clear that the United States of America and the Soviet Union will be in competition as far ahead as we can imagine or see. Yet we have a common interest in survival, and we share a common recognition that our survival depends, in a real sense, on each other. The very competition between us makes it imperative that we bring under control its most dangerous aspect—the nuclear arms race. That is why the strategic arms limitation talks are so very important. This effort by two great nations to limit vital security forces is unique in human history; none have ever done this before. As the Congress and the American people consider the SALT treaty, which is now nearly complete, the debate will center around four basic questions: Why do we need SALT? How is the treaty related to our overall defense strategy? Can Soviet compliance be verified? How does the treaty relate to Soviet activities which challenge us and challenge our interests? Let me address each question in turn. First, why do we need a strategic arms limitation treaty? We need it because it will contribute to a more peaceful world—and to our own national security. Today, we and the Soviet Union, with sharply different world outlooks and interests, both have the ominous destructive power literally to destroy each other as a functioning society, killing tens of millions of people in the process. And common sense tells us—as it tells the Soviet Union—that we must work to make our competition less dangerous, less burdensome, and less likely to bring the ultimate horror of nuclear war. Indeed, the entire world has a vital interest in whether or not we control the strategic arms race. We have consulted closely with our 3 Reference is to Kennedy’s June 10, 1963, commencement address delivered at American University. For the text of the address, see Public Papers: Kennedy, 1963, pp. 459–464.
