members of the carpet workers’ union and took possession of the factory
premises. Several Chinese appeared wearing red badges, who seemed to
direct the actions of the workmen.
The Chinese police at once attempted to negotiate with the strikers and thus
to end the trouble without resort to violence. They succeeded in getting the
six or seven hundred strikers to the police compound, where they were
given the alternatives of returning to work, or of being paid off and
dismissed. The Manager of the factory made an offer of three days’ bonus at
the Chinese New Year (February 13th) if the men returned to work and
performed their duties satisfactorily until then. This offer was accepted and
work was resumed on January 22nd.
On January 25th there was again trouble in the factory. This time it was a
dispute between two factions of the workmen themselves, but the result was
that the American Manager was deprived of his control over the factory, and
he became convinced that the only practicable course open to him was to
close the institution. Civil and military police, and also two hundred
soldiers, arrived and some twenty strikers were arrested, which restored
quiet. In spite of the Manager’s desire to close the factory the police were
most averse to his taking this step and about half of the force went back to
work next day.
At this time similar strikes occurred in other American-owned rug factories
in Tientsin. In the handling of these later strikes the Provincial authorities
were much milder in their methods and resorted almost entirely to
negotiations with the workmen. Finally, by giving the men a bonus, the
owners, Messrs. Elbrook, Incorporated, were able to close their factories.
The changed attitude of the authorities was suspected by Mr. Gauss to be
due to pressure brought to bear by Communist sympathizers. Inflammatory
literature and the presence of many agitators indicated the source of the
disturbances in an unmistakable manner, and Mr. Gauss was of the opinion
that after the Chinese New Year the strikes would spread to the cotton mills.
The Communist Party finds in China only very limited scope for its special
type of propaganda, since the class of industrial laborers and transportation
workers is only a minute fraction of the total population. Nevertheless, this
