International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
623
although this will take a good deal longer. His visit looks more and
more like a turning point in US-Japanese economic relations.3 (C)
3 In his June 6 memorandum to Carter (see footnote 2 above), Strauss expressed his
hope that the U.S.-Japanese agreement would “relieve much of the short-term trade ten-
sion between our two countries, thus allowing you to concentrate more fully on other and
more fundamental issues during the upcoming Summit Conference.”
216.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, June 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Implementation of the Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations
Within two weeks we expect to submit for your approval and
transmittal to Congress the international agreements and domestic im-
plementing legislation which together comprise the final results of the
Tokyo Round. Barring unforeseen difficulties, in keeping with my pre-
vious advice to you, I believe the package—the most comprehensive
trade legislation any President has submitted to any Congress—will be
approved by the House and Senate, under the procedures set forth in
the Trade Act of 1974, before the August recess. However, we still
cannot be certain. The legislation has completed mark-up in both
Houses and a unique “pre-conference” by House Ways and Means and
Senate Finance Committees which concluded without any major loss
on issues.
This package is the culmination of almost five years of negotiations
with our trading partners by this Office in cooperation with other
agencies of the Executive Branch and in close consultation with our pri-
vate sector advisors and with the Congress. The major elements of the
package are as follows:
—international codes of conduct on nontariff barriers including
subsidies and countervailing measures; anti-dumping; product stand-
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National
Security Issues, Box 85, National Security Issues—Trade, [11/1977–12/1979]. No classifi-
cation marking.
