Sources Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX For this volume, the editor made extensive use of Presidential papers and other White House records held by the Carter Library. These records proved the best source of documentation on the roles of President Carter and the National Security Council in formulating, developing, and implementing United States policy toward the Arab-Israeli dispute and the Middle East peace process from August 1978 until January 1981. The National Security Affairs files are divided into two sub-series: Brzezinski Material and Staff Material. Within the Brzezinski Material sub-series, the Country File (especially those files on Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, and Saudi Arabia, and the files on the general Middle East region, which incorporate material on both bilateral relations as well as peace negotiations and the Palestinian autonomy talks which followed the March 1979 signing of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty), the Country Chron series of the Brzezinski Office File, the President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, and the Subject File provided the richest sources of documentation. The Cables File helped complete the documentation of the post-Camp David negotiations through its collection of Department of State Nodis telegrams. The Trip File provided important documentation on President Carter’s March 1979 visit to Egypt and Israel. The Staff Material sub-series is a similarly valuable resource for nearly all aspects of U.S. policy toward the Arab-Israeli dispute, especially the Middle East and Office Files. The Middle East File—particularly, the Subject File, Meetings File, Trips/Visits File, and staff member Chron File contained within—is essential both for the breadth of the topics it covers and for its ability to display the way in which U.S. policy was developed at the working level within the National Security Council. The Presidential Advisory and Outside the System Files of the Office File contain some of the most sensitive documentation generated by the National Security Council for Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski and President Carter. Separate from the National Security Affairs collection is the National Security Council Institutional Files, which focus primarily on the records of meetings of the National Security Council and its sub-groups, the Presidential Review Committee and the Special Coordinating Committee, (including supporting documentation generated by the Department of State, Department of Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, and others for the meetings), as well as documentation related to Presidential Review XV
