464 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Carter: We should not use the “must” in the communique. I can assure you that we will move toward this goal. If we use “must,” it will hurt in the Congress. I cannot accept “must” when Congress has to join with me in making the decision. Giscard: Our Parliament feels strongly about this issue as well. There can be no French support for tariff cuts unless the negotiations seem to be a joint effort. They must seem to be joint and mutually balanced. In the Kennedy Round there was a U.S. commitment to seek to apply GATT rules. We do not want to repeat the Kennedy Round in which U.S. seeks to apply these rules, but Congress puts political obstacles in its path. We will act only when the U.S. authorities have acted in order to assess the application of GATT rules. Lambsdorff: France has conveyed what it would like to see. “Must” is probably not appropriate in this situation. We must recognize the circumstances. Many countries had their own regulations prior to the GATT. We cannot get rid of all of these before December 15. We cannot have unrealistic commitments. While we recognize the French desire for this wording, it is not politically realistic. We should bring this as close as possible to a commitment, recognizing that a commitment is not possible. We should not overreach ourselves here. Carter: I don’t disagree with the paper. But if I go back with a text saying “must,” it would make Congress more obdurate than they already are. I am in a difficult situation to use the word must. We should not use such language in dealing with sovereign nations. I will seek as strong language as possible. I cannot say “must” when it is not my decision. Schmidt: We have two subjects here. It is clear that on the first one, the U.S. President is actively seeking unified application of GATT rules. There is no doubt about this. But he is afraid of counterproductive language. The French President says we have heard such statements of intention for years. I am skeptical about the will of the Congress. Therefore, I warn you that we have difficulties as well and we might not apply reductions of tariffs. No one wants to harm or jeopardize the ability of the two governments to get their Parliaments to agree to what we jointly seek. Thus, we have to find language which doesn’t hurt the two countries which have spoken. Why can’t we say for instance that we will seek agreement on uniform application of the GATT rules as soon as possible. Dell: I agree with this. We in Europe will not implement the agreement unless it is implemented in the U.S. I agree to your language. Or we can say we intend to move to do this, which is an essential condition for implementation of the Tokyo Round.
