World Hunger and Food Policy 845 sive; however, past success should not diminish further efforts to press still harder in the direction of scientific and technical advances. Two ways to increase resources for research on the food needs of developing countries are: a) to double present levels of funding for the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, and b) to reorient the current priorities which now prevail within the major research institutions of the Summit nations. 2. Water Resources. Water resource development and management is a particularly central issue in those regions of the world where hunger is most severe. Better water management will involve several related needs: extensive, long-term capital investments (as a recent Trilateral Report has pointed out);4 increased emphasis on developing new water management techniques at the local level; and international cooperation and agreement on water resource problems that affect more than one country. 3. Fertilizer. An international commitment to assure the availability of fertilizer—beginning with the Summit nations and eventually including the OPEC countries—would represent a major contribution to the food needs of developing countries. As with the case of food, fertilizer is presently available for those nations that can afford it. However, the shortage of foreign exchange constitutes a major constraint on fertilizer purchases for developing countries, particularly because fertilizer has been subject to extreme price fluctuations since 1973. Summit nations can facilitate fertilizer purchases by making substantially more concessional aid or soft money available for this purpose. 4. Developing Country Institutional Capabilities and Program Coordination. Frequent complaints are raised by donor countries and international agencies regarding the lack of institutional capabilities within developing countries to design and implement food production projects. Therefore, expanded international efforts are required— drawing upon private as well as public resources for management, coordination, marketing and project design—to increase local capabilities to prepare and implement projects in the agriculture sector. Donors and recipients can then design together (in countries where this has not already been done) a series of careful plans and targets for using their combined resources to most efficiently produce more food of the sorts most needed to meet nutritional deficiencies. The World Food Council at its upcoming meetings in July and September should be asked to coordinate such programs, and to provide the staff required for this plan of action. 4 Presumably a reference to the 1978 report by the Trilateral Commission entitled “Reducing Malnutrition in Developing Countries: Increasing Rice Production in South and Southeast Asia.” Established in 1973, the Trilateral Commission comprises leaders from the private sector in Japan, Europe, and North America.
