which could be armed; that we could not be expected to accept restrictions
as to arming cruisers and that an attempt to deny us our liberty of action
would be the best method of arousing popular resentment and driving us
into a big building program.
Cecil seemed to be considerably impressed by this statement, Bridgeman
less so. Latter stated that our insistence upon right to build 8-inch [-gun]
cruisers would force them to readjust their tonnage levels upward; that they
had already made considerable concessions to get down to tonnage levels
which we could all discuss and that this had been conditioned upon
elimination of 8-inch gun except on specified number of 10,000-ton
cruisers.
I asked Bridgeman to look at this whole problem along the lines I had
indicated; that the crux of the whole problem was whether they thought we
were likely to dispose of 100,000 tons or less of cruisers tonnage in such a
way as to threaten the security of the British Empire. If so, we ought to
know it. If not, there should be no strong reason for contesting our right to
build as we like.
I then reemphasized that in my opinion British insistence was based on fear
of a situation which was not likely to arise, namely, a building program of
8-inch-gun vessels which would be source of apprehension to the British
Empire, and I again suggested the possibility of some political clause in the
treaty which would permit reexamination of the cruiser provision in the
event that our construction of 8-inch-gun vessels was a cause of
apprehension to either of the other contracting powers. Cecil took up this
suggestion and we had a brief discussion as to the form which such an
article might take and then adjourned until tomorrow when we will give the
matter further consideration.
[Paraphrase.] A stipulation of this nature may conceivably afford an escape
from the present difficulty and I shall today or tomorrow cable you a
proposed solution in accordance with this idea. Additional instructions from
his Government are awaited by Bridgeman and he is not urging an early
decision on the matter of 8-inch guns. Sending copy to London. [End
paraphrase.]
