Covert and Overt Operations He replied to my questions as follows: 2.2. Ghotbzadeh is of the opinion that the most useful contribution to the release of the hostages is at present the unpublicized and discreet, though long and tedious work which consists in rallying the greatest possible number of members of Parliament to this thesis in order to prepare the groundwork. He added that he is working in that direction. 2.3. I then asked him if this meant that there was no way to speed up matters or bypass Parliament. Ghotbzadeh does not rule this out, but he believes that Parliament must in any event take up the highest priorities first and that “to bypass Parliament” is delicate and depends upon circumstances which have not yet materialized (a figure of speech to conceal the Imam’s permission). 2.4. Re scenarios, there are several in the air and it is not a bad thing that there be several scenarios, but at the moment, of course, there is no final version. 3. Given the climate of our discussion, I took it upon myself to tell Ghotbzadeh that rumors had reached the other side (i.e., the U.S.) accusing it of playing a political game with the scenarios, i.e., of giving preference to one group over another. I assured him that this was not the case at all, much to the contrary. The other party is anxious to have the hostages released soonest, without trial, never mind what scenario or what group. Furthermore the other side acknowledges the work and courage of certain leading figures, including the Minister of Foreign Affairs during the last few months. I added that this comment is even more valid when my own country, as protecting power, is concerned and that it does not want to meddle in any of these factional strifes inside Iran. I added that speaking personally I could only express the honor I feel at the confidence and spirit of cooperation that Ghotbzadeh has shown me and assured him of my loyalty. Ghotbzadeh replied that he appreciated my words very much and he added that all this should be attributed to the apprenticeship of democracy which is a long and difficult process. 4. Regarding Bani Sadr, I intend to try to see Sandjabi and if I do I will hand over to him a non-paper.3 3 A draft of the undated “non-paper” was attached to a May 15 memorandum from Precht to Newsom. It consisted of U.S. “observations” concerning the ability of the Swiss Embassy in Tehran to protect U.S. diplomatic and consular interests in Iran. It acknowledged that “present circumstances” did not allow the Swiss to protect the hostages or take possession of U.S. diplomatic or consular property but did expect the Swiss “to exercise such protection and take possession of such property as circumstances may permit.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State
