40
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
increased military aid, medical and public health programs and Point
IV assistance. Every effort is being made to increase as appropriate and
expedite our Iranian aid programs.
(5) I have serious reservations concerning the advisability of any
approach to Mullah Kashani, the leader of the ultra-nationalist reli-
gious groups in Iran, who has a wide popular following. I doubt that
Kashani could, in any event, be bought for any appreciable length of
time, and he might very well use any approach of this sort as a further
weapon in his current attempts to stir up public hatred of all foreigners,
particularly Americans and British. It would be in character for him to
use such an approach as evidence of the intrigues of foreign powers
against the sovereignty of Iran; in this he could win more adherents
and further inflame those whom he already has. The alternate course
proposed by CIA, to discredit Kashani by means of printed material,
etc., has, I believe, merit but this program would have to be carried out
with the greatest caution.
(6) I concur with the opinion expressed by CIA that any approach
to Dr. Mohamad Mossadeq, the leader of the National Front group,
would be difficult, and believe it would be fruitless. The suggested use
of clandestine publications to expose the Soviet ties of some of his fol-
lowers appears a distinct possibility, but the possible effectiveness of
splitting off from his group his “more stable and reasonable followers”
appears questionable.
(7) The use of “black propaganda” weapons against the Tudeh
Party is attractive and might have useful results. However, the present
atmosphere in Iran is so tense and public opinion so emotionally
aroused that any revelation of a “plot” might further disturb the situa-
tion. CIA might, however, make plans for activity of this sort with the
understanding that it would not be implemented until the situation is
such that the results can be more accurately estimated.
(8) The suggestion that an attempt be made to split the Tudeh
Party, particularly to exploit deviationist tendencies, appears to have
merit if practicable steps can be formulated. Perhaps precise courses of
action can be worked out by the representatives in the field as opportu-
nities present themselves.
In addition to the above courses of action suggested for immediate
implementation, the CIA paper sets forth programs assuming (a) a se-
rious deterioration in the situation, or (b) the imposition of a satellite
government. Under either of these contingencies it is recognized that
our action must be far more drastic than under present circumstances,
and the suggestions set forth by CIA should be given careful consider-
ation. In this connection, the present NSC paper on Iran, which was ap-
proved by the Senior Staff on March 13 and is going to the Council for
