Chapter 5, May–June 1990 733 survivability. So we regard the issues of verification and sublimit to be related, and should take into account survivability. Bartholomew: I need to underscore, as Burt did, we have no interest in any arrangement that would threaten survivability. Nothing we have proposed would come near that. Verification is critical both substantively and politically. The number is important, but verification is critical. Karpov: This is a question of interpretation, of how each side sees the threshold needed for survivability. We need to ensure operational conditions that allow for survivability. We support verification that will provide confidence to the US that there are not mobile ICBMs beyond the limits. Why don’t we ask our two ambassadors to take a closer look with a view to providing both survivability and verification. Bartholomew: I invite you in the time remaining to address heavy ICBMs. Karpov: We did study this subject carefully in Moscow, taking into account the discussion at the Moscow ministerial, including the points Gorbachev made to Baker. We think the solutions that have already been agreed upon—­reduce heavy ICBMs to 154 with 1540 warheads—­are effective and serve the purposes of the treaty. In addition, we have also agreed to ban new types of heavy ICBMs, leaving the opportunity to modernize within agreed limits. And we have also agreed on the need to ban mobile heavy ICBMs. As for other constraints on heavy ICBMs, they need to be addressed in the next stage of negotiations dealing with further reductions and strategic stability. We are ready to make a reference in the statement on future negotiations, a reference to the problem of heavy ICBMs in the context of future negotiations. Bartholomew: We need to focus on heavy ICBMs for stability reasons. I don’t need to underscore for you the political importance of this issue as well. That is a matter of record. After the Moscow ministerial there has been a great deal of attention here on this issue. This is not an easy issue for you, we understand that. We persevere because of the importance on heavy ICBMs both politically and for stability, an importance that goes beyond START. That said, what we are looking for here is movement on your part to close this off. We are prepared to drop our Moscow proposal for a cutoff in production of SS-18s if we can establish a limit of 2 heavy ICBM flight tests per year, and on the assumption that the question of these missiles and their elimination will be specified in the statement on future negotiations. Karpov: You will note I did not say reference in the joint statement to elimination. We will refer to the problem of heavy missiles.
