3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
835
solved. “We will definitely get out of Afghanistan—there can be no
doubt about that—but it may take a while before conditions make this
possible.” The negotiating process should not wait until we are ready
to withdraw, he said. It would be good if there could be discussions be-
forehand of the steps that each side could take as part of the process.
Perhaps there will be a role for third countries to play in the process.
In the meantime, he said, the channels of communication should
not be solely occupied with Afghanistan. Other subjects could be dis-
cussed as well.
He said that Gromyko would probably take his vacation from the
latter part of July into August. The Soviet Embassy here had not re-
ceived definite word, but he assumed that Gromyko will be coming to
the United Nations General Assembly in late September, as he has done
in previous years. His personal view was that if there were to be a
meeting between the Secretary and the Foreign Minister in New York
at that time it might be good; conversely, the absence of such a meeting
would be regarded as a negative break with the precedent of earlier
years.
Bessmertnykh is leaving for his regular vacation in the Soviet
Union this coming week. He expects to be back in the latter part of July,
and anticipates that Dobrynin would take his vacation following
Bessmertnykh’s.
Soviet Vessel Port Stop
At the end Bessmertnykh asked me whether we could do anything
to clear up the refusal they had received about the stop of a Soviet
vessel in Baltimore for five hours on June 26 to pick up members of the
Soviet Embassy and take them on a vacation cruise. The Baltimore Port
Authority had cited political and labor factors in their refusal, but Bess-
mertnykh believed that the labor difficulties had been cleared away in a
conversation with Gleason.4 Vasev had mentioned this to Barry yes-
terday, and Bessmertnykh said he would appreciate anything we could
do about this since all the vacation schedules at the Embassy had been
built around the anticipated port stop of the ship. I said I would do
what I could.
4 Not further identified.
