National Security Policy 997 likely to continue; later the motif of pressure and struggle will proba­ bly reappear. Whatever alternation of emphasis may occur, however, the swings are likely to fall within a range which excludes, on the one hand, the deliberate assumption of serious and uncontrollable risks of general war, and, on the other, abandonment of the concept of continu­ ing struggle between two irreconcilable worlds. 3. Given Khrushchev’s unchallenged personal ascendancy, his views are likely to be the primary determinant in Soviet policy for the present. His attitudes are marked on the one hand by a strong sense of the growth of Soviet military and economic power and by a crude and truculent pride in asserting the claims of that power to the world’s attention and deference. He has been free in his vigorous use of mis­ sile threats. On the other hand, he apparently thinks it possible to win recognition for Soviet views through persuasion rather than by force alone. He clearly understands the horrors of nuclear war and his pro­ claimed dedication to economic advance appears to be sincere. He probably genuinely believes that the Soviet system can prove its supe­ riority in “peaceful” competition, although he recognizes that Soviet power plays a vital role in this competition. Thus, the contradictory ten­ dencies toward belligerence and accommodation in Soviet policy are probably in some degree a reflection of the attitudes and personality of Khrushchev, and may persist so long as he is the commanding figure on the Soviet scene. 4. The immediate outlook is that the Soviets will continue their present tactics of detente at least through the initial phase of the series of high-­level negotiations now in view. A period of partial detente pre­ sumably serves a number of useful purposes from Moscow’s point of view. First, it enables the USSR to ascertain through negotiations what positions the West is now willing to take in view of increasing Soviet strength, and provides a suitable and superficially alluring framework for possible Western concessions. Secondly, even barring specific agree­ ments with the West, Moscow probably views high-­level East-­West talks as an acknowledgment by the West of the permanence, legitimacy, and equal status of the Communist Bloc. Finally, during such a period of detente the Soviets would hope to improve their relative power posi­ tion still further, since they would expect Western military programs to be carried on with less urgency. 5. Beyond this phase the outlook is less certain. The main influence shaping Soviet policy is likely to be the Soviet leaders’ sense of their improved power position relative to that of the West. In another year or two they may feel that their capabilities in long-­range missiles have brought them into a period when the relations of military power are the most favorable from their point of view. At some stage, they will almost certainly wish to test the chances of drawing advantage from this sit­ uation if it emerges as they expect. They will still try to win Western
