74 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Enclosure Statement Prepared in the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs ARGENTINA In December 1958, the United States Government, private financial institutions and the International Monetary Fund announced credits of $329 million to assist Argentina in its efforts to achieve financial stabilization and economic development. This program, according to the Eximbank, was one of the most comprehensive financial operations ever undertaken by the United States in Latin America. The $329 million of credits were broken down as follows: $125 million from the Eximbank of which $100 million was to be used to finance purchases from the United States of equipment for economic development projects, and the remaining $25 million was to be used to maintain the flow of essential imports from the U.S. during 1959; a $25 million loan from a consortium of U.S. private commercial banks to meet short term financial requirements; a $50 million exchange agreement from the United States Treasury through the Exchange Stabilization Fund; a $25 million loan from the Development Loan Fund; and a $75 million standby arrangement with the International Monetary Fund. Previously the Argentine government had arranged with the members of the Paris Club (West Germany, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Italy, Great Britain, France, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and The Netherlands) for substantial credits in order to deal with its commercial arrearages with those countries. An arrangement was made whereby Argentina funded debts owed to those countries, amounting to about $450 million, and was permitted to repay them over a period of 10 years; debts to Japan were included in these arrangements. The $329 million of loans was made because Argentina agreed to a full stabilization program with the International Monetary Fund. At the time those loans were made the Argentina international payments position was critical with gross foreign exchange reserves down to a historic low of $129 million compared with $286 million at the end of 1957, $382 million at the end of 1956, $457 million at the end of 1955 and $524 million at the end of 1954. In addition, because of heavy fiscal deficits and virtually uncontrolled credit expansion, the price level in 1958 rose by 32% while production actually declined. Under the International Monetary Fund stabilization program the Argentine government committed itself to extensive alterations in its financial and economic system and import and exchange controls were almost abolished and a single fluctuating exchange rate was established; the budgetary deficit
