893.512/407: Telegram [Document 659] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, October 8, 1926—8 p.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.] 462. Department’s 217, October 5, 7 p.m., my 456, October 6, noon, and 449, October 2 [3], 7 p.m. 1. At diplomatic body meeting[s] yesterday and today tax situation at Canton was discussed from a point of view, first, of what if any action the powers concerned should decide to take in reference thereto, and, second, what reply could be made to the Acting Inspector General of Customs’ inquiry of the Senior Minister as to support the Customs could expect from the powers should the Canton regime endeavor to force it to collect the new taxes. The 2 days’ discussion revealed complete unanimity except for the British Minister, whose position will be later discussed, in opposition to the new taxes; but efforts to arrive at unanimous concurrence in method of opposing them could not be achieved. It was realized finally that the two questions were too vital and broad to be determined by the diplomatic representatives at Peking and therefore it was agreed that each should place them immediately before his Government with the request that a reply be made to reach Peking on October 11th, if possible, when a further meeting it was hoped could take place. In order to furnish respective Governments with something concrete, a formula for joint protest was drafted as give 2. In placing this matter before our Governments, each agree[s] to inform his respective Foreign Office that it was our considered and unanimous opinion that the powers had arrived at a parting of the ways; that they should clearly realize that if Canton taxes were allowed to be carried into effect it meant beginning of the end of our treaty rights in China since undoubtedly the new taxation would be increased as to Canton and its action followed by the other semiautonomous regimes. We all believed that we could not warn our Governments too solemnly in this regard and that we should earnestly solicit them to decide upon a means of preventing the success of the effort
