Venezuela  1215
organized by the Junta Patriótica. On the night of 22 January, the second 
day of the strike, the military told the dictator that he must go.
MAJOR ELEMENTS IN THE EXISTING POLITICAL SITUATION
18. The Junta del Gobierno. Venezuela is now ruled by a Junta com-
posed of three military and two civilian members and dominated by its 
president, Rear Admiral Wolfgang Larrazábal.3 The Junta exercises the 
functions of the presidency; there is, in addition, a cabinet composed of 
men selected primarily for their technical competence, rather than as 
party representatives. The stated mission of the Junta is to bring about 
the re-­establishment of democratic constitutional government through 
elections now scheduled for November.4 The chief threat to the accom-
plishment of its mission is that of a military coup to prevent the return 
of Acción Democrática to power. In military and some civilian circles, 
Larrazábal is strongly suspected of unduly favoring that party, as well 
as of unwise leniency toward the Communists.
19. The Political Parties: General. All Venezuelan parties are of recent 
origin: the Communist party was organized clandestinely in 1931; the 
oldest non-Communist parties date only from the election of 1941. The 
programs of the three major parties (AD, COPEI, and URD)5 are strikingly 
similar, being distinguishable only by minor differences of emphasis. They 
are socialistic and nationalistic, favoring social welfare measures, varying 
degrees of government direction of the economy, and greater Venezuelan 
control of basic industries. The minor parties of the right-center show 
strong traits of mid-19th century liberalism. All parties are supporting the 
Junta, opposing military intervention in political affairs, and demanding 
effective democratic government with full civil rights.
20. Inasmuch as there has been no free election in Venezuela since 
1948, the relative strength of the various parties is difficult to estimate. 
Some 40 percent of the electorate has come of age since that date. Chiefly 
on the basis of the consensus among their political rivals, we estimate 
that AD represents at least half of the electorate and COPEI about a 
3 Larrazábal, 47, is of an outstanding naval family. In 1945, when the Medina gov-
ernment was over thrown by the Army and Acción Democrática, he was arrested, but he 
was Commandant of the Naval Forces by the end of the AD regime. The succeeding 
military Junta thought it expedient to send him away, to be naval attache in Washington. 
In the last months of the Péréz Jiménez regime he was president of the Circulo Militar 
(Armed Forces Club), an assignment which antagonized him by disappointing his naval 
ambitions, but which he used to establish contacts with officers of all the services. He 
assumed the presidency of the Junta on the basis of military seniority. [Footnote is in the 
source text.]
4 These elections may be postponed, for administrative or political reasons. 
[Footnote is in the source text.]
5 Acción Democrática, Partido Social Cristiano Copel, and Unión Republicana Democrática. 
[Footnote is in the source text.]
