3. Even in view of your 286 of November 29th, 1 p.m.,88 I believed that I
was warranted in conceding the preservation of the Customs to be a primary
consideration of expediency. But I raised the question whether the second
alternative course would prove to be a permanent and substantial protection
against the Nationalists’ determined intention to sabotage the whole system.
While I admitted the practically hopeless outlook of either horn of the
dilemma, I tended to believe that the less hopeless course was to make an
obvious formal insistence upon our rights rather than to acquiesce in the
violation of our rights, because, despite our having shown that we did not
actually mean the protests we made at Canton and at Hankow, the
Nationalists still may believe that if we really were backed up to the wall,
for instance at Shanghai, we might make our protests good. Acquiescence
on the other hand would do even more than authorize all further
encroachments in regard to Customs matters; it would give the Cantonese
courage to presume also in other matters upon our weakness.
4. Furthermore I urged that a third alternative was possible, which, if time
permitted, would be productive of better result than the dilemma of the first
two. It is this: that the interested powers by some means put in operation the
Washington surtaxes as a fulfillment of the treaty obligations we have,
rather than as a yielding to the Cantonese exactions. However, even if all
the foreign powers had all possible good will—and that we would be joined
by Japan without infinite argument and enlargement of details there is every
cause for doubt—action of any kind towards implementing the Treaty of
Washington is scarcely possible in time to forestall the issue being forced
by the Nationalists when once they present that issue. Unless we are
prepared to undertake a last-ditch stand to prevent our being bullied into
unconditionally surrendering vastly more than we took upon ourselves to
give up under reasonable safeguards, the Washington Customs Treaty and
the Special Conference would seem to be dead historical topics.
 
5. The British Chargé then expressed his opinion that the resolute
determination of the British Government was not to repeat the mistake at
Canton in lodging at Hankow a protest merely for purpose of record.
Instead, they probably would take an independent course if necessary,
