364 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 different was an approach to Muslim authorities. I pointed out that I had orally raised this with Secretary Vance just after New Year’s. I mentioned the two points in the memo that [less than 1 line not declassified] had both said similar things.3 Dr. Brzezinski generally agreed with this but asked how we identified the leaders we should approach. I said that we could not really identify them; we should have a shotgun approach and send somebody like Hal Saunders on a major tour to explain: a. Our estimate of what happened in Afghanistan; b. Our policy of patience with respect to Iran and the hostages; and c. The fact that there were limits on our patience and that military action might eventually ensue. Dr. Brzezinski asked me to be ready to raise this at the SCC in the morning.4 [portion marking not declassified] 5. With respect to the hostages, I also recommended that we renew the public relations campaign that he had once organized whereby a major US figure tackled a different topic almost every day. I said access to the hostages was a very important one at this time and one that we should not have let drop completely. He agreed with me and again asked that I be ready to raise this in the SCC tomorrow morning. I also stressed the importance of getting access to the prisoners by any group of people in order to gain more intelligence about their location. [portion marking not declassified] 6. I then reviewed [1 line not declassified] the collection effort we had made against the hostages and their environment [less than 1 line not declassified]. 7. With respect to the rescue operation, I told him I thought a 50 percent probability of success was optimistic. I thought the use of the carrier was the only way to improve the surprise element. If we were going to do that, we should start flying carrier aircraft sorties up into the Gulf now and then in a short time send the carrier a little way into the Gulf, withdraw it, and then a number of days before any effort send it all the way up in the Gulf so as not to tip our hand. I further said that I thought the 25th was too early a date and that the plan around Naim was too fuzzy and they needed more time to sort that one out properly. He asked me to get together with Dave Jones and 3 [Names not declassified] agreed with Turner’s position that the United States should try to influence Khomeini through Islamic leaders chosen by a “shotgun approach.” (Ibid.) 4 Turner raised the issue at the January 11 SCC meeting. Powell stated his agreement with Turner, and Aaron offered to put together a small interagency working group under the NSC Staff to examine themes and issues highlighting the U.S. public posture. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 18, SCC Meeting #249 held 1/11/80)
