National Security Policy  1005
States that, at the cost of acceptable levels of damage to themselves, the 
United States as a world power would cease to exist. He further believes 
that such an objective could be attained by the development of their over­
all military capabilities which would include an operational ICBM force 
of about 250 (185 on launcher) by mid-­1961, 500 (385 on launcher) by mid-­
1962, and 800 (640 on launcher) by mid-­1963. It is generally agreed that the 
Soviets have both the technical and industrial capability to produce such 
a force; the physical difficulties thereby entailed will almost certainly not 
be the limiting factor.
It is the view of the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, 
that, while Soviet planners will undoubtedly feel that they will have 
attained a capacity for substantial deterrence and pre-­emptive attack 
by mid-­1962 or earlier, the real objective of the Soviet ICBM program 
is “decisive military superiority.” He believes that the Soviets would 
not be content with conceptual levels of deterrence; they would realize 
the possibility of error in their own calculations and acknowledge the 
possibility of Western pre-emption of their deterrent capabilities. This 
latter contingency would weigh the more heavily if the Soviet leaders 
intended, as he believes likely, to exploit their capabilities in political 
offensives. In this event, their estimate of the likelihood of Western 
“desperate” acts would induce them to attempt attainment of total 
deterrence, i.e. “delusive military superiority.”
[Omitted here is the remainder of the estimate.]
240.	 Memorandum From Kistiakowsky to Eisenhower1
Washington, February 12, 1960
SUBJECT
Problems involved in the Minuteman Program
This missile is in several respects a more advanced concept than 
the Polaris missile and, therefore requires considerable development 
work before it can become operational.
The main technical problems are:
(a) Development of satisfactory solid propellant grams (that for the 
first stage weighing about 10,000 lbs) for the three stages which will 
1 Source: Problems involved in the Minuteman program. No classification marking. 
2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
