council to announce publicly that their action [was] taken after discussion with consular body at Shanghai and with approval of the representatives of the powers concerned at Peking. MacMurray developed this suggestion observing that the chairman of Municipal Council had given him to understand when in Shanghai that Municipal Council would find less difficulty in falling in with desires of Heads of Legation if not compelled to act under obvious pressure. MacMurray further observed that from interviews with Chinese at Shanghai he had gained the impression that Chinese generally would be measurably appeased if Municipal Council would admit some responsibility for the events of May 30th. 4. At this stage of discussion Japanese Minister stated he was informed from Shanghai that Municipal Council intended to resist conclusions of Heads of Legation and French Minister insisted upon the necessity of determining fundamental issue—whether Heads of Legation have or have not power to control action of Municipal Council and in the last resort dismiss it and substitute an administration of the Settlement by the consuls. Both MacMurray and I expressed considerable doubt whether Heads of Legation were legally competent to dismiss Municipal Council. French Minister then proposed identic telegrams to our respective Governments asking for instructions, assuring us of the confidence of our Governments in respect to our attitude in Shanghai incident and our right to dissolve Municipal Council and institute other administrative organ in Shanghai. Both MacMurray and I considered such identic telegrams would be unfortunate as it was in a deplorable belligerent spirit and definitely raised hypothetical question which MacMurray felt Department of State would either be loath to answer or would answer in the negative, thereby preventing us from associating ourselves with our colleagues in any action which Heads of Legation might all believe indicated by resistance on the part of Municipal Council. 5. A long discussion then ensued in which MacMurray supported by Danish colleague expressed the hope that all possibilities of amicable solution between Municipal Council and Heads of Legation should be explored before taking any step which would precipitate issue on the question of control over the Settlement. An impasse appeared to be reached and rather delicate situation arrived at by insistence of French Minister that identic telegrams either should be sent or if no unanimity on the subject the various interested diplomatic representatives would be left to individual action thus breaking up the solidarity heretofore existing among Heads of Legation. 6. At this point senior minister proposed that the representatives of powers having nationals on Municipal Council, namely, Great Britain, Japan and the United States, telegraph identically to their respective consul[s] general in
