426 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 124. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 3, 1978 SUBJECT Status Report on Egypt-Israel Negotiations As you know, Boutros Ghali and Usama [al Baz] have left for Cairo2 and will probably not return until Tuesday.3 Weizman is meanwhile in Israel trying to get support for his proposal on withdrawal in phases to the interim line. In our talks with Dayan today,4 he stuck to a tough line, even reopening some issues, perhaps in anticipation that the Egyptians will do likewise after they return from Cairo. At present, several issues are still not resolved. 1. Serious Issues: —Preamble. Israel wants to delete language that notes that the Camp David framework constitutes a basis for peace between Israel and each of its neighbors. Dayan implied that the only way Israel could agree to this language would be if we were to write a letter stating that there is “no legal linkage” between the Treaty and the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. We have said this is not necessary and that the preamble cannot now be changed. —Gaza. Israel will not accept our suggested language (originally proposed by Barak) on “the issue of the status of Gaza.” Egypt will not accept the Israeli draft. They are both adamant. We have said we will stick with our draft. —Letter on West Bank/Gaza. Israel does not want a joint letter, does not want to refer to a target date for elections, and does not want to annex the Camp David Framework to the letter. Egypt insists on a joint letter, wants to set a target date, and wants to annex the Framework. Otherwise Sadat will want to include arrangements for Gaza in the treaty itself, which his delegation realizes is a non-starter. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 55, Middle East: Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel, 11–12/78. Secret; Outside System. Sent for information. 2 On November 3, Boutros Ghali and al-Baz received instructions to return to Egypt for consultations with Sadat. (Telegram 280946 to Cairo, November 4; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840153–2376) 3 November 7. 4 No other record of these talks has been found.
