Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II larly the eastern bloc governments, were not covered. This lack led to criticism, and also deprived us of many of the benefits described above with respect to those countries. The 1979 amendment has remedied the situation. Second, since we do not control the timing of the public release of the Reports, publication can conflict either with the timing of other bilateral pursuits or with the timing of the human rights strategy itself in a particular country. Finally, the public release of the Reports produces friction in bilateral relations with some countries, and occasionally complicates achievement of other U.S. objectives. In most instances, however, the impact on our bilateral relations— whether positive or negative—has been modest. A more detailed description of the impact of the reports on U.S. foreign relations is provided, region by region, in the sections that follow. Europe and North America Most European countries have had little or no official reaction to the Reports, and the Reports had little impact on our bilateral relations with those countries. The Federal Republic of Germany and Yugoslavia registered minor objections to specific aspects of the 1978 Reports. France objected officially to the fact that a Report was prepared on its human rights practices. The Governments of Turkey, Greece, and Cyprus each expressed displeasure with the Reports, focusing primarily on the discussion of Cyprus in each of these Reports. Since Reports on the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe will be prepared for the first time in 1979, there has been no reaction thus far from these countries. Central and South America Because U.S. policies on human rights issues are generally wellknown in Central and South America, the publication of the Reports has had little impact on our relations with most nations in that region. Most host governments review them with interest but generally offer little or no official comment. In many cases, the Reports have served as a useful resource for the discussion of specific human rights issues in Latin American countries, and for internal human rights reviews related to aid decisions and U.S. votes in the international financial institutions. The Reports generally have had the positive effect of reaffirming to host governments our commitment to human rights, and of reminding individual countries of specific issues which deserve special attention. While a few countries—for example, El Salvador, Jamaica, and Uruguay—have criticized alleged inaccuracies in the Reports, the
