612
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
larly the eastern bloc governments, were not covered. This lack led to
criticism, and also deprived us of many of the benefits described above
with respect to those countries. The 1979 amendment has remedied the
situation.
Second, since we do not control the timing of the public release of
the Reports, publication can conflict either with the timing of other bi-
lateral pursuits or with the timing of the human rights strategy itself in
a particular country.
Finally, the public release of the Reports produces friction in bilat-
eral relations with some countries, and occasionally complicates
achievement of other U.S. objectives.
In most instances, however, the impact on our bilateral relations—
whether positive or negative—has been modest. A more detailed de-
scription of the impact of the reports on U.S. foreign relations is pro-
vided, region by region, in the sections that follow.
Europe and North America
Most European countries have had little or no official reaction to
the Reports, and the Reports had little impact on our bilateral relations
with those countries. The Federal Republic of Germany and Yugoslavia
registered minor objections to specific aspects of the 1978 Reports.
France objected officially to the fact that a Report was prepared on its
human rights practices. The Governments of Turkey, Greece, and
Cyprus each expressed displeasure with the Reports, focusing pri-
marily on the discussion of Cyprus in each of these Reports. Since Re-
ports on the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe will be prepared for the
first time in 1979, there has been no reaction thus far from these
countries.
Central and South America
Because U.S. policies on human rights issues are generally well-
known in Central and South America, the publication of the Reports
has had little impact on our relations with most nations in that region.
Most host governments review them with interest but generally offer
little or no official comment. In many cases, the Reports have served as
a useful resource for the discussion of specific human rights issues in
Latin American countries, and for internal human rights reviews re-
lated to aid decisions and U.S. votes in the international financial insti-
tutions. The Reports generally have had the positive effect of reaf-
firming to host governments our commitment to human rights, and of
reminding individual countries of specific issues which deserve special
attention.
While a few countries—for example, El Salvador, Jamaica, and
Uruguay—have criticized alleged inaccuracies in the Reports, the
