1956  1263
18. Wang replied they had not made such a demand on my govt. 
Only demanded it adopt measures on its own initiative. Wished stress 
imprisoned Chinese my country did not have ability espress will while 
in prison. To try to state by any means that any Chinese in our prisons 
return or not could not be considered true.
18. I asked did he mean a man in prison could not decide whether 
he prefered to serve sentence in accordance with regulations of which 
aware, or desired immediatly proceed his country—­that is did he mean 
a man could not make a decision between those two things.
19. Wang replied as result years my govt’s outrageous anti-China 
propaganda campaign and persecution Chinese my country, tremen­
dous pressure and threats exerted these persons with regard desire 
return motherland. As result all this, (psychology of Chinese prison­
ers no longer normal and would believe if only mention desire return 
motherland, sentences might be doubled and in cases when people 
committed minor offense,) might be taken as major offenses and heavier 
sentences given. Under such circumstances difficult express wish and 
difficult make decision.
20. I said seemed to me pressure would all be in other direction. 
Certainly for prisoner who had long sentence ahead of him to be given 
choice between serving that sentence and being given immediate 
release return to his country, pressure would be all for seeking release. 
I was confident any Chinese in US perfectly aware of what been funda­
mental principle of our system justice from very beginning our country. 
Far from being worried about his sentence being doubled or increased, 
he would know perfectly well that utterly impossible under our sys­
tem. First, it always been fundamental principle our justice, no man 
could be tried twice for same crime. That is if tried and found inno­
cent he could not be tried again. If tried and found guilty and sentence 
imposed he could not be tried again and another sentence imposed. If 
tried and found guilty and appealed sentence to hgher court, higher 
court could under no circumstances increase sentence. It could either 
decrease sentence or reaffirm sentence—­or declare him innocent. These 
absolutely fundamental principles of our system justice which well 
known anyone livng our country. I thus satisfied no prisoners could 
possibly have fear he mentioned. In any event I thought case Mr. Lew 
who has just returned his country ample proof this. Again ask him by 
whatever method he chose, permit Americans in his country expedi­
tiously be permitted return my country. In other words simply ask that 
clear words agreement be carried out.
21. Wang said didnt want engage debate on legal procedure my 
country. Simply wanted point out no lack cases innocent Chinese 
nationals and Chinese students my country who subjected arrest and 
imprisonment my govt. For a person simply to desire return own
