Afghanistan
567
199.
Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 8, 1980
SUBJECT
Record of your Meeting with Lt. Gen Akhtar
The following are the main points that arose in your discussion
with General Akhtar in Islamabad on February 3:
—He explained that he has a very small organization for his Afghan
operation which handles everything involved. In the Pakistan govern-
ment, only President Zia is aware of it.
—To your question about what he is receiving, he gave you a
satisfactory answer, noting the same numbers in categories of support
as you had in your talking paper.
—He is proceeding very cautiously both in technique of transporta-
tion and in quantity of equipment and actions. To prove to you the
results are concrete, not phoney, he promised to send through “other
channels” some photographs.
—You asked about U.S. debriefing of more personnel. He declined
to make them available because it is his policy to allow no one to
return to Afghanistan once he has been exposed to U.S. or Pakistani
intelligence officials. If some are wounded and unable to return, they
could be turned over for a debrief.
—He admitted that some cross-border fire and very small border
clashes have occurred.
—He has pulled together the six political leaders from the Afghan
resistance and told them that support is dependent upon their coopera-
tion and combined planning. They are obliging.
—When you asked what else we can do to help, he asked for
[less than 1 line not declassified] of Soviet formations and movements,
particularly on the Soviet side of the Afghan-Soviet border. You prom-
ised to look into it upon return to the U.S.
—Akhtar also registered a complaint about our request through
Defense channels for the EC–135 flight. Keep it in intelligence channels,
he begged!
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General
Odom File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1–2/80. Top Secret; Sensitive.
