Chapter 5, May–June 1990 767 Burt: Let me add that what we have here is a situation where the glass is both half full and half empty. All we want to do is maintain a set of practices that have existed for many years, and have not interfered with the ability to complete strategic offensive arms agreements. Our program of cooperation with the UK predated the negotiations on strategic arms that led to agreements completed in 1972 and 1979. And in fact we have gone far further to meet Soviet concerns in non-­ circumvention than in any other arms control agreement. I will conclude by saying if you define our cooperation as expanded, you are unilaterally creating a problem. This should not be a problem unless you choose to make it one. Karpov: Mr. Khromov has a question. Khromov: My question is, isn’t the cooperation program with the UK going to create problems of verification of compliance? One of the possibilities would be the Kings Bay base, where we could be told a Trident II missile has nothing to do with the treaty because it belongs to the UK. This would be a problem, like in INF. Bartholomew: We understand your concern, and have gone far to meet it. We will do nothing to prevent us from maintaining and modernizing an effective UK deterrent. Were we to do so, we would damage our relationship not only with that country but our whole position as a reliable ally. This we will not and cannot do. If the terms are as you describe them, then we will be unable to conclude and sign a START treaty. If that were to happen it would be truly tragic. I think you would be sacrificing a major treaty for an artificial and theoretical problem. I have nothing further to say. Karpov: I will note that we have our own problems related to ratification. Gen. Omelitchev is a deputy of the Supreme Soviet, and an expert in the way security issues are treated in the Supreme Soviet. The committee on security and armaments will certainly stumble on this hole. We will not defend a position like this, it is indefensible. Bartholomew: Let me add that we will have our own ratification problems. This is artificial. No one is talking about making the UK a nuclear superpower. If we were to agree to anything like what you are proposing, we would not have a ratification problem because we would have no treaty we could sign. Look at this problem again in the sense of how real it is in terms of the limits in the agreement. Karpov: I too have said everything I can say on this subject. Bartholomew: Let us turn then to heavy ICBMs. From the outset of stragtegic arms negotiations, one goal has been elimination of heavy ICBMs. We are not seeking unilateral advantage, this goal is fundamentally in accord with the strategic stability objective this
