1955 619 US Government. There are such cases among Chinese who returned to China recently. 19. Wang said it is distortion of agreement to allege that there is no distinction between ordinary Americans in China and those who have committed offenses in China. 20. Wang said he would like frankly point out it is not possible for PRC side or for anyone who sincerely concerned with Sino-American talks to tolerate charges which reverse merits of matter and drag out talks. Wang said PRC side asks that talks should without further delay get down to discussion of making announcement on basis their new draft so as to reach agreement thereon. 21. I then presented prepared statement as follows: A. Before taking up any other matters this morning, I desire express my satisfaction at release of Dr. Bradshaw and news that both he and Mrs. Bradshaw have now arrived Hong Kong. I would hope that this action your government portends early release fourteen Americans still remaining in prison your country, thus removing not only this source dispute and controversy between us here but also removing continuing impediment to improvement relations between our two countries. B. I regret note that in spite of fact that at our last meeting I most earnestly urged your government not issue public statement concern­ ing substance our discussions here regarding our agreed announce­ ment September 10, your government, nevertheless, issued such statement. As I pointed out at our last meeting, it is difficult for me understand how your government can consider that such statements contribute to real progress in our talks here. Such public debate can only exacerbate our differences and in no way can contribute to their solution. I have in past, and hope in future fully and openly discuss our differences here with intent do my best resolve them or arrive at greatest possible degree common understanding. I still hold view that place for these discussions is in our meetings here rather than by our two governments exchanging public statements. Action of your gov­ ernment making such statement of course compelled my government make reply. Position my government with respect to carrying out of agreed announcement of September 10 set forth in that reply which was issued by Department of State December 16. C. I then said as far as cruel and inhuman treatment concerned, facts in case Mrs. Bradshaw speak for themselves. In December 1950 this woman along with her husband applied for exit permits. These refused and in February 1951 she and her husband arrested. At time she entered prison, she in normal health. Three and half years later she released com­ pletely broken in body and mind. In spite this, more than another [omis­ sion in the original] passed before authority given her leave.
