784 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 JCS NSC Lt. General John Pustay Gary Sick Marshall Brement Justice Thomas Thornton John Harmon Alfred Friendly Judge Charles Renfrew Treasury Robert Carswell Robert Mundheim CIA Admiral Stansfield Turner [name not declassified] Charles Cogan SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 1. World Court Decision. Mr. Christopher said he thought we would get a good decision from the World Court.2 At present, however, he did not favor going back to the Security Council after the decision since this would merely provoke additional debate and lead to another Soviet veto. If the Soviet judge on the ICJ should vote for the decision, we should review our position since we might be able to bring new pressures on the Soviets. We should be able to use the decision effectively for public presentation in favor of our position. All agreed that we would not plan to return to the Security Council pending further review after the decision is announced. (C) Approve3 Plan to return to the Security Council 2. Iranian Visas. There have been approximately 700 applications for visas by Iranians. Approximately half of these have been granted on the basis of medical needs, rejoining families, and other humanitarian reasons. The other half have been rejected. We have not been swamped with requests. Of those cases which have been granted, nearly half have been minority applicants, and the conditions applied in those cases are considerably more lenient than for other Iranians regardless of their position. The sharp difference between minorities and other Iranians is becoming very evident, and Mr. Christopher felt we should adopt a more liberal standard for granting visas to non-minority Iranians. Specifically, we should be more flexible in granting visas for medi- 2 In its final decision, rendered May 24, the ICJ unanimously determined that Iran must release the hostages immediately, that no hostage could be subjected to a trial or provide witness in any trial, that Iran was obliged to make reparation for injuries caused to the United States, and that the Court would determine the form and amount of this reparation if the two sides could not come to an agreement. Argumentation before the Court and the Court’s ruling are in Department of State Bulletin, May 1980, pp. 36–69, and July 1980, pp. 43–70, respectively. 3 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and initialed “J” in the right margin.
