1978  439
99.	
Memorandum From Victor Utgoff of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security 
Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for 
National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, October 25, 1978
SUBJECT
Observations on the Continued Need for a Triad of Strategic Forces
During the recent Mid-Term Review of Defense Programs, the 
President questioned Harold’s assumption that we must maintain our 
Triad of strategic forces. This memo reviews the arguments for main-
taining a full Triad.
The first thing to note in addressing the overall issue is that, given 
the continued viability we project for the bomber and ICBM forces, and 
the modernization efforts already underway, the question is not the 
general one of whether we want a Triad. It is instead the more specific 
one of whether the modernization of the ICBM force to maintain a Triad (1) 
adds wholly unique and necessary capabilities to the Dyad of bombers 
and SLBMs we are already modernizing, or (2) hedges in some unique 
way against the possibility of a catastrophic loss of one leg of our strate-
gic forces posture, or (3) provides capabilities present in the underlying 
Dyad, but at less cost.
Unique and Necessary Contributions of the ICBM Force
It is commonly argued that the unique combination of good C3, 
high readiness and short flight times make the ICBM force uniquely 
capable of rapid destruction of hard targets. There are several problems 
with this claim, however.
First, the requirement for rapid destruction of targets may not be 
very great. The ICBM modernization study now being completed by 
OSD argues that there are [less than 1 line not declassified] targets (includ-
ing [less than 1 line not declassified] hard targets) other than missile silos 
and launch control centers that change value so rapidly that striking 
them with missiles might do significantly more damage than striking 
them later with bombers or cruise missiles.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski 
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Doctrine/C3I: 1978. Top Secret. Sent for informa-
tion. At the top of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “VU this is a good + and provoc-
ative memo. Set up a discussion of it among our people—­and at some point we ought to 
draw in the DOD. In the meantime develop the [illegible] memos mentioned on pp 6–7. 
ZB.”
