1957  1471
30. I stated that that presented a personal difficulty for me. 
He  was the first to be told of my transfer. I had not yet informed 
the Czechoslovak Government. I would prefer that a statement on the 
future of the talks be made. What I had in mind was: “Ambassadors U. 
Alexis Johnson and Wang Ping-nan held their 73rd meeting today. They 
stated an announcement would subsequently be made as to the date of 
the next meeting.”
31. When Wang appeared to demur at this, I suggested the substi­
tution of “concerning” for “as to the date of”.
32. Wang agreed.
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
855.	 Letter 62 from Johnson to Clough1
Letter No. 62
Geneva, December 12, 1957
Dear Ralph:
This is my final letter from the Geneva Ambassadorial talks. I can­
not say that from a personal standpoint I am sad as the last year, in 
particular, has been very sterile. However, I am sad that more has not 
been accomplished.
As far as the future is concerned I feel that we may well be in for 
a long hiatus with their reply being that they stand ready to resume 
the talks at any time we appoint an Ambassador, but that they see no 
purpose in meetings at a lower level. Frankly, I do not feel that they will 
feel any pressure to take action along the lines of releasing additional 
prisoners to persuade us to resume at the Ambassadorial level. I think 
that their line will be that the sterility of our talks is an argument for the 
Foreign Minister level meeting rather than for reducing the level below 
Ambassadors.
You, of course, know that they are extremely sensitive on the sub­
ject of corresponding levels and we can be sure that even if they do 
agree to resume with Martin they will be very careful also to appoint 
a First Secretary, to correspond with Ed’s rank in London. This will, in 
fact, mean that their man will be considerably below Ed in competence 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
