For the last few weeks I have patiently explored various avenues of approach to parties involved and I am now in possession of a body of reliable information concerning their respective attitudes. Taking all evidence which has been assembled into consideration, together with recommendations of General Pershing, of yourself, and of your advisers, I have reached conclusion that time has arrived to make direct representation to both parties on this subject. I do not feel that this step could have been taken earlier and I am equally of opinion that it should not be longer delayed. (3) Procedure to be followed is exceedingly important. For the moment we are standing in favorable position which should not be disturbed by any measure which might tend to alter attitude of the two parties which I am led to believe may be receptive. For some time Chile has intimated willingness to entertain suggestions for settlement. Peru has evidently adopted policy of pushing on toward an ultimate plebiscite, partly through confidence of winning it on face of returns, partly through the feeling that in any event developments were providing her at least a moral victory. Two factors have recently appeared that shake this confidence and that will possibly act to reverse this policy. The regulation allowing railroad employees to vote and practical difficulties in way of sending her voters to provinces and in voting them are, as you have reported, causing Peru to pause and to consider question of withdrawal from plebiscite. From all information available I am convinced, for first time, that Peru might welcome opportunity to discuss matter of adjustment on new lines. (4) New complications are to be avoided. Chances of adjustment would, in my opinion, be diminished instead of enhanced through any action by which Peru might be induced to burn her bridges and to withdraw from plebiscite. For this reason you should for the present make no commitment to either party on question of abandonment of plebiscite. Procedure, outlined in part (7) of your telegram under acknowledgment, of delivering something in nature of an ultimatum to Chilean Commissioner seems to me to involve heavy risk which we need not at present assume. Peru should not be advised either directly or indirectly that you are ready to call off plebiscite and put blame on Chile, and to my mind there is much danger of word being conveyed to Peruvian representatives if you talk with Chilean
