March–August 1953
575
207.
Memorandum From the Director of the U.S. Technical
Cooperation Administration Mission in Iran (Warne) to the
Ambassador to Iran (Henderson)1
Tehran, May 20, 1953.
DISCUSSION WITH MINISTER AKHAVI
Dr. Ali Akbar Akhavi, Minister of National Economy, asked me to
call on him today. He had heard that I was to go with you to Karachi,
though I have not spread it around.
There were several things about Point 4 operations that he wished
to discuss, such as a request from him and the Prime Minister for an
American adviser for the Iranian Insurance Company, but I gained the
impression that, in the main, he wanted to say some things that he
hoped I would repeat in Karachi. I believe, also, that he said to me
about what he earlier had said to you.
In brief, these are the points he made:
1. This is the time to help Iran, and if Dr. Mossadegh is given assur-
ance of help he will put the Tudeh down.
2. The Prime Minister cannot fight on two fronts, the pro-British el-
ements who are opposing him, and the Tudeh, so he has felt that he has
had to tolerate the Tudeh. He knows that the Tudeh also are enemies,
but right now they are not fighting him.
3. If the Prime Minister were given the resources he would and
could easily take in hand both groups of opposition, the pro-British and
the Tudeh.
4. The anti-American activities come from what Dr. Akhavi de-
scribes as the extreme right and the extreme left. He says there are very
few leading this movement and we should not be alarmed by it.
5. Dr. Akhavi believes that the extreme rightist are the repre-
sentatives of corruption and pro-British influence. They lack the moral
stamina to overcome Dr. Mossadegh. Zirazadeh, he says, spends much
money but none of his own. Dr. Baghai, the same, though not so
blatantly.
6. Those who have not experienced the effects of British Imperi-
alism may not be able to appreciate the depths of the hatred in Iran of it,
but it is the one incontestable fact that makes Tudeh and the middle
parties compatible at all.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 469, Records of U.S. Foreign Assistance Agencies
1948–1961, Mission to Iran, Executive Office Subject Files (Central Files) 1951–1961, Box 7,
Folder 6, 350. Secret; Security Information.
