Chapter 6, June–December 1990  933
 The exchanges between Secretary Cheney and Minister Yazov left 
us confused why you want the right to construct new silos for heavy 
ICBMs.
 I have studied the letter you and Minister Yazov sent to Secretary 
Cheney and me. It suggests two reasons for constructing new heavy 
ICBM silos—­accidental destruction and relocation for “non-­military” 
reasons.
 You say you have no plans to do either, and rightfully so because 
such occurrences are quite unlikely. It would be better to construct the 
treaty around the most likely case—­that neither of these contingencies 
arise—­and include special provisions to handle them if the unlikely 
happens.
— This would solve your problem in a way that does not create 
one for us.
 To do this we would ban the construction of new heavy ICBM 
silos, and include:
— A provision that would allow the replacement of a silo acci-
dently destroyed after notification in the Joint Commission and 
confirmation that the silo is inoperable.
— A commitment that we would consider sympathetically a 
request in the Joint Commission to replace silos at bases closed for, 
as you say in your letter, non-­military reasons due to internal polit-
ical processes.
 Can we agree on this as a way to deal with these unlikely contin-
gencies in a way that does not cause us a problem?
178.	 Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State 
Baker1
	
Washington, December 17, 1990, 1430Z
424164/TOSEC 290026. Subject: START Package
1. (Secret)—Entire Text.
2. Embassy should deliver the note in Paras 3 and 4 below from 
Secretary Baker to Foreign Minister Shevardnadze ASAP. There will be 
no signed original. This package follows-­up on the recent discussions 
in Houston and Washington.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
N900009–0229. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information. Drafted by Roy; approved 
by Roy and in S/S. From December 16 to 18, Baker was in Brussels to attend a NATO 
ministerial meeting.
