424
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
compliance with international law would determine Panama’s further
action, Royo said.
8. Torrijos said that Col. Noriega would go to Contadora to brief
the Shah on these developments. He and Royo asked that I go to
Contadora later in the morning to let the Shah know that we were
familiar with the Panamanian plans.
9. I pointed out that Panama was giving away the only two cards
in its hand without any assurance of results. My argument did not
prevail, however, in the face of all those present who insisted that it
was the right moment for a calculated risk. They seemed to have
confidence that Ghotbzadeh would perform and that even if he were
not elected President, that he was in such high favor with Khomeini
that he would wield great power.
10. In a post-meeting phone conversation with Lewis, I said I
thought it unfortunate that Royo had given in so quickly without
putting together the whole deal and coordinating with us. Lewis gave
a verbal shrug of the shoulders and said it was important now to make
sure Royo’s telex was carefully drafted so that it did not make any
commitments as to the arrest and that it show clearly that Panama’s
intention is to work to free the hostages. He agreed that he would not
have committed himself to send the cable but felt it was too late in
view of Royo’s promises.
11. I arranged with Royo to meet with him at 6:45 a.m. in his office
and that he would not send the cable prior to such time, so I could
advise him of any information received from Washington tonight.
12. Hamilton Jordan informed me at about 10:30 p.m. that he was
very concerned about timing and felt Royo’s telex would be a great
mistake. He said to tell Royo that as a result of the weekend trip,
President Carter had ordered a complete review of our negotiating
posture and had said we should work with the Panamanians.4 He asked
that I try to stop the telex to Ghotbzadeh and get Royo’s represent-
atives to Washington. He said to tell Royo that Ghotbzadeh was on
his way out politically, had told a contact of ours he could not win the
election, and had made many unkept promises to us. Perhaps the telex
was a good idea for later, but we had to coordinate. I said that if
necessary I would call him from Royo’s office.
13. Lewis called the PN Ambassador in Paris about 11:45 p.m. He
learned that the French intermediary had not yet arrived from Tehran
but would be in shortly. Lewis asked that the intermediary call him
no later than 5 a.m. Panama time so that we could have his overall
assessment prior to my meeting with Royo. Lewis quoted the intermedi-
4 See Documents 157 and 159.
