Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
683
China” to “we will not sell offensive arms to China.”3 This shift in for-
mulation would enable you to provide the Chinese with the over-the-
horizon radar and perhaps later with anti-tank weaponry. Given the
scale and the boldness of the Soviet move, these reactions are both
needed and hardly excessive. Moreover, they would communicate tan-
gibly our willingness to support those who are prepared to stand up to
the Soviets, and the Chinese are certainly in that category.
More broadly, we have to move deliberately to fashion a wider se-
curity arrangement for the region, lest Soviet influence spread rapidly
from Afghanistan to Pakistan and Iran.4 I cannot emphasize strongly
enough the strategic consequences of such a development. It would
place in direct jeopardy our most vital interests in the Middle East.
The recommended subtle change in terminology, initiating a lim-
ited defense arrangement with China, could be the point of departure
for a wider security effort in the region. You are already moving firmly
on Pakistan, and I believe the Congress will support you. We should
implement rapidly your decisions on new bases in the Indian Ocean/
Gulf of Oman area, and survey teams will now be going out.5
Beyond the above, we will need an aid package for Pakistan, and
that could be expensive, though it might be shared with Saudi Arabia.
Also, if we can stiffen Pakistan’s back, we should be in a position to
extend some aid to the Afghani rebels, in order to keep the Soviets
bogged down.
Finally, we need to do something to reassure the Egyptians, the
Saudis, and others on the Arabian peninsula that the U.S. is prepared to
assert its power, and that requires a visible military presence in the area
now. You might consider consulting with Sadat about military deploy-
ment to an Egyptian base of a U.S. brigade for joint maneuvers.6 This
would be an impressive demonstration of U.S. determination to con-
test, if necessary, Soviet military preeminence in the region.
3 Brzezinski placed an arrow and a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this
sentence. In his memoirs, he indicates that Brown and Donovan supported this proposal,
while Vance, Christopher, and Cutler opposed it. According to Brzezinski: “The Presi-
dent concluded that under the present circumstances it would suffice for Brown to indi-
cate to the Chinese that the United States would be willing to provide China with
over-the-horizon radar and would give China more favored treatment in trade than the
Soviet Union, but that ‘it would be a quantum leap to go to arms sales’ at this time. It was
better, he concluded, to leave that option open.” (Power and Principle, p. 431)
4 Brzezinski placed an arrow and a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this
sentence.
5 Documentation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
XVIII, Middle East Regional; Arabian Peninsula.
6 Brzezinski placed an arrow and a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this
sentence.
