Arms Control and Disarmament  1651
Consideration of this question has served to draw attention to the 
urgent need for decisions on United States nuclear testing policy in the 
event negotiations are unsuccessful or reach agreement only on con­
trolled suspension of nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere. We have 
agreed that studies looking toward such decisions should be initiated 
promptly and should embrace future requirements for nuclear weapons 
testing, improvement of methods of detection, fall-­out considerations, 
and factors of cost and practicability involved in testing underground 
and in outer space. Arrangements for these studies are being worked 
out by the Department of Defense, the Atomic Energy Commission, and 
the Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology.
Acting Secretary
Attachment
Proposal
Washington, April 17, 1959
VOLUNTARY TEMPORARY MORATORIUM 
ON UNDERGROUND AND HIGH ALTITUDE TESTS
PROBLEM
To consider whether it would be in the U.S. interest to offer to accom­
pany a controlled suspension of atmospheric nuclear weapons tests with 
a voluntary one to two year moratorium on underground and high alti­
tude nuclear weapons tests, provided the Soviet Union does the same.
BACKGROUND
During preparation of the proposal put forward on April 13 at Geneva 
by the U.S. and U.N. delegations, a possible additional feature was con­
sidered. While this additional element was not included in the April 13 
proposal, it was agreed that it would be given further urgent study by the 
U.S. against the possibility that the Soviet reaction to the April 13 proposal 
might be such as to justify reconsideration of the decision not to include it.
The additional proposal was put forward in the following terms. 
The Russians will probably be very disinclined to reach any agreement 
falling short of a complete ban on all tests. They will argue for a com­
plete ban on grounds of general principle and say that anything short 
of it will be unsatisfactory and unfair. The U.S. and the U.K. might 
meet this objection by announcing that they would be prepared, pro­
vided the Soviets are likewise to refrain for a period from the entry into 
force of the initial agreement from conducting tests underground and 
above 50 kilometers. This moratorium would be a voluntary arrange­
ment outside any formal agreement—thus preserving the important
