February 1951–February 1952
143
a mutually acceptable draft resolution. Our efforts to persuade the
British to assume a more conciliatory attitude in the draft resulted in a
sharp reaction in London, and the British Government through various
channels in London, Washington and New York set forth in very strong
terms their dissatisfaction with what they considered to be the lack of
support for their position. The British expressed concern that this lack
of support might result in the question entering into the political debate
in the United Kingdom with consequent harmful effects upon United
States-British relations.
We have, however, now been able to work out a resolution which
goes a long way toward meeting the British desires and which we feel
would encounter minimum adverse reaction on the part of the Ira-
nians. Briefly, this resolution would (a) recount on a factual basis the
principal factors relating to the situation, including the fact that Iran
did not accept the provisional measures of the International Court of
Justice; (b) call for a resumption of negotiations on the basis of the prin-
ciples of the Court’s decision, unless some other mutually acceptable
basis can be found; and (c) call upon all countries to take no action
which would prejudice the rights, claims or positions of the parties.8
Dr. Mosadeq, heading a large Iranian delegation, arrived in New
York on October 8 to represent Iran before the Security Council. It is un-
derstood that his efforts will be directed toward denying the compe-
tency of the Security Council in the matter. In so doing he is expected to
make a blistering attack against the AIOC in particular and the British
in general. It is feared that airing the matter before the Security Council
will very seriously prejudice the possibility of successful negotiations.
It would be well if Dr. Mosadeq’s presence in the United States could
be used as an opportunity to bring about a resumption of negotiations
before the Security Council action, although the present British political
situation is such as to make it unlikely that they will or can agree to a
substantial postponement of the Council’s meeting. The Department is,
however, endeavoring in such ways as it can to bring about a resump-
tion of negotiations, although as a practical matter this is probably not
possible until after the British elections on October 25.
8 In October, the United States worked with the British on the United Nations Secu-
rity Council resolution, which called for a resumption of oil negotiations on the basis of
the opinion of the International Court of Justice issued on July 5. In its negotiations with
the British on the proposed Security Council resolution, the U.S. attempted to dissuade
them from including a demand for the return of all British technicians expelled from Iran
as a result of Prime Minister Mosadeq’s order of September 24. For extensive documenta-
tion on this Security Council resolution, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran,
1951–1954, pp. 196–220 (Documents 102–110).
