Afghanistan
341
We find no credible evidence of a split within the Soviet leadership
on the decision to move into Afghanistan. They must have agreed that
many outside factors combined to make the time propitious for the
move: increasing doubt about the SALT treaty, the NATO theater
nuclear force decision, the crisis in U.S.-Iranian relations, and the termi-
nation of U.S. military aid to Pakistan, among others. While we are not
prepared to conclude that the Afghan decision represents a permanent
turning away from the policy of détente, we believe that, given the
present slump in U.S.-Soviet relations, the Soviets concluded that no
real progress was to be expected in any case in the months ahead.
End summary.
3. There is much which argued against the Soviet armed interven-
tion into Afghanistan. The move seems likely to worsen Moscow’s
relations with Pakistan, Iran, and other Muslim states, not to mention
China. It will seriously strain the very fabric of the policies of détente
with the West and especially with the U.S., jeopardizing in the process
the SALT treaty. There is even the danger of becoming bogged down
in an Indochina-type guerilla war (though we recognize that parallels
with Vietnam are very imperfect).
4. Why, then, did they do it, when the potential damage to Soviet
foreign policy interests was so great? We do not pretend to have the
answer, other than to make the perhaps obvious observation that the
Soviets must have considered all these risks and concluded that the
potential benefits outweighed them.
Soviet objectives
5. The Soviets apparently have multiple objectives. The most imme-
diate one would be related to the situation within Afghanistan itself,
with Moscow moving to remove Amin and carry out its long-held
plans for broadening the regime’s base, installing a leader who can
gain more popular support for the DRA in hopes of quelling the insur-
gency. Their massive troop support suggests that they are prepared to
launch a major offensive themselves against the insurgents if Babrak
is unable to gain that needed support from the population.
6. Beyond the immediate situation, however, we would imagine
several ideological and geopolitical considerations which entered into
the decision. While some of them are in the worst-case category, they
are perhaps worth mentioning as an aid to analysis:
—Amin’s lack of popular support and inability to come to terms
with the Muslim insurgency risked the eventual fall of a Marxist-
oriented government from power. Once installed in an area contiguous
to the Soviet Union, no “Socialist” regime has fallen from power in
recent times; the Soviets may have determined not to allow Afghanistan
to become the exception, fearing the impact of such an “ideological”
