Chapter 2, January–June 1989 255 ALCM Range—OSD supports Option 4, to maintain 1,500 km range cutoff. ALCM Distinguishability—OSD supports Option 2, to reaffirm our existing approach and to avoid constraints on conventional cruise missiles. Mobile ICBMs: Issues 1/2—OSD supports Option 1, to maintain our existing ban on mobile ICBMs. Issue 3—If the ban on mobile ICBMs is rescinded, OSD supports Option 1 on mobile ICBM sublimits (whether or not MIRVed mobiles are permitted), not to discuss specific mobile ICBM sublimit numbers until agreement has been reached on a verification approach. Issue 4—OSD supports Option 2, to protect U.S. options with regard to potential deployment of movable ICBMs. Mobile ICBM Verification Issue 1—OSD supports the Option 2 Deployment Area concept for Road-Mobile ICBM basing, as it is most consistent with survivability of a Small ICBM force. Issue 2—OSD supports the Option 1 rail garrison concept for Rail-Mobile ICBM basing as it is most consistent with Peacekeeper rail garrison requirements. Issue 3—OSD has not taken a position on the issue of Permeter/Portal Monitoring (PPM), pending a decision on permitting mobile ICBMs. If the mobiles ban is rescinded, OSD would strongly support Option 3. Issue 4—On Mandatory Suspect-Site Inspection (SSI), OSD has not taken a position on this issue, pending a decision on permitting mobile ICBMs. If the mobiles ban is rescinded, OSD would strongly support Option 3. Issue 5—On Right-­of-Refusal SSI, OSD has not taken a position on this issue, pending a decision on permitting mobile ICBMs. Issue 6—OSD supports Option 1, not to allow SSI at places where PPM is an option but is not chosen. DST 001; Assuring U.S. Testing Rights (S) Our current position regarding U.S. testing rights supports the President’s decision to maintain the original objectives of the SDI program and should be affirmed. The Department of Defense can execute the President’s guidance on SDI within the ABM Treaty if we preserve our existing rights under the ABM Treaty and as agreed at the Washington Summit. There is no activity in the SDI program during
