730  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
type as discussed.3 The Nicaraguan Government has likewise deliv-
ered a note today to our Embassy in Managua along similar lines. The 
Costa Rican Government has informed our Embassy that it believes 
surveilliance will not be necessary for the time being.
We do not yet have any proof that the Guatemalan rebels are sup-
ported by Castro or communist forces.
The purpose of our assistance would be to prevent the rebels from 
receiving any reimbursements or supplies that Castro or the com-
muists might try to send them. Under present conditions, however, 
the overt use of our military forces within Guatemalan jurisdiction 
would be inadvisable because they might appear to be taking sides in 
what may turn out to be an internal Guatemalan conflict.
I believe our forces should [illegible in the original] discreet sur-
veillance in order to be able to lead [illegible in the original] assistance 
should its need become evident, but that they should not under present 
conditions attract attention in Guatemala.
I therefore recommend that you authorize the Secretary of Defense 
(a) to instruct our Naval units to remain on the high seas near Guatemala 
out of sight of lead and our aircraft to patrol at a height at which they will 
not attract attention and (b) to report promptly any evidences of a Castro 
or communist attempt to send the rebels supplies or reimbursements and 
to refrain from combat operations unless specifically authorized.
I would recommend further that you authorize a statement for the 
press, either from the White House or from the State Department, along 
the following lines, in the event a question is asked:
“In response to requests by the Governments of Guatemala and 
Nicaragua, surface and air units of the United States Navy are in a posi-
tion in which they could assist these Governments, should it become 
necessary, to seek out and prevent intervention on the part of commu-
nist-directed elements in the internal affairs of Guatemala and Nica-
ragua through the landing of armed forces or supplies from abroad.”4
3 The request was contained in a note dated November 15 from Ambassador Alejos 
to Secretary Herter, which read in part as follows: “I have the honor to request the assis-
tance of Your Excellency’s Government in a surveillance of the Caribbean approaches 
to Guatemala in detecting and preventing the intervention on the part of communist 
directed elements in the internal affairs of Guatemala through the landing of men and 
supplies from overseas.” (714.00/11–1560).
A notation on this note reads as follows: “In lieu of a reply to this note, the President 
sent a special message to President Ydígoras on November 30, 1960.
“File. R[ichard] A. G[odfrey] OAP/G 11/30/60.” For Eisenhower’s message dated 
November 28, but transmitted by telegram, November 30, 1960, see Document GT–46. 
4 Source: Telegram 348 to Guatemala, November 17, said that the President had 
issued the statement quoted above at Augusta, Georgia, on that date. (611.14/11–1760).
