Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I mersed once you learn of it. I realize that seeing foreign visitors and working on foreign problems is important, but I think we need a better balance. My Role I believe I should also make a basic re-evaluation of the ways in which I have been serving you. In reviewing the last few months, I have concluded that I have been spending too much time on routine work which parallels and often duplicates the efforts of others and which they could do just as well on their own; at the same time I have not been doing those things that others cannot do. I have in mind such things as the western trip, which produced more benefits for the Administration than I expected.4 It put the problems in focus and identified where we should be concentrating our efforts, which before the trip had been diffuse and uncoordinated. I have been told that there has been a substantial improvement in western attitudes towards us as a result of that trip, and especially our follow-up efforts. I should be doing more of this kind of domestic travel and giving more comprehensive speeches articulating our policies. I should also have a heavy campaigning schedule which will enable me to play a stronger role as spokesman for our programs. I don’t know if you concur with this conclusion or not, but if you do I think it would be helpful in gaining greater public understanding of and support for our goals. I don’t in any way wish to de-emphasize my role with Congress or my advisory role with you, but I believe my public education role has suffered somewhat. The Mood of the Country I would like to mention just one thing about the so-called “conservative” trend in the country that everyone is talking about. If you ask people whether they are conservative or liberal, there is no question but that more will identify themselves as conservatives than would have been the case several years ago. But if you ask people whether government should help provide more and better housing, education, health care, environmental protection and the rest, a very high percentage of the population still strongly supports government activity of that kind. There is obviously great public concern about inflation and the management of government. I don’t consider trying to deal with inflation or trying to improve the management of government to be illiberal
