812  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The treaty would define a monitoring system which would be 
admittedly not fully effective. Evasion with up to megaton weapons, 
but at extremely high cost, would be theoretically possible in outer 
space. For somewhat smaller weapons, and at somewhat lower but 
still rather high cost, the evasion would also be theoretically possible 
underground by using large holes. Both techniques would require 
major development programs on the part of the Soviets to make them 
practical and detection proof. The underground technique with its 
large earth-­works would be very sensitive to our presently planned 
advanced reconnaissance systems.
The technical requirements and uncertainties of clandestine testing 
underground and in outer space, together with the attendant risk of 
disclosure by the diverse intelligence sources available to the United 
States, could constitute an adequate deterrent to USSR evasion—partic­
ularly if the Soviets conclude that the technical gains possible through 
continued testing under these conditions are limited. Whether this 
adds up to an adequate safeguard for us is consequently not a technical 
question.
These, Mr. President, are the considerations involved, which I 
thought might be useful to you if the result of the impending discussions 
with the British is a change in our tactics at the Geneva negotiations.
192.	 Note From Buford to Martin1
Washington, August 5, 1959
Following our conversation this morning regarding the attached 
alternative sentences in paragraph 16 I notified Jimmy Lay that we 
much preferred the second alternative but would be willing, if there 
were some strong objection from other quarters, to accept the first 
alternative. Jimmy informed me then that Gordon Gray had seen the 
President this morning on some other matter and in the course of their 
discussion had shown the President the two alternatives. The President 
indicated that he much preferred the second alternative. Apparently 
Mr. McElroy was there or came in shortly thereafter and Mr. McElroy 
agreed with the President’s choice. Mr. Lay therefore is circulating an 
approved Record of Action incorporating the second alternative.
1 Source: Eisenhower’s preferred revision of paragraph 16 of NSC 5906. Top Secret. 
2 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1.
