464  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
had no objection to the U.S. proposal to limit the number of launches 
of missiles not equipped with telemetric devices so that these could 
be launched without broadcasting engineering measurements. The 
Soviets believed that the agreement should include all types of ballistic 
missiles without regard to when their testing had been completed. We 
needed a complete ban on telemetry encryption and other measures 
that denied access to telemetry. The Soviet side was prepared to show 
flexibility so that we could have an accord formalized as a separate text 
or as an agreed statement to the START Treaty. He suggested the work-
ing group address this issue to see whether we could make progress at 
this ministerial.
The Secretary said Ambassadors Burt and Nazarkin should work 
to see if elements of common ground could be developed that would 
resolve or narrow our differences. Shevardnadze agreed, adding that he 
wanted to reiterate his view that we had some good ground to build on 
in all the areas discussed so far and perhaps could find some solutions.
The Secretary said he next wanted to address mobile ICBM veri-
fication. He presented a paper and asked the Soviets to study it with 
a view toward considering it in detail later on. Shevardnadze said he 
would leave this issue with the working group. He had the general 
impression that we would need to find a compromise. The Secretary said 
he did not expect an immediate reaction to the U.S. paper since it had 
not even been presented in Russian translation. Shevardnadze joked that 
the Soviets would provide papers that could be immediately approved 
by the U.S. side.
The Secretary said he wanted to say a few words about sea-launched 
cruise missiles. Shevardnadze had emphasized the importance of this 
issue in Wyoming and had said there could be arrangements for SLCMs 
separate from the START Treaty. As he had indicated the previous night, 
the U.S. had prepared a draft of the kind of declaration we would pro-
pose be exchanged on a reciprocal basis. This statement would commit 
each side to declare its SLCM plans annually for the three years ahead. 
The declaration would need to be updated annually for the duration of 
the treaty. In our political system, such a declaration would carry great 
weight. We hoped it would fully meet Soviet concerns.
The Secretary added that, despite significant efforts, we had been 
unable to identify any way to verify formal limits on SLCMs with-
out a degree of intrusion that would be unacceptable. The Secretary 
knew that the Soviets wanted to address the question of SLCM verifi-
cation. We agreed that Ambassadors Burt and Nazarkin could engage 
in formal exchanges on SLCM verification in Geneva. We hoped that 
the Soviet side would take a hard look at our proposed declaration so 
that we could deal with this issue outside the formal START Treaty. 
He asked whether Shevardnadze wanted to respond now or move to
