Arms Control and Disarmament 1263 The final conclusions are reported as intelligence to the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee, where the information is collated with intelligence from all other sources, and National Intelligence Estimates of Soviet nuclear capability are prepared. A limited cooperation between AFOAT–1 and the United King­ dom has been in progress for a number of years. Geophysical stations are operated by the British Ministry of Defense. Measurements from these stations are reported by cable directly to headquarters, AFOAT–1. Radiochemical data obtained on samples of Soviet weapon debris are exchanged with the Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell under Sir John Cockroft and the Atomic Weapons Research Establish­ ment, Aldermaston under Sir William Penney. b. The Acoustic Component. The acoustic element of the Long Range Detection System consists of 10 acoustic stations surrounding the USSR as shown in Figure 1. One of these stations is omitted from the fig­ ure for security reasons. Eight of these acoustic stations are operated by the U.S. Army Signal Corps from a headquarters at Ft. Monmouth, New Jersey. These stations are located in Japan (2), Philippine Islands, Turkey, Eritrea, Germany, Greenland and Alaska. Two acoustic stations are operated by the United Kingdom. In addition to the permanent net stations, data are frequently obtained from experimental stations in San Diego, Washington, D. C. and Ft. Monmouth, N. J. Each acoustic station consists of four condenser microphones, one located at each corner of a 6-­ to 10-­mile square. Although only three microphones are necessary to establish the azimuth and apparent velocity of the incoming acoustic wave, four are used to provide a fac­ tor of safety for instrument malfunction and to improve the precision of meas­urement. Time sequence of arrival of the acoustic wave at indi­ vidual microphones provides a measure of the azimuth and apparent velocity. The microphones are coupled to the atmosphere through a pipe array 1000 ft in length with openings every five feet throughout the length. This coupling device greatly reduces the background noise from wind turbulence (about a factor of 10) and permits identification of acoustic waves having pressure amplitudes as low as 0.1 dyne/cm2 under favorable conditions. Each microphone is connected by wire lines to a central recording station where variations in atmospheric pressure in the subsonic frequency range from approximately 1.0 to 0.01 cps are amplified and recorded on Esterline-Angus pen recorders. Service personnel, trained especially for the purpose, continuously scan the records on a 24-­hour basis. When signal characteristics meet the crite­ ria determined by AFOAT–1 to be indicative of a large explosion, the station personnel itemize the principal signal characteristics in a coded message to the net headquarters at Ft. Monmouth, N. J. There the data are checked, correlated with other acoustic data, and transmitted to
