216 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX initial exploratory work left him confident that people for broadcasting staffs could be found, researchers hired and trained and available research materials much more effectively exploited. News and programming-support offices in the Middle East were also needed. The four expansion packages offered by BIB were then discussed: •Package I—immediate steps to improve content and depth of RL broadcasts in Uzbek, Tatar, Kazakh, Azeri, Tajik, Turkmen and Kirgiz—was endorsed unanimously. (U) •Package II—improving broadcast impact in the target area by leasing transmitters in the Middle East was also unanimously endorsed, in principle. There was a good deal of discussion of the political ramifications as well as the concrete technical possibilities of leasing in various countries. The Chairman concluded by directing that opportunities in Israel, Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia be urgently explored and that State facilitate BIB efforts in every way possible. The BIB Chairman reported promising conversations with a high Israeli official and there was general agreement that possibilities in Israel should be the first to be explored. The Chairman cited the RFE experience in broadcasting to Poland from Germany as negating worries that broadcasts transmitted from Israel would not be effective with Muslim audiences. The Chairman suggested that BIB might want to explore transmitter leasing opportunities farther afield but felt that the four countries named should be urgently explored first. The SCC Radio Working Group will monitor progress on this effort closely and report back to the SCC on new problems or opportunities. (C) •Package III—an extension of Package I—more comprehensive measures for improving and expanding RL’s Muslim-language broadcasts to 5½ hours of original programming per week was endorsed unanimously with the understanding that it would be practical only if Package II could be successfully implemented or transmitter power augmented in some other way. In discussion of this package, BIB representatives stressed the need for a solid information and research base to enable RL to carry out its unique mission: in-depth coverage of internal affairs and the special ethnic and cultural interests of its audiences, in contrast to VOA’s primary mission of providing U.S. and international news and commentary. (C) •Package IV—a proposal for building four 250 KW transmitters somewhere in the Middle East was deferred for later consideration, pending the results of the leasing effort. The Chairman emphasized that this deferral was “without prejudice” and could be taken up again whenever BIB thought it opportune. (U) The Chairman then turned to FBIS and noted that the services it provides, though excellent have been shown during the past year of crisis in the Middle East, to be neither fast nor comprehensive enough. He mentioned the inadequacy of our knowledge of how and through what channels distorted information about the Great Mosque incident in
