768  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
agreement is meant to achieve. I do not need to spell out why elimina-
tion of heavy ICBMs is a very important objective from the standpoint 
of stability.
At a certain point in the negotiations the Soviet Union said it was 
prepared to reduce heavy ICBMs by 50%. That did not mean total elim-
ination, but it still represented a substantial step. We then looked for 
phased elimination via flight testing, production, and modernization 
bans. We said 50% is not 100% but it is a good step. In order to get at 
longer-­term elimination and to prevent upgrade in the interim, there 
should be a ban on testing and modernization and production.
The Soviet Union said 50% reduction and that is it, we have paid 
enough. There we stayed for a long time—50% is enough versus 50% 
is good but should be accompanied by these additional bans. Then we 
saw the Soviet Union modernizing, upgrading the SS–18s. In Moscow 
we changed our position. Under our new proposal we would permit 
the current upgrade program and reliability testing. We proposed 
2 flight tests per year, and a cutoff of production by 1993. The Soviet 
Union said no.
In Moscow we said at a minimum let us have the limit of 2 flight 
tests per year. This would be enough to permit you to maintain the 
reliability of your system, and to continue to deploy the Mod 5 and the 
Mod 6. At least is would halt the development of the Mod 7, 8, and 9 
while we continue to work in these negotiations. We have traveled con-
siderable ground, and resolution of this would have a favorable impact 
on START. Why can we not agree to put a sentence in the joint state-
ment on START that we have agreed to limit heavy ICBM flight tests to 
2 per year?
Burt: I am interested in why if the Soviet side has agreed to no new 
type of heavy ICBM, why it is necessary to test heavy missiles more that 
twice a year?
Omelitchev: First I do not understand the number 2. Why not 3 or 
4? Why do you think 2 is sufficient for our testing? You are correct we 
are willing to reduce by 50% and ban new types, reserving the right 
to modernize existing types. We need testing. The volume of testing 
is determined by the volume of combat training. 2 is not enough. One 
year maybe we do 3, one year 4, another year 5. It all depends on the 
organization of the modernization process, training requirements, and 
the necessary level of readiness.
Burt: We know from conversations on telemetry with Mr. Khromov 
and our own experts, who reached agreement that the readiness and 
reliability of a missile type could be maintained with 2 tests per year.
Omelitchev: I am not aware of any statements to this effect.
