There is, however, one portion of Mr. Bustamante’s code in which it is
believed the United States have an immediate and direct interest—namely
the title concerning extradition. In the opinion of the American Delegates,
this subject should have been retained by the Subcommission of
International Public Law, using Project No. 17 of the Pan American Union
as a basis of discussion collated with the draft in Mr. Bustamante’s code.
However, the provisions on the subject in his code seem generally to be in
accord with the law of the United States and their accepted practice; but in
order to reach a maximum of agreement, the Delegates of the United States
suggested that extraditable offenses should not be determined on the basis
of minimum punishment, but specifically listed as such in the various
treaties and conventions dealing with extradition. This suggestion was
adopted in Article 346.
The question of the extradition by a State of its own nationals aroused
considerable discussion. In Mr. Bustamante’s proposed code, Article 347
was as follows: “The contracting States are not obliged to hand over their
own nationals.” While the provision thus stated would leave each of the
contracting parties free to adopt its own policy in this respect, it was felt
that, in the interest of international justice, some obligation should be
imposed upon the State refusing to do so. Therefore the following clause
was added: “The nation which declines to hand over one of its own citizens
must try him.” Although the provision contained in Article 380, that, “In no
case shall the death penalty be imposed or executed for the offense upon
which the extradition is founded,” appears in certain extradition treaties to
which the Government of the United States is a party, the American
Delegation has some doubts as to the wisdom of its adoption of such a
general policy. In their opinion, the abolition of capital punishment, if
considered desirable, should be by direct enactment, rather than indirectly
by treaty arrangement.
III. SUBCOMMISSION C. ON WAYS AND MEANS FOR THE WORK OF CODIFICATION
The members of this Subcommission, five in number, met toward the end of
the session, under the Chairmanship of Mr. Maurtua, and submitted a report
on the subject-matter with which they had been entrusted. It was a
unanimous report, and unanimously approved by the Commission in
plenary session, May 16th. It is in itself a summary of ways and means, and
