Non-Proliferation
861
340.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)1
Washington, April 22, 1977
SUBJECT
Presidential Decision on Proliferation
The President has decided that the international fuel cycle evalu-
ation program should include paper studies but not operational dem-
onstrations of reprocessing. He feels that there is no reason why every
nuclear facility in a participating country must be a part of the pro-
gram. He does not want any American funding—direct or indirect—of
reprocessing activities, other than paper studies. He believes that many
of the key questions concerning reprocessing—the economic value of
reprocessing in a non-breeder fuel cycle, the availability of uranium re-
sources, future nuclear energy demand, etc.—can be debated and de-
cided on paper. Other key concerns, particularly the development of
spent fuel storage capabilities, will be operationally studied. He views
this option as a compromise position between a rigid American posture
against reprocessing on the one hand, and encouraging the further de-
velopment of reprocessing by including it in the evaluation program,
on the other.
He has further decided that a clear showing of need should be a
strict prerequisite to granting of U.S. approvals of requests to retransfer
for reprocessing. This is basically the interagency recommendation—
retaining flexibility—but with a stronger presumption against ap-
proval of these requests. Under this option, reprocessing in the UK and
France would be viewed as a last resort, to be avoided if at all possible.
He has approved the bilateral formulation favored by State and
Defense for full scope safeguards, with the explicit provision that this
be regarded as an interim measure, and the understanding that we will
continue to press for supplier acceptance of a requirement for formal
recipient commitment to full scope safeguards, preferably through ad-
herence to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
On the question of Presidential flexibility, he has approved the op-
tion which provides for exception by Presidential determination for
both new and existing agreements.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 52, Proliferation: Reprocessing, 4/77–8/80. Secret.
