Arms Control and Disarmament  1367
other than peaceful purposes. In addition, the principles which will be 
used in establishing and implementing the Euratom safeguard system 
must be mutually acceptable, the U.S. will assist Euratom in establish­
ing their system, there will be frequent and continuing consultation to 
assure that the system is operating effectively under the agreed upon 
principles, and the U.S. has the right to terminate the cooperative pro­
gram if the system is not operated in accordance with these principles. 
These principles also will be compatible with the safeguard provisions 
of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
9. It is anticipated that this special safeguards arrangement, 
made with the multi-national organization Euratom, may draw crit­
icism from other nations which have different safeguards provisions 
in their agreements for cooperation with the United States. Also, Mr. 
Sterling Cole, Director General of the IAEA, expressed the opinion that 
the IAEA should have the responsibility for safeguarding the material 
supplied to Euratom by the U.S. It is the judgment of the Department 
of State and the Atomic Energy Commission that the special arrange­
ment with Euratom is entirely adequate and will provide the U.S. with 
assurance that none of the material will be used for any military pur­
pose. The close ties of these countries to the U.S. through NATO and 
the traditional support of the U.S. for institutions, such as Euratom, 
which foster European unity justify this special arrangement. Further, 
it is recognized that inspection of the program by the IAEA is politically 
infeasible at this time.
10. As a result of the discussions with Mr. Cole, the U.S. has pro­
posed, and Euratom has agreed, that (a) the IAEA shall have the right of 
first option to purchase any special nuclear material, produced in reac­
tors fueled with materials obtained from the U.S., which is in excess of 
the need of Euratom for such material for peaceful uses; (b) Euratom is 
prepared to consult with an exchange experiences with the IAEA with 
the objective of establishing a safeguards system reasonably compati­
ble with that of the IAEA. In addition, there has been an exchange of 
letters between the United States and Euratom concerning the language 
contained in the Memorandum of Understanding on Safeguards and 
Controls recognizing that such language provides for verification, by 
mutually approved scientific methods, of the effectiveness of the safe­
guards and controls system applied to nuclear materials from the other 
Party and fissionable materials derived therefrom. Further, Euratom 
has advised the United States that in the event of the establishment of 
an international safeguards and controls system by the International 
Atomic Energy Agency, the United States and Euratom will consult 
regarding assumption by that Agency of the safeguards and control 
of fissionable material utilized and produced in implementation of the 
program contemplated by the Memorandum of Understanding.
