International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
425
139.
Memorandum From John Renner of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 30, 1978
SUBJECT
US Current Account Deficit
In response to your tasking memo of February 15 (at Tab A),2 an in-
teragency group under the chairmanship of Tony Solomon has been
working steadily to arrive at a reliable estimate of the probable magni-
tude of future current account deficits and the probable impact on the
dollar.
The report of the Solomon Group is virtually finished. The prin-
cipal conclusions are that, in the absence of major policy changes, the
US current account position will not improve and may deteriorate over
the next five years and that as a consequence the dollar will depreciate
further.
Blumenthal and Solomon are worried this report will leak to the
press and cause a run on the dollar. Consequently they are considering
not sending the President the report but to brief him orally.
It does not make much difference whether the President is told
orally or in writing about the findings of the Solomon Group. But as the
future of the US current account position and the repercussions for the
dollar are among the most important international economic issues that
the President needs to focus on, it is essential that Blumenthal and Sol-
omon brief the President promptly and certainly before the Summit. If
you agree, I will take this line with Solomon.3
What should the next steps be?
Faced with the prospect for large current account deficits over the
next five years and additional pressure on the dollar, the question is
whether anything can be done about it.
I think there are additional steps that can and, given the adverse
consequences of a continually falling dollar, definitely should be taken.
There is much that could be done, given sufficient resolve, to reduce
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/International: 1–6/78. Secret. Sent for ac-
tion. Sent through Owen. Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 Printed as Document 106.
3 Brzezinski underlined the last part of this paragraph beginning with “essential
that Blumenthal,” and he indicated his approval of this recommendation.
