Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 669 Giscard: Yes, and then either we have a very negative answer from Iran which I think is probable. And then we have to decide what to do. I am just mentioning that I suspect that we will probably have to act on the diplomatic aspect (sic). Carter: Yes. Giscard: If on the other hand there is an indication of delay by Iran, then we can resort to take specific actions. Carter: Allright, I understand. This is good information for me, Valery. I think you understand the difficult position we’re in. Giscard: Yes, I understand very well. Of course we must not only work to release the hostages, but also consider the impact of our actions on Iran. Carter: Absolutely. Giscard: We must consider both. Carter: Yes, I understand that. Giscard: This is for your personal information and the statement will not say that we are proposing this. Carter: I understand. Giscard: But it will certainly be a firm and strong statement. Carter: Valery, let me ask you to do one other thing for me which I think you already understand. We have had so many promises from them—either outright lies or failure to do what they say they will do. The only thing I would like to ask you all to do is not to let them equivocate and delay and delay and delay, as they have with us for the past five months. That’s their character and even if Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh make a flat, absolute promise, they then refer it to the Revolutionary Council. They insist upon a unanimous vote and in the last few days they have had all the Council members except two who approved the transfer of the hostages. Under those circumstances they referred it to Khomeini, who then says it must be a unanimous decision. I know you called me just for information purposes, but I think if you all could try to prevent that sort of deliberate postponement or delay in action, it would really be helpful. Giscard: Yes. We will be very clear and precise about it. It will look like the European countries acting on their own. If the answer is negative, then we will take a decision at once. Carter: That’s good. We want to avoid taking military action. And, I think we have a few days that we can wait, as you know, before we take any stronger action than we have taken. I think the outcome might very well be determined by how forceful you all act together. Well, I am very grateful to you for this information. Giscard: One more point, Jimmy. We will also contact the Iraqis tomorrow. They can have also indirect pressure on Iran.
