800.51 W 89Yugoslavia/42: Telegram [Document 126] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) WASHINGTON, May 13, 1924—6 p.m. 14. Reference Department’s 13, April 30, 5 P.M.85 Please present the following note to the Yugoslav Foreign Office: “The Government of the United States has been happy to receive the representatives specially appointed by the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to discuss with the World War Foreign Debt Commission the indebtedness of that Government to the Government of the United States, and has noted with satisfaction the assurances which it has received from Dr. Diouritch, Dr. Nedelkovitch and Mr. Pupin on the occasion of their conference with the World War Foreign Debt Commission to the effect that their Government regards its indebtedness to the United States as a financial obligation which will be honored in every respect and intends and desires to present a plan for refunding this indebtedness. It is, however, a matter of regret to the Government of the United States that the representatives of the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes should have found themselves unable to make any definite proposals looking to the refunding of the indebtedness in question at the present time. The desire of the Government of the United States to reach a refunding agreement at the earliest possible moment was expressed by the World War Foreign Debt Commission to the representatives of the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. They were also informed that the Government of the United States desired to be assured that no step would be taken by the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes prior to the refunding or discharge of the latter’s indebtedness to the United States, with respect to any other indebtedness heretofore or hereafter contracted which should result in placing the United States in a less favorable position as a creditor than that which it occupies at the present time. In reply the Commission was informed that the Government of the United States could consider that it already had the desired assurance, which could readily be confirmed, to the effect that no step whatsoever was contemplated by the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes which would affect the United States in the manner suggested.
