1404  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
4. I said that another matter that was urgent was the reaching of 
a policy decision on nuclear testing. It seemed likely that there would 
be an agreement at Geneva and that coupled with the United Nations 
Commission Report made it urgent that we arrive at a new policy. I 
said that State was working actively with Defense and AEC on this sub­
ject and that I thought some split would develop which the President 
would have to resolve. The President said he was thinking in terms of 
a total suspension except of underground tests. I said I thought that 
the Defense Department would not like this because in a confined area 
some characteristics of the explosion could not be accurately estimated. 
The President said that he did not think that this should be a reason 
against limiting the test to underground areas.
I suggested to General Goodpaster that he try to arrange a 
restricted meeting of those directly interested as soon as I could be 
back in Washington. The President said he had already asked Good­
paster to plan for this.
5. I said I received his note about George Whitney, that he was a 
good personal friend of mine and I thought highly of him. I observed 
however that Mrs. Whitman had indicated his age somewhat exceeded 
the President’s estimate. I added however that I was not one who 
believed incapacity automatically came at 73.
John Foster Dulles
350.	 Record of Telephone Conversation Between John Foster 
Dulles and Herter1
New York, August 13, 1958, 1:14 p.m.
The Sec said on the whole it went well. The atmosphere is less 
tense than he thought it would be. Fawzi is a slick performer and made 
a smart conciliatory speech. The Sec said he talked with Gromyko yes­
terday and for the first time he did not recite boiler-­plate stuff and it 
looked as though he would be interested in getting something. Their 
res is pretty moderate. If the order were reversed it would not be too 
bad. This may be the lull before the storm and it may get worse but it is 
off to a fairly mild start with a reasonable prospect of getting a res most 
1 Source: Cessation of nuclear testing. No classification marking. 2 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
