778 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX only optimists shape history. He thanked President Sadat for the time that he had given the delegation. As the meeting broke up, Chip Carter said to President Sadat that he considered him “one of the two greatest men in the world.” President Sadat put his arm around Chip and walked with him to the door. 221. Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President Carter1 March 19, 1979 Dear Mr. President, I consider it necessary to write to you on the question of the situation in the Middle East. In the past I set forth more than once my considerations on this matter. What makes me return once again to this question is the situation emerging now in connection with the steps taken by the United States to push forward a separate agreement between Israel and Egypt. Our principled attitude to attempts to solve the Middle East problem on the road of separate deals is known to you. We have expressed this assessment of ours both through diplomatic channels and publicly, in particular in connection with the US-Israeli Egyptian meeting in Camp David last year. So far we do not know yet all the details of the agreement being prepared, and the fact that they are kept secret is symptomatic in itself. But whatever these specific details might be, the main thing is already clear. This agreement is not designed for and cannot lead to a just and thus a lasting peace in the Middle East. No matter what statements are made, what explanations are given we are deeply convinced that the prepared separate deal is advantageous only to Israel. Not only does it fail to resolve fundamental issues underlying the Arab-Israeli conflict but it does not even bring us closer to their solution. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 4, USSR (Brezhnev Drafts/Letters), 4/77–9/80. No classification marking. Printed from an unofficial translation delivered by Dobrynin at 6 p.m. on March 19. At the top of the memorandum, Carter wrote “Susan [Clough] file J.” The Department sent its official translation to the Embassy in Moscow in telegram 68930, March 20. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840167–2098)
