Chapter 2, January–June 1989  89
review of whether to also deploy extensive air defenses or to seek sig-
nificant constraints on air defenses. There are several considerations 
which lead us to assess the prospects of effective and acceptable con-
straints on air defenses as being poor.
(S) First, verifying compliance with limits on air defenses would be 
severely challenging. The complexity of an air defense infrastructure, 
the mobility (and multiple uses) of air defense systems, and the sheer 
numbers of activities involved raise the question of whether we could 
set verification standards with respect to strategic air defenses which 
would be as demanding as those for systems dealt with in START.
(S) Second, systems for strategic air defense (such as interceptor 
aircraft or airborne surveillance radars) have the inherent capability 
to be shifted rapidly to non-­strategic missions. It would be difficult 
to construct constraints which limited dedicated air defenses without 
adversely affecting their readiness for non-­strategic uses. An analogy 
can be drawn to attempting to constrain airborne refueling capability—­
­an area we have carefully avoided in START.
(S) Finally, air defense of North America is a mission which we 
share by treaty with Canada. Any proposal to negotiate restraints on 
air defenses would, at a minimum, have to be carefully coordinated 
with Canada. And introducing air defenses into START could give the 
Soviets a stronger case for drawing one of our allies into the negotia-
tions, an outcome which we have carefully avoided for strategic offen-
sive forces.
Conclusion
(S) No specific decisions are required at this time, as a result of 
the discussion on Question #1. This intent was to familiarize the reader 
with major issues relating to our general approach to START. Decisions 
will come as part of other reviews.
Question #2: SLCM
Would the elimination of nuclear-­armed, land-­attack SLCMs 
enhance or degrade security and stability?
(S) U.S. and Allied concern over Soviet nuclear-­armed, land-­attack 
SLCMs stems from their potential for use in a precursor attack on crit-
ical leadership and C3I targets, as well as their potential for attack on 
a range of industrial and military targets. Allied concerns focus on the 
latter. Arguing that nuclear-­armed SLCMs do not play a central role in 
U.S. strategic forces, some have suggested that a ban on such systems 
would be in the U.S. interest.
(S) The Soviet Union possesses other assets that could be used for 
precursor attacks, in particular SLBMs launched from SSBNs close to 
U.S. coasts though these are easier to detect than SLCMs once launched.
