Furthermore, the United States would not in any way be bound thereby to
the provisions of the covenant of the League of Nations. The French
proposal of June last looking to the conclusion of a bi-lateral compact, had
been drawn up in the light of the century old relations between France and
the United States; the French Government still stands ready to negotiate
with the American Government on the same conditions and on the same
basis. It has never altered its attitude in that respect. But when confronted
by the initiative of the United States in proposing a multipartite covenant, it
had to take into consideration the relations existing among the various
Powers which would be called upon to participate therein. This it has done,
with the object of assuring the success of the treaty contemplated by the
United States. Its suggestions of January 5 as to the terms of the multipartite
treaty are inspired by the formula which has already gained the unanimous
adherence of all of the States members of the League of Nations, and which
for that very reason might be accepted by them with regard to the United
States, just as it has already been accepted among themselves.
This is the explanation of our proposal of January 5.
The Government of the Republic has always, under all circumstances, very
clearly and without mental reservation declared its readiness to join in any
declaration tending to denounce war as a crime and to set up international
sanctions susceptible of preventing or repressing it. There has been no
change in its sentiments in that respect: its position remains the same. Your
Excellency may therefore be assured of its sincere desire to respond to the
idea of the American Government and to second its efforts to the full extent
compatible with the situation of fact created by its international obligations.
It is this preoccupation which inspired the formula proposed on January 5, a
formula which does indeed seem to be the most apt at this time to assure the
accomplishment of the American project. The Government of the Republic
accordingly cannot but hope that the American Government will share this
view. Subject to these observations, the Government of the Republic would,
moreover, very gladly welcome any suggestions offered by the American
Government which would make it possible to reconcile an absolute
condemnation of war with the engagements and obligations assumed by the
several nations and the legitimate concern for their respective security.
