January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1263
raelis had given assurances that they would not “interfere” in the legis-
lative process in connection with the Bill—and that I understood this to
mean that the Government would take no action in the Knesset in con-
nection with the Bill. Burg approved this; but after he talked to Begin he
telephoned to say that Begin had disapproved it.
In conversations thereafter with Roy Atherton we agreed that the
best way to proceed in order to get the negotiations going would be as
follows:
1. Roy will make an oral presentation to Ali and perhaps Sadat5
about the facts in connection with the Jerusalem Bill and the reasons
why the Israeli Government finds it exceedingly difficult politically to
say anything in writing about the plans with respect to the Bill. We
hope that this may allay Egyptian concerns, even though it falls far
short of what they had originally requested.
2. A letter would come from you to President Sadat6 calling upon
him to resume the negotiations as soon as possible and pointing out
that we are in a far stronger position to have an impact on Israel and her
policies if we are in negotiations with her.
3. Roy will hand the Egyptians a copy of Ed Muskie’s forthcoming
speech on the Middle East7 in which Ed will call for no further unilat-
eral steps by either party and urging the parties to return to the negoti-
ating table.
If all of this works as it should, then I would propose that the an-
nouncement be made by the United States about the resumption of the
talks. We could merely say that after extensive discussions with Israel
and Egypt and clarification of the situation with reference to several
points raised, the parties have agreed to resume negotiations immedi-
ately. I would not think that it would be profitable to elaborate beyond
this brief statement.
At the same time, we would hope to be able to say that General Ali
and Minister Burg are going to be in Washington next week and meet
of his personal diary, Carter wrote of the meeting: “At the foreign affairs breakfast we
discussed the Mideast peace talks. Begin is shaky and we don’t want to do anything to
prop him up because he’s a major obstacle to success, but we’ve got to show our leader-
ship, keep the Camp David process alive, and stop the abandonment of the process by
Egypt.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 435)
5 The substance of the U.S. proposal was sent to Atherton in telegram 149590 to
Cairo, June 7. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880143–1871) Ath-
erton met with Ali, el-Baz, and Amre Moussa on June 7 to deliver the U.S. proposal for
the resumption of the autonomy negotiations. (Telegram 12674 from Cairo, June 7; Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–2490)
6 See Document 381.
7 Muskie delivered his speech to the Washington Press Club on June 9. See footnote
7, Document 370.
