Human Rights
179
2. East Timor. We will either have to change our current policy
which accepts Indonesia’s absorption or will have to take the heat
which may be severe. I concur with John Hays’ gloomy appraisal of In-
donesian intentions to improve their human rights situation in a se-
rious and substantive way.6 Perhaps I will feel differently after
spending some time there.
Spanish Sahara. By virture of U.N. adoption of two separate and
conflicting resolutions dealing with Saharan self determination, the
issue remains unsettled.7 We are still pressing for regional resolution,
hopefully, through U.N. good offices. In practice, we have supported
Morocco with military assistance and some may view that aid as giving
comfort to Morocco/Mauritania claims over the disputed territory. Al-
geria is harboring refugees/guerrillas/terrorists and this is the nub of
the problem. While we cannot ignore refugee needs, the Sahara is a
mess we would do well to stay out of, but I am not sure we can.
3. The Caribbean and Central America. Don suggested we find some
“institutional means . . . to make sure that the U.S. is especially sensitive
to the problems of these near-by countries.” Completion of the country
evaluations should provide a firm basis for a series of steps we might
take to be of positive assistance and should surely heighten our sensi-
tivity as well.
6 The East Timor undated response reads, in part: “The previous Administration
did acquiesce in Indonesia’s absorption of East Timor after the Indonesians went through
an elaborate, stage-managed exercise in Timorese self-determination. We have seen no
reason to question the previous Administration’s decision, especially when it is clear that
there is not the slightest possibility of reversing the action—nor, for that matter, any evi-
dence that the Timorese would be better off if the action were reversed.” (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980,
Lot 81D113, Box 16, Human Rights—Don Fraser)
7 The Bureau of African Affairs undated response reads, in part: “In December 1975
the UN General Assembly adopted two resolutions, to a degree conflicting. One, which
was sponsored by Algeria, called on Spain to assure that the Saharans could exercise their
right to self-determination under UN supervision. The U.S. abstained on this resolution.
The other, which the U.S. supported because we believed it offered the best chance of a
peaceful settlement at the time, took note of the Tripartite Agreement, and called on the
administrators of the territory to ensure that the Saharans would be able to exercise their
right to self-determination through free consultations organized with the assistance of a
UN representative.” (Ibid.)
