3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
857
Dobrynin responded by saying that he fully agrees but wanted to
know what, in that case, prevented an improvement in our relations. I
told him that there is no point in playing games with each other, that
Afghanistan was clearly the issue because it not only posed a strategic
challenge to our interests but also because it has become a symbol of
what is perceived in this country as Soviet expansionism.
This led to a discussion of whether the Afghanistani problem can
somehow be solved. I explained to him what we mean by the “transi-
tional arrangements” designed to create a government in Afghanistan
which is not hostile to the Soviet Union but which is not dependent for
its survival on the presence of a Soviet occupation army.
Dobrynin maintained that we are in effect insisting that Babrak
Karmal has to go, whereas the Soviet Union is willing to solve the
problem on the basis of withdrawal of Soviet forces, once an Afghan
army that is capable of sustaining Karmal has been created. “Why not
accept then a solution based on the principle of neutrality and non-
interference?” he asked.
I pointed out that Babrak Karmal is part of the problem that needs
to be solved and hence cannot be the solution. To govern he has to have
a Soviet army of occupation. Moreover, to govern without Soviet
troops, there would have to be a massive and inevitably brutal counter-
insurgency operation which would further poison U.S.-Soviet rela-
tions. This is why it is in our mutual interest to try to find an accommo-
dation soon, perhaps through more extensive explorations of what a
transitional arrangement would involve. If such a solution could be
found, it would be a real breakthrough, making possible rapid progress
on other issues, notably arms control.
Dobrynin then asked me about the prospects for SALT. I told him
that the President and the Secretary of State are fully committed to it
and that we will seek its ratification. However, (1) if the present situa-
tion in Afghanistan continues, ratification will be difficult; (2) if there is
a massive Soviet counter-insurgency after the Olympics, ratification
will become even more difficult because public emotions here will be
further aroused; (3) but if there is some genuine progress on Afghani-
stan, pointing toward the withdrawal of all Soviet troops and involving
perhaps some transitional arrangements, then the public would wel-
come SALT and ratification would be facilitated.
I added that the public wishes a firm policy toward the Soviet
Union but also desires accommodation with the Soviet Union. It is our
task to make that accommodation possible and I hoped that Dobrynin
would impress the Soviet leaders with this thought.
He tried to discuss TNF and the Middle East with me but I told
him that TNF had been discussed with Christopher, that on the Middle
East I did not have anything new to say, and that in any case, I knew
