“It was at the time of the negotiation of the Commercial Treaty of 19031 that the Chinese Government expressed a desire to reform its judiciary system and to bring it into accord with that of western nations. The United States agreed to give every assistance to such reform and stated that it would be prepared to relinquish extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws, the arrangement for their administration and other considerations warranted it in so doing. Having in mind this promise, my Government has observed each measure that the Chinese Government and its people, during the twenty two years which have passed, have taken for the establishment of an independent judiciary and the enactment of laws for the administration of justice. It has been gratified to note the progress that has been made in this connection. The establishment of courts and the enactment of laws, however, do not in themselves meet all the requirements of the situation. Courts cannot function and develop properly or consistently without the aid of a stable government, capable and willing to maintain them and enforce their findings and decisions. It is regretted that the inability of the Chinese Government during the past several years fully to enforce the mandate of its authority has made it difficult for the courts and judiciary already established to function in a normal manner. “The questions of the conventional tariff and the extraterritorial rights under which citizens and subjects of the treaty Powers reside in China are two of the important questions raised by the Chinese Government’s note. Both received consideration at the Washington Conference and it is the belief of the Government of the United States that the most feasible method for dealing with them is by a constant and scrupulous observance of the obligations undertaken at that Conference. To that end the Government of the United States is ready to appoint its delegates to the Special Conference on Chinese tariff matters provided for in the treaty of February 6, 1922,2 and is furthermore ready to accept any reasonable proposal for extending the scope of that Conference to enable it to deal fully and completely with all matters related to its purpose. My Government is also willing, either at the tariff conference or at a subsequent time, to take up the subject of a comprehensive revision of the treaties, looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy. “Before it can form any opinion as to what, if any, steps can be taken to meet the desires of the Chinese Government in regard to the question of extraterritoriality and those special sanctions of the treaties under which its citizens live and conduct their enterprises in China, my Government desires to have before it more complete information than has heretofore been available, and the most feasible way in which the question can be approached and considered is to send to China the commission provided for in Resolution V of the Washington Conference3 in the expectation that the investigation
