agreements given these antecedents could only be effective if the
interests and rights of one of the parties were secured at the
expense of those of the other party.
Clearly, according to the text of the convention of 1923, the
intention of those who negotiated it was the formation of a
‘complete, permanent’ list of 30 jurisconsults for the organization
of the Central American Tribunal in each case which must arise.
The Government of San Salvador not having ratified the
convention the list is therefore reduced to 24. It is true that in
conformity with article 26 of the convention it would enter into
force by ratification of three at least of the signatory states. The
convention is therefore effective; but the lists for the formation of
the Tribunal were not drawn up in due time and these are even yet
‘incomplete’ according to the tenor of article 2 of the same
convention. The legal effectiveness of a treaty is one thing but an
entirely different question is that of the execution and fulfillment
of its provisions. Thus the Government of Honduras has not been
able to fulfill the obligation which is imposed upon it by the
article 2 above cited of transmitting ‘the complete list to each one
of the signatory republics’ because these lists have not yet been
‘complete’ as is explicitly required by the convention.
Now as concerns the date of the latter nominations my
Government has abided scrupulously by the official decrees
which have been communicated to it. Permit me to repeat,
because it has been already expressed in my previous notes, that
none of the considerations relative to the formation of the Central
American Tribunal has any reference to the high moral worth and
reputation of the jurisconsults already named or to be named.
The fact has been pointed out that there are actually 12
distinguished jurists eligible for nomination as members of the
Tribunal from whom may be chosen those necessary to form it,
and thereupon would be constituted of three only, one of whom
might be selected by mutual agreement aside from the list of 12
mentioned. My Government with great regret must differ
