1978  463
In this regard several studies of our [6 lines not declassified] which 
are both a follow-­on to PD–18; a SAC study of strategic C3I which is 
just getting underway; and a recently completed Defense Science Board 
(DSB) Study which addressed enduring C3I.3 I am also convening a fol-
low-­on task force of the DSB to extend the DSB’s preliminary analyses; 
and plan to have Navy examine the enduring communications to stra-
tegic submarines.
With regard to your question on the continuity of government, we 
share your concern that the military C3I system and the survivability 
and endurance of the C3I system serving the NCA are part of a cohesive 
whole. To this end my staff will continue to work closely with Colonel 
Odom and Fritz Ermarth of your staff to ensure that changes we pro-
pose in military C3I systems are consistent with the President’s desires 
and the procedures and systems of the Office of the President.
I also share your concerns with respect to the National Commu-
nications System, over half of which consists of the Defense Commu-
nications System. The impact of the Communications Act of 1978 (HR 
13015), in its present form, on the DoD’s national security and emer-
gency preparedness responsibilities is of particular concern.4 Our 
views which have been provided to OMB, point out DoD’s opposition 
to the bill in its present form and detail the shortcomings of the bill. 
Policies being developed based on private sector interests, e.g., unreg-
ulated competition, and pending legislation resulting from testimony 
on HR 13015 could very well have an adverse impact on many aspects 
of DoD operations, including the ability to support enduring general 
war C3I.
I am encouraged by your recognition of the importance of C3I to 
our war-­fighting and deterrent posture, and am confident that, with 
your assistance, we can make progress in this extremely important area.
C.W. Duncan
3 For the Executive Summary of the Defense Science Board Study, see the attach-
ment to Document 88.
4 The Communications Act of 1978, as proposed, was a measure designed to amend 
the original Communications Act of 1934 to introduce private-­sector competition into the 
telephone system.
