68
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
c. East Europe: There is considerable puzzlement in Eastern Eu-
rope as to what we4 are about—perhaps because many of these coun-
tries are very interested in the forthcoming Belgrade Conference. They
tend to worry as to what the impact of this U.S. emphasis on human
rights is going to be on that forum. They clearly also are concerned as to
whether we will move the Soviets away from de´tente and perhaps put
more pressure on them.
d. China: The Chinese are generally pleased with our stand be-
cause they read it as a toughening of our position toward Moscow.
They seem blithely unconcerned about any vulnerability of their own
position on human rights.
e. West Europe and Japan: There is generally broad approval for
taking this stand with the general inclination to favor tempering our
position with considerations of practicality. Basically they also tend to
look at the issue more in their own parochial and regional terms than
they do in vocal [local?] ones. Specifically the impact on East/West/
Central relations. They are very worried at a deterioration of those rela-
tions since they normally prefer flat behind-the-scenes diplomacy.
f. Latin America: They are nearly unanimous in denouncing these
new pressures. Clearly this is the strongest in the countries that feel
most challenged, like Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, Guatemala, El Sal-
vador and Chile. They think and complain, as usual, that we aren’t
making allowances for their special problems nor giving them the spe-
cial attention that we should to a neighbor. It particularly galls some of
them that we appear not to be willing to make exceptions for them as
we are doing for South Korea, in their view.
g. There is a developing cohesiveness of support for each other in
their defiance of Washington on this issue.
h. In the rest of Asia,5 other than Japan, there is a general lack of en-
thusiasm one would expect in totalitarian states like South Korea, In-
donesia and Taiwan.
i. In Africa, reactions have been varied. The Ethiopians feel they
are being singled out unjustly. The Black African States applaud the ef-
fort as long as they don’t look past its implicit support for Black ma-
jority rule.
j. Much the same in the Middle East where again the Arabs ap-
plaud our position as long as it is discussed primarily in terms of the
rights of the Palestinians. Iran is sensitive, vulnerable and worried
about the long-term impact on their relations with the United States.
4 An unknown hand inserted the word “we” before “are.”
5 An unknown hand crossed out “the area” and wrote “Asia,” above it.
