294
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
2. The Secretary opened by expressing his pleasure at the opportu-
nity to talk of matters of mutual interest and to improve the relationship
between our two countries which is the objective we both share.
Chnoupek thanked the Secretary for receiving him and mentioned
that he has not had an opportunity for almost three years to have a
discussion on bilateral relations at this level. In the Czechoslovak view
and, he thought, in the US view, the development of relations is not
in keeping with the general trend. Among the Socialist countries, he
said, Czechoslovakia has to rank in the last place. In substance, we are
in the same place as we were five to six years ago. At that time, the
work done with American colleagues did not lead to the desired results.
He admitted there have been some positive steps during the most
recent period. He had a one and one-half hour talk with Ambassador
Byrne on bilateral relations and they went into considerable detail.
They evaluated all the positive steps but also said that the main problem
remains unresolved, namely the property and financial claims.2
Noting the discussions on claims in the 1960’s Chnoupek men-
tioned Secretary Rogers’ visit to Czechoslovakia during which it was
agreed to resume talks. After hard negotiations, Czechoslovakia
believed it had concluded a very reasonable agreement which was
roughly in keeping with those the US reached with other Socialist
countries. The agreement was initialled but not concluded. Chnoupek
said there has hardly been any practical possibility for a political dia-
logue since then. The last visit to Prague was by an Assistant Secretary
(Hartman). Trade was not at all up to the possibilities. Czechoslovak
exports according to one joke, is as high as Polish exports of ham.
Imports are low. Tariffs for Czechoslovak goods are four times higher.
There is no opportunity to obtain credits.
3. Returning to the claims question, Chnoupek said he has seen a
large number of official, semi-official and unofficial people who have
expressed views on this question. In the last three years, he has almost
lost sight of what are official views and what are unofficial views,
citing conversations with Congressman Vanik and Senator Jackson. He
said that in their recent talk Ambassador Byrne had stated certain new
views. He expected that these would represent the official stand of the
US Government. But if he understood the Ambassador correctly, he
was giving his own reasoning about what a settlement would look like
2 In telegram 2615 from Prague, September 15, the Embassy reported the conversa-
tion between Ambassador Bryne and the Czechoslovak Foreign Minister. The discussion
covered bilateral relations, including treatment of the United States in the Czechoslovak
press. Chnoupek told Byrne that, while he understood U.S. dissatisfaction with the
treatment, he “could not see any hope for amelioration in the near future, as press was
province of ideologues, not government.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770335–0022) See also footnote 3, Document 97.
