576 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Dr. Brzezinski thought it absurd that Soviet peacetime sensitivities should be allowed to influence our deliberations on war plans toward the Soviet Union in this way. He believed that we, like the Soviets, should shape war plans for maximum military effect. Secretary Brown then noted that treating China and Cuba in an equivalent manner undermines any arguments that this change in targeting plans implies that we are forming some sort of alliance with China. Secretary Brown noted that we could simply take [2 lines not declassified] Mr. Aaron asked whether the systems thus directed against China would be as capable and survivable as those currently used. Secretary Brown responded that the change would in the main mean retargeting some bomber weapons. Deputy Secretary Christopher asked how China’s current status in the SIOP had come about, noting that China had only recently begun to acquire ICBMs; why should we reduce China’s status in the SIOP now, and why had we put China in the SIOP in the first place? Secretary Brown replied while China had been weaker in the past, US/China relations had also been more hostile. Deputy Secretary Christopher asked the group to imagine the public reaction should some reduction of strategic targeting against China be revealed. Dr. Brzezinski commented that the strategic balance between the US and USSR was shifting unfavorably and we should alter our war plans to make the best of the situation. Should this leak and upset the Soviets, too bad. Secretary Brown observed that the question was not whether to make a sensible move in targeting plans, but how to explain the change if it had to be explained. Dr. Brzezinski thought we should design the best plans and then worry about how to explain them if need be. Secretary Brown repeated that it looked like the best approach would be to put most of the [less than 1 line not declassified] SIOP weapons now targeted on China against Soviet targets while covering China targets [less than 1 line not declassified] General Smith asserted it would still be appropriate to [1 line not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski called for a decision paper to lay out a plan and its possible political implications for the President. The discussion then turned to the second agenda item: asymmetries in population fatalities and leadership targeting.
