34
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
“c. If the Persian Government, after being warned by the Russian
Soviet Government, finds itself unable to avert such danger.
“d. If preparations have been made for a considerable armed attack
upon Russia or the Soviet Republics allied to her by the partisans of the
regime which has been overthrown (the Czarist regime), or by its sup-
porters among those foreign powers which are in a position to assist the
enemies of the Workers and Peasants Republics, and at the same time
to possess themselves by force or by underhand methods of part of
the Persian territory thereby establishing a base of operations for any
attacks—made either directly or through the counter-revolutionary
forces—which they might contemplate against Russia or the Soviet Re-
publics allied to her.”
It is also the view of the Department’s legal advisers that if the USSR
made out a case for co-existence of the above four conditions, and at the
same time the Government of Iran denied their co-existence and/or re-
sisted the introduction of Soviet troops into Iran, the USSR would not
be entitled under the United Nations Charter to introduce armed forces
unilaterally into Iran on the basis of the treaty. It would be a violation of
Charter obligations for the Soviet Union to take such action against the
will and over the resistance of the Government of Iran. In such circum-
stances, the Soviet Government would be bound by the Charter to seek
a peaceful adjustment of differences arising out of the 1921 treaty and,
if necessary, to refer the matter to the United Nations for consideration.
23. In view of the above, the invocation of the treaty need leave no
doubts in the free world as to the rights and wrongs of the matter and
the misuse of its provisions by the Soviets to justify aggression could be
made clear to world opinion. The Soviets can use the treaty as a pretext
to becloud the issue and the United States should accordingly be on the
alert to counter such moves.
24. In the event of overt Soviet attack on Iran, available United
States courses of action would include:
a. Opposing the aggression by political means short of the commitment of
United States armed forces in Iran. This course would be the less costly
and would leave our forces available for other urgent tasks, including
the contingency of global war. This course, however, would be unlikely
to succeed.
b. Opposing the aggression by all means short of global war, including de-
ployment of United States and United Kingdom forces for localized opposition
to the Soviet attack. This course would lead to hostilities between United
States and USSR forces involving the risk of global war, while the com-
mitment of United States forces in Iran would reduce United States ca-
pabilities for global war if it developed. However, this course, in so far
as it prevented complete Soviet occupation of Iran, would provide an
