724
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—May reduce Congressional momentum to legislate restrictions.
—Gives you the possibility, but not the certainty, of announcing
relief by November and putting it into effect before the end of 1980—as
opposed to as late as May 1981 under the regular process.
—Failure to give this sort of signal of concern almost guarantees
increased domestic criticism of your efforts to deal with auto industry’s
problems, given the limited non-trade actions available to you.
—Responds to the concern expressed by the UAW and others that,
except for Germany, the U.S. market remains the only major market to-
tally open to imports.
The disadvantages of this approach are:
—Likely that this request will be seen as a signal of intent to re-
verse your previous position on trade restraints and as prejudicing the
USITC procedure.
—The USITC Chairman has indicated privately that the Commis-
sioners would find it extremely difficult to speed up the process in such
a complex and sensitive case and give all parties a fair hearing.
—Conditions may not have changed sufficiently since March to
justify this action. Though even modest employment benefits are im-
portant, they are gains at the expense of higher auto prices and
inflation.
—Likely to cause concern internationally that you are moving in a
protectionist direction after having reaffirmed at the Venice Summit a
commitment to an open world trading system.
—Could cause increased apprehension in Europe that their auto
exporters will get caught in an eventual across-the-board import relief
action, when Japan is “the cause of the problem.”
—Creates the possibility you will have to make a decision on im-
port relief before the election. In the event the USITC does not find in-
jury, you will be in an awkward spot domestically.
—Over the short term (i.e., the next model year), substantial re-
strictions on imports, coupled with a domestic recovery and a con-
tinued shift in consumer preferences toward smaller cars, could cause
the domestic industry to bump up against small car capacity restraints,
increasing the likelihood that domestic small car prices will rise
substantially.
Please indicate your decision below on requesting an expedited
USITC investigation:13
13 Carter did not indicate his decision.
