Chile  231
this argument can’t be won by talk alone, but only by giving them a 
sense of participation.
10) Our recent interest in Africa is even harder to explain to 
Chileans than are our European and Asian expenditures. They see 
Africa as almost as remote from the Soviet orbit as South America, and 
any developmental assistance we give there as directly harmful to their 
own interests because it fosters the African capacity for economic com-
petition against Latin America.
11) We have made it appear that our economic assistance is avail-
able only if it is to be applied according to our own ideas of economics. 
As a result we often seem to be making “free enterprise” or “people’s 
capitalism” the “goal” rather than a possible and preferred “means” 
toward our major purpose of promoting economic development. Many 
of our aid and loan programs assist government and semi-­government 
development programs. Since this is often in accordance with local eco-
nomic theory, we should exploit this de facto situation.
12) Chileans, as a people, undoubtedly know us, as a people, better 
than we know them. Everything, including our world position, movies, 
press wire services, USIA, make that inevitable. Yet they understand us 
poorly. That being the case, how can we expect to understand them well. 
They have none of our means to bring themselves to our attention. Our 
ignorance of them is abysmal. Our lack of interest is almost as great. 
They know this and it offends them.
Review is called for.
The problems above have not created bitterness in Chile toward 
the U.S., but they have created an atmosphere in which Chileans are 
clearly satisfied that the Nixon trip brought Latin American-U.S. prob-
lems dramatically to the forefront. No one here excuses the excesses 
of Lima or Caracas, and all are quick to say it “couldn’t happen here.” 
They are clearly pleased, though, that one way or another their prob-
lems finally reached the front pages of the U.S. press, and they are rea-
sonably sure this would not have happened in any other way.
What to do? If we want to alleviate these problems, if we want to 
keep peace in “our own patio” and, most of all, if we want to create a 
strong, friendly neighbor out of Chile, new verve must be added to our 
policy. Quoting the title of El Mercurio’s May 16 lead editorial, “The 
U.S. Has the Floor.” But Chileans want to hear some new ideas from 
us, not more explanation of old ones. Nevertheless it would be tragic 
if we panicked at this stage and started throwing money or anything 
else around carelessly. Our attitude of requiring performance with our 
assistance and of helping those who help themselves is fundamentally 
sound. We need, however, to reassess not only the degree of help they 
can, but will, give themselves, taking into consideration the social and
