Arms Control and Disarmament 1333 317. Record of Telephone Conversation Between Lodge and John Foster Dulles1 April 24, 1958, 11:43 a.m. TELEPHONE CALL FROM AMB LODGE (MR WILCOX HEARD MOST OF IT) L’s over-­all feeling is favorable. Some people on his staff think we should never provoke a Soviet veto but L thinks the proposal should be the deciding factor and this has good qualities. The Sec said he is encouraged by the fact Defense went for it and read from their letter. L and the Sec agreed not to present this as a propaganda view. L said Wadsworth said the Pres may make a nuclear test suspen­ sion speech of his own. The Sec never heard of it. L said the para re the zone of inspection as proposed by us was rubbing their noses a bit. They went into that and mentioned saying as considered. L said he would put this in a telegram and the drafting officer could consider it. L mentioned putting in something about having a technical group study it for a summit meeting to be held on these points—L thinks they won’t want it. The Sec explained why he did not agree on that. L said in the next-­to-­last paragraph strike “to settle the technical problems involved” and substitute “to make recommendations for agreement on the technical problems involved to be submitted to a con­ ference of foreign ministers”. L asked re putting in Sweden and Finland. The Sec said a way might be found to include those areas if they agree. They have never been consulted. The Sec mentioned putting them in on a contingent basis. L is putting that in a telegram. L asked re the speed of it and the Sec said if we have a Foreign Min­ isters Meeting that aspect would delay it.—The Sec mentioned saying making a report to be considered by the govts concerned through their foreign ministers. L said now that we are going into the SC we should drop the dis­ armament comm mtg. The Sec is agreeable to drop it for the time being with the understanding we will have it sometime. The Sec will restudy the res. L will wait until he hears and then will see the people there. The Sec said he may get Caccia in. L said he would like the changes telephoned to him. 1 Source: Arctic inspection zone proposal. No classification marking. 2 pp. Eisen­ hower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
