Minister was informed that the Department of State found itself unable to
share the Chinese Government’s opinion that Germany’s adherence was not
contemplated by the framers of the Treaty. Similar consideration has been
given to the corresponding views of the Chinese Government as set forth in
its memorandum on the subject of adherence by Switzerland, Chile and
Persia and in respect to adherence by these countries the Department of
State is also unable to find itself in agreement with the Chinese
Government. Article VIII of the Treaty which is quoted above designates
the Powers that are to be invited by the United States to adhere as those
“which have Governments recognized by the signatory Powers and which
have treaty relations with China”. All of the Powers named have
Governments recognized by the signatory Powers and the Chinese
Government does not deny that they have treaty relations with China.
The statement contained in the Chinese Government’s memorandum that
Bolivia’s treaty relations with China did not commence until December 17,
1924, the date when the ratifications of the Treaty of Friendship between
China and Bolivia were exchanged, may be accepted as a correct
interpretation of the effect of the deposit of ratifications. The weight of
authority on the question is that when a treaty expressly provides that it is to
be effective on ratification, it has no validity or binding force prior to the
date of ratification and that ratification is not retroactive. The same rule of
interpretation applies to the Nine Power Treaty relating to principles and
policies. Article IX of that Treaty, as indicated above, provides that it is to
take effect “on the date of the deposit of all the ratifications” at Washington.
Deposit of ratifications at Washington was not effected until August 5,
1925. Prior to that date the Treaty had no validity or binding force. Bolivia’s
treaty relations with China became effective on December 17 of the
preceding year and therefore Bolivia, like Germany, Switzerland, Chile and
Persia on October 1, 1925, belonged to the category of Powers having
Governments recognized by the signatory Powers and having treaty
relations with China to which the Government of the United States was
obliged by Article VIII to send invitations to adhere.
The memorandum enclosed with the Chinese Minister’s note of January 22
is the first intimation that the Government of the United States has had that
there is any question as to Peru’s treaty relations with China. The records
