214 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 61. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, June 17, 1958 Participants Department of State Secretary Dulles Christian A. Herter, Under Secretary Gerard C. Smith, Asst Secretary–Policy Planning Department of Defense Secretary McElroy Donald A. Quarles, Deputy Secretary Mansfield D. Sprague, Assistant Secretary John N. Irwin II, Deputy Asst Secretary Thomas S. Gates, Jr., Secretary of the Navy James H. Douglas, Secretary of the Air Force Wilbur M. Brucker, Secretary of the Army General Randolph McC Pate General N. F. Twining, Chairman, JCS Admiral Arleigh Burke, Chief of Naval Operations General T. D. White General Maxwell D. Taylor Rear Admiral Charles O. Triebel, USN General Cutler Secretary Dulles said he would like to commend the cooperation which the Department of Defense had given in connection with the Lebanon affair, pointing out that needed equipment had been supplied to the Lebanese government in exceptionally fast time. He pointed out that it would be best if the Lebanese forces could handle the problem themselves. If we have to intervene, it will be only the choice of the lesser of two evils—­the greater of the two evils being the political reper­ cussions of our failure to come to the aid of our friends, the Lebanese. Secretary McElroy then opened the discussion on the Strategic Concept. He said that Defense officials and the JCS had two discussions on the matter. They had given a good deal of thought to the type of mil­ itary backing that the US should have for its diplomatic aims. Secretary McElroy felt that, perhaps, Defense had failed to give the Secretary of State a clear picture of our limited war capabilities. He sug­ gested that some situations could best be handled by non-US forces. Of course, it would be preferable if these were UN forces. But until that became possible, he wondered if some type of volunteer forces, 1 Source: Strategic concept for the defense of Europe. Top Secret. 14 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548.
