826
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Insurgent Arms and Supplies
Although outside help has become increasingly important, the
insurgents rely primarily on weapons they had when the Marxists took
over in April 1978 or have since captured from the Afghan military,
obtained from deserters, or purchased on the local black market. (The
sale of ammunition and occasionally arms is widespread in the Afghan
Army, and some Soviet troops reportedly have also been involved.)
We have no statistics on the number of weapons the insurgents have
obtained from sources in the country, but there have been tens of
thousands of deserters and defectors from the Afghan Army, many of
them taking their weapons with them, and we know of many raids on
garrisons, police posts, and convoys in which the insurgents cap-
tured weapons.
The insurgents appear to have sufficient small arms, but frequently
run short of ammunition. Because of its range and the availability of
ammunition, the British World War II Lee-Enfield is their favorite
weapon. Large numbers of Soviet-made AK–47 assault rifles have come
into insurgent hands since the Marxist takeover, as have a growing
number of West German designed G–2 rifles (manufactured in Pakistan
under license for the Pakistan Army and also a standard Iranian Army
weapon). The insurgents have also captured machine guns, mortars,
anti-aircraft weapons, and even tanks and artillery from the Army,
but these are generally in short supply. The difficulty of moving and
maintaining heavy equipment such as tanks and artillery severely limits
their usefulness. The insurgents also produce some of their own mate-
rial—for example they convert plumbing pipe and pressure cookers
into landmines and refill old shell casings to make new ammunition.
The insurgents have used their weapons effectively, quickly adapt-
ing their tactics to new arms—such as antitank rockets—and using
unfamiliar captured heavy weapons with some effect (partly because
soldiers trained in their use defected). They have even had a technical
advantage over the Soviets in one area—rifle accuracy and range.
Although the Lee-Enfield’s rate of fire is much slower than the AK–
47s, its accuracy and range makes it superior in the typical clash in
which only a few shots are exchanged.
Some of the most effective insurgent weapons—notably antitank
rockets and modern landmines—can only be obtained abroad. In addi-
tion, the gradual drying up of the Afghan Army as a source of weap-
ons—controls on weapons and ammunition seem to be tightening, and
desertions are slowing down as the army becomes smaller—has made
foreign sources more important even for small arms and ammunition.
Pakistan has been the major outside source of arms. The gun mar-
kets in tribal areas near the border have supplied weapons to both
Afghan and Pakistani tribesmen for decades. Most of the weapons
