476
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
reached on a report on the status of the Tokyo Round.2 It has a lot of
nice sounding words but very little hard positive results. In fact, the Eu-
ropean Community withdrew previous tariff-cutting offers, including
the entire paper sector, which is important to us politically and eco-
nomically. Without the support of the US paper industry, the prospects
of getting Congressional approval of the MTNs would be reduced.
In the fall, when the serious, detailed negotiations are joined, we
should insist on:
—Substantial tariff cuts by the EC in the paper sector.
—Major tariff reductions by the Japanese on high technology
products, including computers and related equipment.
To have a reasonable chance of getting these concessions, the US
will have to forego the planned withdrawal of tariff cuts in the textile
and apparel sectors.
National Export Policy
Following the President’s directive to develop a national export
policy, Frank Weil chaired a task force to examine possible steps to ex-
pand exports and has come up with a draft report to the President
based on a consensus of the views of the task force members. Although
this consensus report does not go nearly as far as required to deal seri-
ously with the problem, it has run into heavy opposition. OMB does
not want to spend any additional money; CEA puts its faith entirely in
macro-economic policies; DPS is negative for religious reasons.
I think it is important for the US to have a hard-hitting, practical,
and effective national export policy that will create incentives for ex-
ports and eliminate the multiple disincentives that exist now. This
cannot be done, in my opinion, unless basic attitudes toward the im-
portance of exports change and until national priorities are re-ordered
to subordinate particular policy objectives to the need to export.
Exports are required to enable us to acquire the foreign exchange
to pay for needed and desired imports. Expanding exports would con-
tribute greatly to reducing our current account deficit and to strength-
ening the dollar.
I recommend that you both take every opportunity to stress the
importance of an effective national export policy to the President, Ei-
zenstat, Strauss, and Schultze.
Inflation
We have not cut taxes as planned; we have increased interest rates;
we have jaw-boned. Some think that these measures (especially the in-
2 See Document 144.
