National Security Policy  649
pointed out that the Executive Branch itself has been fairly sensible, but 
has been pushed by demagogues and special interests.
The President expressed understanding of the problems of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff in testifying before a hostile Congress. He agreed 
with Mr. McElroy that the best way for a hostile Congress under these 
circumstances to attack the Administration is to attack it for not fulfill­
ing its military requirements. Mr. McElroy pointed out that the concept 
of efficiency in government represents the “hard sell” rather than the 
“easy sell.”
Mr. Quarles then offered certain background in this area. He stated 
that the Department of Defense had resisted the AEC on the matter 
of forecast of requirements so far in advance as ten years. The AEC 
feels, however, that it is necessary to forecast requirements this far in 
order to plan efficiently the construction of our production capacity. Mr. 
Quarles and Admiral Radford had taken the initial position that our 
plutonium supply is adequate. However, this position had been over­
taken by service requirements for the DAVY CROCKETT and for small 
nuclear warheads for air defense. These two programs require much 
plutonium. The second position then taken by Mr. Quarles and Admiral 
Radford had been that a certain amount of additional plutonium was 
needed, but not in large quantity since we would have the opportunity 
to increase efficiency by continued testing. Upon the implementation 
of the current test suspension, the Department of Defense could not see 
any further position beyond that of moderate increases in plutonium.
Mr. McElroy then outlined the tack which the Department of 
Defense follows on these matters. Since the estimated requirements of 
the Department of Defense always exceed the amount of available plu­
tonium by large amounts, the Secretary of Defense had estimated that 
in order to obtain a small bite we must raise our estimated requirements 
considerably. He pointed out the relationship between requirements 
and time. If we are given a few more years, our annual production can 
be considerably reduced. He added, however, he realizes that the term 
“requirements” is a poor word.
The President again focused on the term “requirements” with a 
thought that the number of weapons actually required in 1968 is proba­
bly required in 1961. Therefore, a statement of figures as 1968 require­
ments would invite an emergency mobilization in order to produce 
them quickly.
Mr. Quarles, in this connection, pointed out that the progression 
from 1963 to 1968 does not represent significant increase in the number 
of weapons or in yield; what it does represent is an increase in tactical 
weapons. This progression is more expensive in terms of plutonium. 
He admits we would like to reach these levels in 1963 but reasonable 
production rates require a stretch-­out to 1968.
