Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 affect the outcome of the elections. Such a crisis might include any of the following: (1) A tragic hostage development: Some of our hostages could be put on trial, or one or more of them could die, or we might simply learn that some of them have disappeared. Khomeini appears determined to embarrass you in whatever way possible. (2) Break-up in Iran: Khomeini’s death and the collapse of public order could prompt the disintegration of Iran and the outbreak of civil war, precipitating even a Soviet intervention. At the present moment, we have relatively few means of influencing the outcome of such a civil war, while we do know that the Soviets have started training for military operations directed at Iran. (3) A Soviet peace offensive, or a new military offensive in Afghanistan, or (most probably) both: The Soviets will most likely intensify their efforts to woo Western Europe and perhaps even the United States through arms control initiatives, while maintaining their assertive posture in Afghanistan. Their objective will be to achieve Western acquiescence while splitting the West even further. (4) A crisis in the Middle East: Some violent act (West Bank, Syria, Lebanon) could occur, sparking a new cycle of emotion and retaliation, or—less likely—there could be some upheaval in either Saudi Arabia or Egypt jeopardizing the stability of the region. (5) A confrontation with Cuba: The Cubans could launch a new refugee wave,23 in order to embarrass you and to hurt you politically. (6) Caribbean instability: There could be even more violence and instability—perhaps another “Nicaragua.” At the same time, all of the above could also offer opportunities for decisive leadership. Such a reaction could galvanize national support and cause a patriotic upsurge. Thus, on the hostage issue we should at least have the option to take prompt military action, either through a blockade or (perhaps) the seizure of Kharg Island. I believe you should ask Harold Brown to take some quiet steps to make sure that prompt military action could be initiated in the event of such crisis. We will not be able to wait for days to react. The break-up of Iran would pose serious dilemmas, and our reaction would have to be calibrated to any Soviet initiative. In any case, we would want to act here in concert with some of the key regional countries, as well as our Allies, although again the adoption of a very firm posture could have a very positive effect. 23 Reference is to the influx of Cuban refugees into the United States beginning the spring of 1980.
