Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Rights. We consider these ideas sound steps in the right direction and find even more significance for our long range human rights policy in the fact that key Third World countries initiated and pressed them to formal adoption. In sum, others well outside the WEO human rights “bloc” are independently moving to enhance human rights mechanisms. 12. The U.S. role as a prime mover in the HRC was preserved by the re-election of Ambassador W. Beverly Carter, Jr., (23 votes) to the HRC’s Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. This body, comprising 26 members serving in a private expert capacity, is the channel through which complaints of human rights violations lodged with the UN are directed for scrutiny and recommendations for transmittal to the HRC. 13. Cambodian human rights violations were eased into the spotlight of UN attention by consensus adoption of a “decision” that asks the Secretary-General to submit the relevant records of this session’s proceedings to the Government of “Democratic” Kampuchea for its response. That response together with “all information which may be available about the situation” is to be reported back to the HRC next year through the subcommission. The decision was a compromise on a UK-initiated resolution that called for a more straightforward investigation. However, minimal as the decision was, it was implicitly critical and seems to permit the consideration by the HRC of information submitted from all sources, including the detailed charges made in the UK’s speech. Successful pursuit of the case against Cambodia will require close and careful coordination before the 1978 HRC session. 14. Additionally, the Commission was able to address, at least initially, far more agenda items than it has been able to in recent years. Results were mixed. The most notable failure was the effort to move forward on a draft declaration on religious intolerance. The draft foundered due to angry Third World opposition (Moslem and Christian alike), to Soviet insistence on language providing for the freedom not rpt not to believe in a religion. On other subjects, initial steps were taken by the establishment of various working groups to come up with proposals on measures to (a) promote rights of ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities; (b) enhance rights of migrant workers; and (c) reconsider the religious intolerance declaration. The Swedish-initiated text of a draft convention against torture was accepted as a basis for further discussion by a working group to meet just before the next HRC session. UN member states will submit comments that will be compiled for the working group’s consideration. Under the heading of the role of youth in promoting human rights, the issue of conscientious objection to military service was held over for the HRC agenda.
