Arms Control and Disarmament 1303 arrival time measurements in the rock, analagous to the fireball meas­ urements above ground. This was done on Rainier and appears to be accurate to 10% even without a calibration. The radius of the radioac­ tive debris or the amount of material melted might also be used if the medium is calibrated by a shot of known yield. The prompt diagnostics such as neutron and gamma ray measurements to give time interval or propagation burning data, streak camera work, etc., can be done better below than above ground since the shielding is free and one need only drill holes as desired. Radiochemistry has not been demonstrated to be satisfactory, since fractionation does occur. However, the use of hollow pipes leading into reception chambers from the device may give a sub­ stantial fraction of debris unfractionated, and may lead to satisfactory radiochemical diagnostics. Preliminary estimates indicate that a test operation can be carried out more cheaply underground than on towers and balloons. The diag­ nostic stations could also be underground for clandestine tests (in fact they probably will be even if the tests are not hidden). Keeping under­ ground tests secret will increase the costs by preventing the use of a single diagnostic bunker for many shots on the basis that more than one in a given vicinity increases suspicion and the possibility of proving a violation. It may mean that each shot must be in a completely different area, but this conclusion may be modified to some extent, because also natural earthquakes have aftershocks. In any event, such extra costs are associated with clandestine tests generally rather than underground tests specifically and are not likely to be more than a few million per shot, which is not a large percentage increase. IV. Dependence of Seismic Signal on Yield and Medium On the basis of observations, it is believed that the amplitude of the earth motion from an underground explosion increases as the 1.2-­power of the energy released. This scaling law is obtained on the basis of explosions of conventional explosives underground (quarry blasts). The law is somewhat surprising; theoretically one would expect that the seismic amplitude would go as the square root of the energy release. The empirical law has been used in Appendix A to predict the frequency of earthquakes in the USSR which might be confused with subsurface shots of various yields. The empirical law clearly gives more larger results for the seismic signal to be expected from shots of larger yield than Rainier than the “theoretical expectation” would give. The empirical law indicates that a larger fraction of the energy release goes into seismic waves at higher yield. This effect certainly must stop at some point; at about 100 kilotons the entire energy would be converted into seismic energy if the 1.2-­power law held up to that yield. Experiments are urgently needed to establish the actual relation between yield and seismic signal. These should be carried out with
