Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission He said a C–141 could drop the fuel 12 miles south of the area where the Otter explored. With fuel there ahead of time; the helicopters can depart from the carriers with the Delta team on board and, if the mission must be aborted, they can return to the carriers. The Chairman said that our principal uncertainty is still whether the hostages are in the Embassy compound. He thought we may need to take some additional risks in order to get a better picture of that situation. Turning to the schedule, he said the 17th is a possible date for conducting the rescue, but the 24th would be preferable. He would like to ask the NSC to look at the possibility of a decision to cache the fuel before that date. The operation would be conducted as follows: We would take in a C–141, drop four people and a little fuel and a jeep with some radios. They would go into the foothills, surveil the area to find a place to cache the fuel and to land an airplane, if that proved to be the desirable way to supply the fuel. If they run into trouble, they would come out either with an Otter, with a helicopter, or it is possible to literally snatch them from the ground with a moving C–130. However, the area was totally barren and appeared as though no human being had set foot on it for centuries. The next night, three C–130s would come, and more people would be brought into the foothills. They would then continue the execution of the mission on into Tehran, or they would be pulled out and we would stay in a holding pattern. With this scenario, we would still have the 24-hour waiting period around Tehran, but he did not believe that the risk of exposure is great at that point. The President asked what would be visible during the day of waiting. The Chairman answered that there would be no airplanes; there would be six helicopters, outside, up in these barren hills covered by camouflage. There would be 100 people waiting in the warehouse, which is located 12 miles from Tehran. The Director of Central Intelligence said that the principal advantage of this is that there would be no more C–130s flying across Saudi Arabia the first night. General Jones said the seizure and holding of Nain has been eliminated and the overflight of Saudi Arabia has been reduced to only the second day when there would be no tip-off problem. Admiral Turner stressed that under this approach, the troops would come out from the carriers on the helicopters and not on a C–130. The Chairman said that they were about two days away from completing planning on the fuel-caching operation. Once that is completed, he would then like to ask that we consider the possibility of
