Afghanistan
593
214.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Chairman of the Special Coordination Committee1
Washington, February 21, 1980
SUBJECT
Additional Funding for Afghanistan Covert Action Program (S/[handling
restriction not declassified])
1. The Afghanistan Covert Action Program began with a Presiden-
tial Finding dated 3 July 1979 which authorized humanitarian aid to
the insurgents.2 The SCC authorized [amount not declassified] in support
of this program. A second Finding on 7 November expanded the pro-
gram by authorizing procurement advice and communications equip-
ment. The SCC authorized [amount not declassified] for this phase of the
program. Following the Soviet invasion, a third Presidential Finding
dated 28 December expanded the program further by authorizing the
provision of lethal military equipment to the insurgents.3 The SCC
authorized an additional [amount not declassified] for the program. As
you are aware, Saudi Arabia has agreed to cooperate with us in this
program and has contributed [amount not declassified] for a total Afghan
program budget of [amount not declassified]. This amount will soon be
exhausted. (S/[handling restriction not declassified])
2. At an NSC meeting of 15 February 1980 the President approved
continuation of the Afghanistan Covert Action Program for the remain-
der of calendar year 1980.4 We need approval from the SCC to request
a release [less than 1 line not declassified] which is the amount we estimate
we need to maintain our part of this program. For your information,
we anticipate that Saudi Arabia will contribute an additional [amount
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 13, SCC (I) Meeting, 27 February 1980, Afghanistan. Secret; [handling restriction
not declassified].
2 See footnote 5, Document 53.
3 See footnote 6, Document 107.
4 No record of an NSC meeting on that date was found. Reference may be to a
foreign policy breakfast, February 15, attended by Carter, Vance, Brown, Jordan, Brzezin-
ski, Cutler, Donovan, and General David Jones. The meeting was noted, but not elabo-
rated upon, in the President’s Daily Diary. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, Presi-
dent’s Daily Diary)
