Comprehensive Test Ban —A CTB would be responsive to growing international and domestic political pressures to end nuclear testing. It would fulfill US pledges to seek this goal which have been made in the Limited Test Ban Treaty, the Non-Proliferation Treaty, UN and CCD speeches, and most recently, by President Carter. Arguments against a CTB are: —Since World War II the US has depended on nuclear weapons to deter nuclear and conventional attacks on the US and its allies. In particular, nuclear weapons have served to counterbalance the overwhelming superiority of Soviet conventional forces in Europe. A CTB will inevitably result in some deterioration of US nuclear weaponry. —If the Soviets decide to violate or circumvent the CTB Treaty and are successful, at least in the low-yield range, this could result in further military asymmetries favoring the Soviet Union. —Future foreign concern over US capability to oppose Soviet aggression in the event of a perceived degradation in our nuclear deterrent could result in international realignments and possibly further proliferation. —Specific strategic and tactical weapons will not be optimized and may even have to be cancelled because of technical difficulties. —Continued testing by other weapons states, notably China, could eventually have an adverse effect on US national security. —An early cessation of nuclear testing would eliminate our current objectives to improve the safety, security, command/control features, and reduction of collateral damage from all classes of nuclear weapons. —The Soviets could have an asymmetric advantage in maintaining stockpile reliability and nuclear weapons design capability. —[2 lines not declassified] Such testing could be important for development of some tactical weapons. VII. CTB Implementing Options A. Negotiations with Continued Testing Under this option we would initiate CTB negotiations with the Soviets as soon as practicable, but would continue testing pending conclusion of a CTB Treaty. (It is considered likely that negotiation of a CTB would take at least a year, particularly if PNEs were allowed.) Advantages —Together with renewed SALT negotiations, would demonstrate US commitment to arms control and enhance prospects for our nonproliferation objectives.
