Comprehensive Test Ban
335
—A CTB would be responsive to growing international and do-
mestic political pressures to end nuclear testing. It would fulfill US
pledges to seek this goal which have been made in the Limited Test Ban
Treaty, the Non-Proliferation Treaty, UN and CCD speeches, and most
recently, by President Carter.
Arguments against a CTB are:
—Since World War II the US has depended on nuclear weapons to
deter nuclear and conventional attacks on the US and its allies. In par-
ticular, nuclear weapons have served to counterbalance the over-
whelming superiority of Soviet conventional forces in Europe. A CTB
will inevitably result in some deterioration of US nuclear weaponry.
—If the Soviets decide to violate or circumvent the CTB Treaty and
are successful, at least in the low-yield range, this could result in fur-
ther military asymmetries favoring the Soviet Union.
—Future foreign concern over US capability to oppose Soviet ag-
gression in the event of a perceived degradation in our nuclear deter-
rent could result in international realignments and possibly further
proliferation.
—Specific strategic and tactical weapons will not be optimized and
may even have to be cancelled because of technical difficulties.
—Continued testing by other weapons states, notably China,
could eventually have an adverse effect on US national security.
—An early cessation of nuclear testing would eliminate our cur-
rent objectives to improve the safety, security, command/control fea-
tures, and reduction of collateral damage from all classes of nuclear
weapons.
—The Soviets could have an asymmetric advantage in maintaining
stockpile reliability and nuclear weapons design capability.
—[2 lines not declassified] Such testing could be important for de-
velopment of some tactical weapons.
VII. CTB Implementing Options
A. Negotiations with Continued Testing
Under this option we would initiate CTB negotiations with the So-
viets as soon as practicable, but would continue testing pending con-
clusion of a CTB Treaty. (It is considered likely that negotiation of a
CTB would take at least a year, particularly if PNEs were allowed.)
Advantages
—Together with renewed SALT negotiations, would demonstrate
US commitment to arms control and enhance prospects for our non-
proliferation objectives.
