104 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 86. Telegram 496 to Geneva1 Washington, August 15, 1955, 10:57 a.m. 496. For Johnson. In event a break threatens over Point 1 of agenda, we think you should inform Wang that we suggest a recess of two weeks or some such time to permit CHICOMS to complete their investigation of cer­ tain American cases, a short time which should be ample in view Chou En-­lai’s July 30 statement that “the number of American civilians in China is small, and their question can be easily settled” and that US at time of recessing would make a public statement somewhat as follows: QTE The US is prepared to make a joint declaration with the C.P.R. which would confirm formally a) that all nationals of either under the authority of the other who desire to return home are now free to do so; b) that a third party in each country may be designated to assist such return if ever a national desiring to return believes that, contrary to declared policy, he is encountering official obstruction, and c) that such third party may also be the means of providing financial assistance to those desiring to return. However, this joint declaration is not now being made because the C.P.R. reports that it has not yet completed its investigation of certain US cases. Therefore, the talks are recessed for quote blank unqte weeks at the end of which time we hope the C.P.R will join with the US in mak­ ing a joint declaration such as the US is now prepared to make. Despite the present recess, the US is continuing its own policy of permitting Chinese nationals in the US who desire to return to the mainland to do so. The US hopes and believes that agreement on the release of Amer­ icans on the China mainland can be reached by the end of the period of recess, having in mind Mr. Chou En-­lai’s statement of July 30, 1955 that “the number of American civilians in China is small, and their question can be easily settled.” UNQTE Dulles 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1555. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Dulles; cleared by McConaughy.
