Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1099
importance to the Tlatelolco Treaty as a device to prevent non-
proliferation since they (Argentina) never had the intentions to prolif-
erate. However, primarily because the US felt this was an important
move followed by international safeguards as discussed during the
Vance visit last November, the GOA decided to ratify the Treaty ac-
companied by international safeguards and was under the impression
the US would follow up with discussions on the transfer of heavy water
technology. This exchange, according to Aden, was the crux of the
whole matter and apparently where both countries are now of different
opinions relative to the outcome of the November discussions. The Sci-
Couns reviewed again the US understanding of the discussions as
stated in our note, and indicated that it is our clear understanding that
paragraph 7 of the Communique´ referred to expanded US/Argentine
nuclear cooperation under the first two stages and that the phrase “rel-
evant technology” did not include transfer of heavy water production
technology except under conditions described in the third stage. The
third stage included the requirement for a deferral of reprocessing ac-
tivities and the negotiation of a full scope safeguard agreement if this
was not accomplished under stages one or two. These would be the
conditions for further discussions on the transfer of heavy water tech-
nology. As stated in the Note, this US position had been expressed on
several occasions to Castro Madero and other GOA officials by Amb
Smith, Prof Nye, and Embassy officers.
6. Aden indicated deferral of reprocessing was not a part of the
Joint Communique´ but of separate discussions during the visit. He
claimed this was not connected to receiving heavy water technology
from the US; and in any event, Argentina was not involved in chemical
reprocessing and does not have the need nor the technology. However,
Aden said this would remain a technical question that could be dis-
cussed further with the US.
7. Finally, Aden stated Argentina was highly interested in moving
ahead with important discussions with the US on future nuclear coop-
eration and objectives of non-proliferation. He feels if both gov-
ernments work together on a sincere basis for peaceful purposes of
atomic energy, these differences related to the Joint Communique´ and
stages of cooperation can be resolved.
8. The reporting officer indicated he was actively working with
CNEA officials and lawyers on the review of the US Non-Proliferation
Act and that they had requested discussions with the US side on the
renegotiation of a nuclear cooperation agreement (Reftel A) which
would be necessary before some of the expanded cooperation referred
to in the Note could take place.
9. In a final question on the PNE Section of Tlatelolco, Aden men-
tioned this would be decided by Cal and the presidency but he felt this
was not of great importance to Argentina.
