Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX treaty. We indicated that we are very concerned that any reaction by Saudi Arabia directed negatively at the treaty, such as attacks or tangible economic actions, could adversely affect our interests. We had intense discussions. In the eyes of the Saudis this initiative greatly complicates their situation. They are faced with conflicting pulls from the U.S. and the other Arabs. They feel that you (Sadat) have not consulted with them and they see a difficult period following the treaty. They see themselves bound by collective obligations of the Arab League. We pressed them with regard to the differentiation between the collective obligations and bilateral actions. We noted that we are involved in a growing relation with Egypt and it would be senseless if the Saudis diminished their relations. I believe it is fair to say that our discussions usefully conveyed to the Saudi leadership the gravity with which we would view such action. We sought an understanding from them that they discuss very precisely the technical steps they intend to take, distinguishing between symbolic steps as opposed to those that have tangible, bilateral effects. We heard the answer from Saud and from Fahd with unanimity. We find ourselves encouraged. They made a point which struck us as sensible, that you have not done enough to explain your motives and actions. They find themselves in the position of explaining your actions to others. It would be helpful if you could make a public case using the kind of argument that we made to them, stressing that the victims of any freeze in the present situation would be the Palestinians. Dr. Brzezinski then invited Mr. Christopher to comment. Mr. Christopher said that Dr. Brzezinski’s account was entirely accurate. He would say that Saudi Arabia was pulled in three directions. First, by their Arab brothers; secondly, by their friendship with the U.S.; and third, by their friendship and admiration for Egypt. They want to do everything in their power not to hurt Egypt over the next weeks and months. On a bilateral basis they are prepared to continue the aid relations and they referred to two substantial aid programs as recent signal or talisman of their good faith. They were careful to note that things may change, but they intend to be a good friend of Egypt. On the collective side it is different. They intend to send an emissary to the other Arab countries to promote moderation. They will join only in the technical outcome, i.e., the move of the Arab League headquarters from Cairo, suspension of Egyptian membership in the Arab League, and the application of the boycott to Egyptian companies dealing with Israel. They could not stop action short of that. We are in for a period of very careful waiting and watching. They will try quietly and in their own way on the collective front. We got the
