1978  401
essential to meeting SIOP objectives), or any other national-­level policy 
document.
(TS) In the absence of specific guidance on how to translate the 
idea of Secure Reserve Forces into actual nuclear attack plans, pre-
planned packages have been developed for the current SRF. These 
preplanned packages include a combination of the unique (Eastern 
European economic) and the strategic after-­thought (e.g., low priority 
USSR economic SIOP “seconds”) with no definition as to when, where 
and under what conditions the forces would actually be used, except 
that it would be after a major nuclear exchange. The SRF weapons are 
available for use in ad hoc employment options—­they are not committed 
to any specific preplanned target package or employment strategy.
(S) Lack of attention at the policy level to Secure Reserve Force 
employment concepts is in part rooted in the persistence of the view 
that if deterrence fails a nuclear war will not only be massive but brief. 
In such a scenario there would be a role for a reserve force; but only for 
a force that is modest in size, and intended for use only in protection of 
the U.S. against coercion by a recovering Soviet Union, or from intimi-
dation by a third party.
(S) What has not been satisfactorily addressed is the role that a 
Secure Reserve Force would or should play if a nuclear war were pro-
longed, and involved a series of exchanges.
(C) The task assigned the SRF Study Group was to assess the capa-
bilities of the SRF in its present composition, particularly the capabili-
ties for target acquisition, under two different employment strategies; 
preplanned targeting and ad hoc targeting for the SRF as it is currently 
composed (B–52s, POSEIDON/POLARIS and MINUTEMAN III). The 
study assessed the four basic requirements central to the use and con-
trol of the SRF against a range of time, C3I, and reconnaissance variables 
and constraints: (1) survival of the SRF; (2) survival of the decision-­
maker; (3) information requirements for the employment of the Secure 
Reserve Force and the availability of that information (survivability of 
intelligence and communications assets); and (4) the ability of the NCA 
to command and control and retarget/reprogram U.S. military forces 
and to communicate with allies, enemies, and neutrals.
(U) Two scenarios were developed for use in the study. In both sce-
narios, it was assumed that there was a major nuclear exchange between 
the Soviet Union and the United States. The first scenario assumes that 
the Soviets initiate an attack on the United States and its allies with U.S. 
forces in a day-­to-­day alert posture. The second scenario assumes that 
the Soviet Union initiates an attack against the United States and its 
allies with U.S. forces in a generated posture.
