790
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
territorial integrity, and non-alignment of Yugoslavia. On their side,
it was their desire for improved relations without prejudice to their
cherished non-alignment and national unity.
They implied they were more afraid of an attack by Bulgaria2 than
by the Soviet Union. But if they were overmatched, they were (they
said) prepared to retreat to the mountains, as in World War II, and
fight on as guerrillas. On the political side, they would not admit that
their internal ethnic differences created political instability, but they
were at least willing to recognize the potential for such trouble. They
noted that Albania and Bulgaria both claimed Yugoslav territory.
They asked about SALT, including cruise missiles, and I gave quite
a detailed explanation. Ljubicic remarked that, while a SALT agreement
might benefically limit systems by which the US and Russia threaten
each other, it would not necessarily make the smaller countries more
secure. He asked about reduction of [less than 1 line not declassified]. I
responded that that issue was not included in SALT although eventu-
ally forward-based and other non-strategic systems would probably
be dealt with in SALT or some other forum. Ljubicic asked about the
neutron bomb and I explained its military purpose.
As to an enhanced military supply relationship, I outlined our
desire to be forthcoming within certain limits (e.g. defensive weapons
only, no sensitive technology) and stressed the need for better proce-
dures to avoid the misunderstandings of the past. I gave a few illustra-
tions of weapons which we would be willing to provide and which
we would not be willing to provide. By pointing out that you had
endorsed enlarging the US-GOY relationship while at the same time
ordering a world-wide reduction in our arms transfers, I noted our
special interest in them.
While they welcomed the US attitude in general, the Yugoslavs
expressed disappointment as to specifics. I believe this concern was
somewhat alleviated by my emphasizing that our visit was designed
to start a process rather than to result in definitive decisions. They
indicated that their principal interests lay in high technology anti-
armor, anti-air and anti-landing (helicopter and airborne) weapons.
While we can modestly expand our relationship, the process will not
be easy because Yugoslavia’s desires will frequently involve systems
too sensitive for release. Most of their arms purchases (they say they
make 75 percent themselves) are from the USSR. They buy about
550 million a year from the U.K.; our own sales are no more than a
couple of million a year.3
2 Carter underlined “Bulgaria.”
3 Ermarth wrote in the margin next to this paragraph: “10/31 DOD informed NSC
that 550 should have read 50.”
