804 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX lican and Democratic National Committees have invited a delegation of Yugoslav Communist Party leaders to visit the US later this year— a first. But the invitation took great effort to arrange, and mutual suspicion, I suspect, will be high. The Tito visit should make each side more respectable in the eyes of the other, thereby encouraging the development of a real dialogue and a continuing exchange. 13. The question of suspicion may, in the last analysis, be the real roadblock that must be overcome if our relations are to prosper over the longer term. Yugoslavia is led, after all, by a generation of Communists who fought a war and died for their beliefs; men who, soon afterward, only reluctantly and after great soul-searching chose to accept Moscow’s excommunication rather than change their ways; men who for a long time, in their heart-of-hearts, longed to be reaccepted into the body of the faithful (but on their own terms). And we, in their eyes, are the bulwark of capitalism, the fortress of economic exploitation, and the last defender of a dying colonialism. 14. Admittedly, times have changed. Unlike whichever Louis it was, the Yugoslav leadership has learned something. But it has forgotten very little. The emotional pull of the Soviets has lessened, the growth of Eurocommunism has reduced the sense of isolation. The United States does not post the ever-present military threat the Soviets do; we can be used, we are generally respected and often envied, but we are not widely trusted. In the end the saving element is that they are all better Yugoslavs than Communists. As such, their own interests as they perceive them will guide their decisions (which makes them very like all the rest of us). It is our job, then, slowly to persuade them of the community of our interests. We have made a remarkably good start over the course of the past year; the task now is to transform a promising beginning into a lasting success. Eagleburger
