136 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement replied that of course it is conceivable that we might be able to pre­ vent nuclear bombs falling upon our cities; but we could certainly never avoid the hazard of widespread radioactive fallout in the event of a nuclear exchange. The President likewise addressed his next question to Governor Hoegh. If, he said, we are thinking of an attack which would involve some 30 million U.S. casualties in the initial exchange, we have still not approached the casualty limits because there may be repeated attacks by the enemy after the initial attack. Such attacks might occur at a time when people were just coming out of shelter from the first attack. So, said the President, he concluded that when we talk about a vast nuclear exchange between us and the enemy, we are in fact talking about some­ thing the results of which are almost impossible to conceive of. With respect to the psychological aspects of the problem of shel­ ter, the President said he had got together some knowledgeable people and asked them just how much money it would take to build a fallout shelter on his farm sufficient to hold some 14 or 15 people. They had estimated the cost to be between $25 and $30 thousand, and the shelter was by no means elaborate. This posed the psychological problem. The President said that maybe, if he got a good job after he ceased to be President, he could afford to build such a shelter, but most of his neigh­ bors would not be able to do so. In that case, won’t they argue that only the rich are managing to get shelter protection? And will they not go on from that point to insist that the Federal Government build shelters for them? The President stressed that he was all for the construction of private shelters as far as this seemed likely to go, but he confessed that he was baffled by the problem of working out a scheme that offered hope of real success. Accordingly, the over-­all answer seemed to him to be for this Government to assure that no doubt whatsoever existed about the protection of our massive retaliatory capability. In summary, the President stated that he agreed with the measures which had been proposed by the Interdepartmental Committee, as modified by the comments of the other Members of the Council. Secretary Dulles turned to Governor Hoegh and complained that no one in all these years had ever told him what he should store in the basements of his houses. Why had he not been told? Governor Hoegh explained the reasons why. Since there was no visible shelter program, anyone who was found building a private shelter was thought to be eccentric. Secretary Dulles pressed the question as to what kind of food should be stored in his basement. Governor Hoegh replied by asking the Secretary what he liked to eat. Secretary McElroy commented that in his opinion it would be nec­ essary to terrify the people of the United States before they will do what Secretary Dulles was suggesting—­namely, to build and stock shelters
