42
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
9.
Special Estimate1
SE–3
Washington, March 16, 1951.
THE CURRENT CRISIS IN IRAN
Conclusions
1. The political situation in Iran has long been unstable. This insta-
bility has been increased by the assassination of Razmara, which has
led to a new outburst of extreme nationalism, expressed in a vigorous
demand for nationalization of oil resources of the Anglo-Iranian Oil
Company.
2. We do not believe, however, that the situation is such that there
is imminent danger of the government’s losing control, barring armed
intervention by the USSR. This estimate is based on the following
considerations:
a. Available information indicates that the Iranian armed forces,
including the gendarme´rie and police, are adequate to maintain order.
There is no evidence to suggest that they are not under effective control
of the government.
b. The extreme nationalists have only a very small representation
in the Majlis. Their popular following, though large and widespread, is
nevertheless unorganized.
c. The illegal pro-Soviet Tudeh Party is not believed to be capable
of taking advantage of the current tension to gain control of the gov-
ernment or even seriously to disrupt the government’s control.
d. Although the main issue in the present crisis is nationalization
of Iran’s oil resources and although this issue has evoked over-
whelming popular support, responsible government officials, led by
the Shah, are aware of the difficulties involved in nationalization.
Given the cooperation of the British, they may be expected to make a
real effort to find a face-saving settlement with the Anglo-Iranian Oil
Company.
3. Nevertheless, the possibility cannot be excluded that the situa-
tion may be aggravated and the crisis prolonged by an unyielding atti-
tude on the part of the British, or by some unpredictable development
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79S01011A, Box 3, Folder 3,
SE–3, The Current Crisis in Iran. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet, the esti-
mate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the Intel-
ligence Advisory Committee on March 15. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intel-
ligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, Air Force, and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff participated in its preparation.
