1956 679 459. Letter 21 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 21 Geneva, January 20, 1956 Dear Walter: Thank you very much for your letter of January 16 and especially for your forethought in sending me a copy of the Shepley article. As you will see the subject came up in a very major way at yesterday’s meeting and I was able to handle it against the background of full knowledge of the contents of the article. I do not think there can be any question but that the article stung Peiping and that at the minimum they felt they had to react as least ver­ bally. I have tried to kill much speculation among the correspondents here that the article called forth the Chicom statement on the talks, let­ ting it be known that Weng had informed me at last meeting before the furor concerning the Shepley article had started, that they were going to issue the statement. Whether or not the Shepley article in fact had any effect on their final decision, it gave them a convenient peg on which to hang their release. I had to handle my reply to Wang entirely off the cuff but believe I made the major points. I had not anticipated quite this kind of pres­ entation from him and thought it would more likely be a passing ­reference such as his reference to Quarles’ statement the preceding meeting which I could, if I chose, ignore. However, his presentation with regard to the Shepley article was such I felt it incumbent to reply at some length. I have tried fully and frankly to cover my views with regard to the situation in my telegrams and have little to add. You can be sure that I more than share your concern over the pos­ sibility, and I think even probability, that eventually some Chinese in jail that desires to return will turn up. I am a little concerned over being too specific in my statements each of the persons mentioned in his lists is free to return, just on the chance one of them might turn out to be imprisoned, deceased, or some other such thing. I agreed with him yesterday on changing the date of meeting after I had verified that it was not an attempt to step-­up the frequency of the meetings. Knowing your schedule on getting my instructions to me, as well as the likelihood that little new would be needed for the next meet­ ing, it should not present any problem to you back there. By agreeing to it of course enabled me somewhat to balance off his agreeing to my 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
