Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 108. Briefing by Secretary of State Vance and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 15, 1979 SECRETARY VANCE2 I am delighted that so many of you have joined us today. I particularly want to thank the two main business organizations represented here, and especially their leadership, for their efforts in advancing public understanding of a major foreign policy issue. Both Councils have played—and will continue to play—important roles in strengthening our economic relations. It is now 1 month since the President announced that the United States and the People’s Republic of China had reached agreement on the establishment of full and normal diplomatic relations.3 Today I would like to share with you some of the background leading up to the President’s historic decision and outline what we believe it means for the United States and for the world. Few other foreign policy issues have so long divided Americans as “the China question.” In the 1930’s, Americans became deeply aware and often passionately concerned with the tragedy and suffering of China. In the early 1940’s, our two nations fought together against the Axis Powers. In the late 1940’s we tried—ultimately without success— to help the two sides in the Chinese civil war find a peaceful settlement to their conflict. Relations between the People’s Republic of China and the United States reached a nadir in the 1950’s. Our armies clashed in Korea, and at home the China issue left a deep mark on the domestic political landscape. One of the tragedies of that period was the destruction of the careers of some outstanding Foreign Service officers because they reported events in Asia as they saw them. The impasse in our relations with Peking persisted despite the emergence during the 1960’s of incontestable evidence of serious rivalry between the Soviet Union and China. The United States, enmeshed in military involvement in Southeast Asia, and China, preoc-
