Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
527
108.
Briefing by Secretary of State Vance and the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 15, 1979
SECRETARY VANCE2
I am delighted that so many of you have joined us today. I particu-
larly want to thank the two main business organizations represented
here, and especially their leadership, for their efforts in advancing
public understanding of a major foreign policy issue. Both Councils
have played—and will continue to play—important roles in strength-
ening our economic relations.
It is now 1 month since the President announced that the United
States and the People’s Republic of China had reached agreement on
the establishment of full and normal diplomatic relations.3 Today I
would like to share with you some of the background leading up to the
President’s historic decision and outline what we believe it means for
the United States and for the world.
Few other foreign policy issues have so long divided Americans as
“the China question.” In the 1930’s, Americans became deeply aware
and often passionately concerned with the tragedy and suffering of
China. In the early 1940’s, our two nations fought together against the
Axis Powers. In the late 1940’s we tried—ultimately without success—
to help the two sides in the Chinese civil war find a peaceful settlement
to their conflict.
Relations between the People’s Republic of China and the United
States reached a nadir in the 1950’s. Our armies clashed in Korea, and at
home the China issue left a deep mark on the domestic political land-
scape. One of the tragedies of that period was the destruction of the ca-
reers of some outstanding Foreign Service officers because they re-
ported events in Asia as they saw them.
The impasse in our relations with Peking persisted despite the
emergence during the 1960’s of incontestable evidence of serious ri-
valry between the Soviet Union and China. The United States, en-
meshed in military involvement in Southeast Asia, and China, preoc-
1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, February 1979, pp. 14–21. All brackets are in
the original. The Department of State held the briefing for chief executives and other offi-
cials from member firms of the National Council for U.S.–China Trade and the USA/
ROC Economic Council.
2 Press Release 13. [Footnote in the original.]
3 For text see Bulletin of January 1979, p. 25. [Footnote in the original. See Docu-
ments 104 and 105.]
