808  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
71. In the late 1980s, prompt casualties and fatalities among the 
general Soviet population would be somewhat greater than in 1979. At 
present rates of shelter construction, the projected increase in shelter 
capacity would be more than offset by increases in Soviet urban pop-
ulation and by improvements in US forces. Mass evacuation of cities 
would still be necessary to save a substantial portion of the urban pop-
ulation. An even larger percentage of the leadership and essential per-
sonnel will probably have shelter protection, but the Soviet economy 
will remain about as vulnerable as at present.
72. Given their belief that all aspects of society contribute to a 
nation’s military capabilities, the Soviet leaders probably view civil 
defense as contributing to their strength in the US-Soviet strategic bal-
ance. They almost certainly believe their present civil defenses would 
improve their ability to conduct military operations and would enhance 
the USSR’s chances of surviving a nuclear war. Our latest analyses of 
the effects of civil defense, however, provide additional support to our 
previous judgment that present and projected Soviet civil defense pro-
grams would not embolden the Soviet leaders to take actions during a 
crisis that would involve deliberately accepting a high risk of nuclear 
war.
73. There is an alternative view that the Soviet Union’s capabil-
ity to protect its extensive leadership infrastructure at all levels, even 
under conditions of limited warning, enhances its ability to conduct 
military operations, improves its crisis management, and promotes 
postwar recovery. The continuing Soviet investment of major resources 
in the civil defense program clearly demonstrates the confidence the 
Soviet leaders have in its value. This confidence could contribute to 
Soviet resolve in a future crisis environment. According to this view, 
the Soviet civil defense program—­through its potential for influenc-
ing political perceptions, providing leverage for coercion during a cri-
sis, affecting nuclear exchange outcomes, and contributing to postwar 
recovery—­impacts on both the reality of the strategic balance and on 
perceptions of the balance in the USSR and elsewhere.15
15 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior 
Intelligence Officers of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]
