536
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
capacity is already fully mortgaged and movement of these airfields
would not enhance that capacity.
Option A is to make incremental grants to Israel and Egypt in FY
1979, FY 1980 and FY 1981 equalling the agreed foreign exchange costs of
replicating the two Israeli air bases, including essential associated air
control and communications systems and other directly required logis-
tical support facilities, and of establishing the Egyptian early warning
system, both on a construction schedule within three years. In both
countries, “foreign exchange costs” would be defined to permit substi-
tution of imported goods and services for domestic ones when neces-
sary in our judgment to avoid extreme dislocations of their domestic
economies. We would refer the Israeli request for military equipment
not essential to the air base relocation to the regular process of US-
Israeli consultation on annual FMS credit assistance, without indication
of predisposition to increase regular aid levels. As to the economic im-
pact of other military redeployments or civilian resettlement, we would
point out that our regular economic assistance provides generous relief
of these burdens, to the extent that dollars can help. Our present rough
estimate is that this approach would cost the US about $220–$250 mil-
lion a year (additional to current aid levels) for three years; at least 85%
of this would be for Israel.
Option B would offer full-cost financing of the same facilities as in
Option A, thus releasing more Israeli budget funds for the other pur-
poses. We would insist on US control of the construction schedule and
take this program into account in responding to Israel’s annual aid re-
quests. Our rough estimate is that this approach would cost the US
about $1.3–$1.4 billion, spread over three years, that is, $425 to $475 mil-
lion per year (additional to current aid levels), 90% for Israel.
Legislation
We recommend that any US contribution toward costs of imple-
menting the treaty be sought from the Congress in special legislation,
which would authorize appropriations in annual installments. Keeping
this aid out of our regular foreign aid program would help to avoid
building in radically heightened annual aid levels to either country.
Offsetting Congressional cuts in your other aid programs could prob-
ably still be expected, however.
