succeed in discovering any to offer. The American delegation has
made it plain that we would naturally welcome any proposal
which would be the means of accomplishing a successful
outcome, but that there could be no question of our conceding the
fundamental principle which was the cause of the deadlock
between the British and ourselves.
4. It will doubtless be necessary to convene a meeting of the chief
delegates in order to compose an agenda for the closing meeting
before having the final plenary session. It is possible on this
occasion that the British or Japanese may make some suggestion
that, instead of a debate and statement of the divergent positions
of the different delegations, a statement be drafted setting forth
the work accomplished by the Conference for which no solution
could be found at the present time and the recommendation that
the problems which have vexed the Conference be given study by
the different Governments represented. It may further be
advocated that the Conference recommend to the three powers
represented that, should it not be possible to consider them at an
earlier date, the limitation of auxiliary craft be discussed at the
Conference to be held in 1931. (The Japanese delegation has
indicated on different occasions that, should the Conference fail,
they would favor some resolution concerning a discussion of
auxiliary craft before or during the Conference of 1931.)
Acrimonious debate would naturally be prevented by such a final
act of the Conference, but it would likewise prevent our making a
clear statement, such as that already drafted, concerning the
American attitude. Do you desire me to support or oppose such a
proposal should it be suggested and accepted by the British and
Japanese? If such a proposal should be made and supported by the
British and Japanese, you may wish to give consideration to the
effect of rejecting it.
5. In considering the program for the final session, it is also
possible that a proposal may be made that three inoffensive
speeches should be made after being circulated and approved by
the three delegations represented. This is not favored by me and I
