806 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI —that the US must move rapidly and decisively to reestablish its reliability as a nuclear fuel supplier, and that to achieve this end we must not only take steps to provide new enrichment capacity but also to restore certainty that contractual commitments will be honored on a timely basis for all cooperating states adhering to their non-proliferation obligations; —that a policy of constraint on reprocessing must be accompanied by strong incentives, focusing on assured supply of low-enriched uranium and of natural uranium fuel; —that the establishment of parallel policies among the nuclear supplier states which would at least entail cooperative planning of new enrichment facilities and close consultations on the relation between fuel assurances and “back-end” constraints is essential; —that multilateral as well as international arrangements to assure access to fuel supplies are needed in order to avoid placing reactor exporting nations at a competitive disadvantage or recipients at an economic disadvantage provided they abide by generally accepted nonproliferation guidelines. Differences exist over what specific steps need to be taken now with respect to multilateral collaboration in the area of enrichment. Discussion of this issue and recommendations on fuel assurances are on pages 22–28. 3. How should we tighten our agreements for civil nuclear cooperation and our nuclear export policy? Nuclear exports take place under agreements for cooperation between the US and individual recipient countries. There is interagency consensus that stricter terms should be required in new agreements including, if all suppliers concur, full-scope safeguards (i.e., safeguards on all nuclear activities in NNWS); and that we should seek to upgrade existing agreement to include at least some additional conditions. This study examines: —what new requirements we will impose for future agreements for cooperation. Of primary concern are: • Whether we make full-scope safeguards (i.e., safeguards on all nuclear activities in a NNWS) a condition of US nuclear cooperation or instead insist on alternative measures aimed at widening safeguards application. • Whether and to what extent the US should impose new requirements in the absence of agreement by other key suppliers to impose them. (A decision to impose increased safeguards and other conditions for new agreements would affect, among others, the proposed agreements with Israel, Egypt, and Brazil.) —how we should upgrade cooperation under existing agreements, in particular:
