464 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Some LDC’s have argued that the emphasis of our assistance programs on basic human needs is designed to impede Third World industrial development. To the extent our human rights policies stress basic human needs assistance, they attract the same criticism. Needless to say, what underlies our approach is not a desire to forestall economic competition from LDCs, but rather a conviction that a stronger emphasis on basic human needs will enhance our effectiveness in promoting overall economic development. V. The Effect of Our Actions on the Advancement of U.S. Human Rights Objectives The United States has used a variety of policy tools to implement its human rights policy. The use of our “voice and vote” in the multilateral development institutions is only one of these tools, but one which, in certain circumstances, has been influential. IFI-related actions have normally been taken in conjunction with or subsequent to other forms of action or representation. Thus, actions in the IFIs have not become the “cutting edge” of our human rights policy. Since, as noted above, our concept of human rights encompasses economic and social rights, we have in most instances continued to support IFI loans to countries with serious human rights problems when the loans are directed at meeting the basic human needs of the poor; at the same time, we have opposed loans to such countries for large capital and infrastructure projects. We have explained this distinction to recipient governments. In our representations we have emphasized our belief that policies which foster human rights contribute positively to economic and social development. As for the economic impact of our actions in the IFIs, no loan has failed to be approved because of our opposition, although efforts described above to encourage other donor support may lead to the actual disapproval of loans. However, when countries have withdrawn or delayed applications for loans in anticipation of U.S. opposition, there has been a direct economic impact. (The value of all loans that have been postponed is approximately $385 million. Of that amount, loans totaling approximately $250 million were subsequently approved by the IFIs.) There has also been an economic effect in those few instances in which countries, anticipating U.S. opposition to a proposed loan, have switched the loans from the Inter-American Development Bank’s “soft lending window” (i.e., the Fund for Special Operations), where the U.S. has veto power over loans, to the bank’s “hard lending window,” where interest rates are higher and maturities shorter. U.S. actions in the IFIs on human rights may also in certain cases affect a country’s credit-worthiness in the eyes of commercial lenders. As our actions in the IFIs are almost always accompanied by other actions or representations, a direct relationship cannot be shown be-
