World Hunger and Food Policy
781
Mechanism for Establishing the Commission
Two choices exist for establishing the Commission
(1) Executive Order
A Commission authorized by Executive Order can be initiated im-
mediately with a prescribed membership; be given carefully prescribed
responsibilities; and operate under a statutory base for agency funding
and manpower sharing. This approach would clearly define Presiden-
tial interest, allow more direct control over the Commission by the
White House; and provide a test of public reaction and interest before
the Administration modifies programs or requests legislation. Such au-
thorization, however, would still require an appropriation from the
Congress. To enable the Commission to be established immediately,
some money could be allocated from the President’s Discretionary Ac-
count while an appropriation was being sought.
(2) Executive Order Accompanied by a Message on World Hunger to the
Congress
This variation of the Executive Order mechanism offers the advan-
tage of option (1), but also provides an opportunity to communicate the
recommendations of the World Hunger Working Group, to broaden
the framework within which the Commission will conduct its work
and offers an opportunity to make near-term changes in existing pro-
grams. Perhaps most important it provides a very appropriate oppor-
tunity to lay out your overall world hunger policy, without having to
wait until the Commission completes its report. To wait that long
without any major statement from you might be too long. Such a mes-
sage could also contain a request for an appropriation for the
Commission.
DECISION
Executive Order Only
Executive Order and Message to Congress12
12 The President approved this option. On March 17, Bourne provided members of
the World Hunger Working Group with copies of a draft message to Congress and a draft
charter and executive order establishing the Commission on Domestic and International
Hunger and Malnutrition. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P780067–1963) Executive Order 12078, signed by the President on September 5, created
the Presidential Commission on World Hunger. (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pp.
1498–1499) See also Document 251.
