1250 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement was domestic matter they entitled settle by any means they chose, including force. In recent months Chinese Communists introduced proposals aimed promoting trade and INNERQUOTE cultural contacts END INNERQUOTE between US and mainland China. Ambassador Johnson pointed out US restrictions in these fields resulted from Chinese Communists’ acts and threats of military aggression and mistreatment Americans. US sought assurance through Geneva talks such behavior would not continue. Until meaningful assurances in these respects been received US could not consider modifying these safeguards. US dedicated to peaceful solution of differences. It is prepared resume discussions at ambassadorial level directed toward issuance by both sides meaningful declaration on renunciation of force and thereaf­ ter other practical matters at issue. UNQUOTE Hoover 753. Letter 60 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 60 Washington, November 26, 1956 Dear Alex: We are considering whether to release a public statement on the McCarthy case. We are also weighing the pros and cons of a pub­ lic statement on the results of our offer of parole and deportation to Chinese convicts in U.S. prisons. The press attention to the Middle East and Hungary has abated sufficiently for us to be able to command a reasonable amount of press space for these matters if we decide that from other standpoints the time is ripe. The GRC has agreed to take the two prisoners who elected to go to Taiwan so there is no longer a problem on that score. If we decide to make a statement this week, it would probably come out on Thursday. We would, of course, give you the text in advance. Your letter No. 49 of November 15 arrived on November 23. In the prevailing circumstances we consider that Wang is unlikely to sus­ pend the talks at the next meeting. However, we have a contingency 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Drafted by McConaughy.
