1072
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
339.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Director of the Office
of Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter1
Washington, January 9, 1980
SUBJECT
Foreign Policy and Country Aid Allocations (S)
This memorandum responds to your request that we review pro-
posed aid allocations to countries in light of their attitudes toward pri-
mary US foreign policy objectives, especially in the current Iranian and
Afghan situations.2 (S)
An NSC staff analysis last week found a high correlation between
recent trends in allocations of aid among countries and their support of,
or opposition to, major US foreign policy interests.3 (C)
We have considered whether reductions in aid to unhelpful coun-
tries would be likely to improve their political behavior or influence
other aid recipients to be more helpful. (S)
I. Security Assistance
This type of assistance is geared primarily to support of short-term
foreign policy purposes, and so changes in it to take account of the re-
cipients’ changing foreign policy attitudes are not only appropriate but
desirable. (U)
In security assistance, negative political factors were found in the
cases of three recipients: Zambia, Syria, and Mozambique, and incon-
sistency between low aid allocations and high political support ratings
was noted in the cases of Oman, Morocco, and Lebanon. (U)
Of the three countries frequently at odds with US policy, only
Syria has been particularly unhelpful in the current crises. On Iran,
while the Syrians have indicated the possibility of their playing a medi-
ator’s role, their public pronouncements have been strongly pro-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 25, Foreign Assistance: 1–10/80. Secret. Sent for action. Carter initialed “C” at the top
of the page.
2 In a January 8 handwritten note to Brzezinski and McIntyre, Carter rquested: “Ad-
vise me what changes we should make in foreign aid pkg—today.” (Ibid.) In November
1979, Iranian Islamic militants overran the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and took the U.S. per-
sonnel as hostages. In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan.
3 Reference is to a January 5 memorandum from NSC Staff members Rutherford
Poats and Robert Kimmitt to Brzezinski entitled “Correlation of Aid Levels and Support
of US Objectives.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Out-
side the System File, Box 60, Chron: 1/81)
