Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII on Soviet armaments and other aspects of the alliance with the USSR has deterred Baghdad from abrogating the Soviet-Iraqi treaty and normal working relations. Saudi Arabia, meanwhile, has become even more anxious about US capabilities and resolve. • The nonaligned movement has been unable to condemn the USSR except implicitly within the forum of the UN General Assembly. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) Nonetheless, Soviet interests have suffered considerable damage: • The political center of gravity in the West has shifted in ways generally adverse to the USSR; belief in Soviet expansionism has been reconfirmed; openmindedness about Soviet intentions and favorable attitudes about the USSR are voiced infrequently and receive scant hearing. • US defense efforts have been accelerated, the European allies have pledged to fulfill the NATO Long-Term Defense Plan more rapidly, and a strong impetus has been given to increased Japanese defense spending and military cooperation with the United States. • The United States has affirmed its readiness to use military force in the Persian Gulf, Western security cooperation with China has increased, and Western willingness to maintain military deployments in the Indian Ocean has been increased. Local opposition to forward US military deployments also has been undermined. • Western economic sanctions have impaired Moscow’s ability to satisfy Soviet consumer demands for meat and dairy products and will probably further retard Soviet efforts to secure sophisticated technology and massive investment credits. Although Western support for the sanctions is eroding, Soviet economic weaknesses have been pointed up anew, both within the USSR and externally. • The Olympic boycott has seriously damaged Moscow’s ability to use the games for propaganda domestically and internationally. • The Kremlin has received uneven support from Eastern Europe, which has felt a strong identity of interests with Western Europe. Moscow has sensed vulnerability and shown less than full control over the Warsaw Pact states and has new reason to doubt the reliability of these allies. • The interests of Cuba and Vietnam have been adversely affected by the Soviet move into Afghanistan, and North Korea has been upset by the invasion. Havana’s international position has been hurt; acceptance of the Heng Samrin regime in Kampuchea has been at least slowed; and relations between Pyongyang and Moscow have become even more strained. The Kremlin is further concerned about the opening it may have afforded the United States for undermining its positions in Angola, Ethiopia, Mozambique, and South Yemen.
