754
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
as far reaching a proposal as possible since restraint is clearly in our in-
terest in Africa because the Soviet Union is transferring so much more
than we. McGiffert favored instructing the delegation to have a general
discussion with the Soviets on Africa. If they show interest, the delega-
tion should report back to Washington which will then decide whether
a proposal should be tabled and what it would be. Gelb said that ap-
proach would not work, and that after all this time we ought to be able
to approve or disapprove the options as drafted. Keeny favored ap-
proval of both options, with a preference for Option 1. Aaron agreed
with McGiffert’s view that the delegation should check back with
Washington for approval during the round. Gelb said that objections to
the weapons lists (which had already been cleared by all agencies in-
volved) should be raised here and worked out before the round.
Blechman and Keeny added that the delegation was not asking for au-
thority to make changes in the options, but rather for authority to table
a pre-authorized option. McGiffert said that the delegation should ex-
plore the possibilities for limitations of less sophisticated weapons
systems. If there is interest, report back to Washington. General Jones
agreed. Aaron said that the Interagency Group should prepare precise
formulations of the two options which would then be considered for
approval. Gelb emphasized that State’s position was that the delega-
tion have the power to proceed once the proposal was approved.
On the question of how to approach the control of the transfer of
technology and coproduction in CAT, McGiffert argued that it be
treated only as a means of assuring noncircumvention of agreed re-
straint regimes, and not as a separate criterion. Keeny argued that since
control of coproduction and technology is an important part of our uni-
lateral restraint policy, it makes sense to seek to apply the same limita-
tions to the Soviets. It should therefore be treated as a separate crite-
rion. Jones and Gelb both favored treating coproduction as a non-
circumvention issue. Gelb noted however that he understood ACDA’s
argument and felt that the issue should be posed in that manner for the
President.
