Second, land disarmament is a regional question. I do not believe
that any agreement can possibly be procured which will involve
all the countries of the world in a scale limiting land armaments.
The conditions are so different as to the relation of countries with
each other, necessary forces for protection and many other
conditions which would make it impossible to arrive at a general
formula,—to illustrate, no land armament anywhere in the
Western Hemisphere bears the slightest relation to land
armaments of Europe. They are neither a menace to Europe nor
an aid to Europe except in extraordinary circumstances such as
brought the United States into the last War. Land armaments in
South America bear no relation to land armaments in North
America; neither do the armaments in the Far East (exclusive of
Russia) bear any relation to those in Europe except as nations
may require a certain number of troops to protect their colonial
possessions. The question of reduction of land armament is
primarily confined to the reduction of European armaments. The
United States has no more than an academic interest or, I might
say, a moral interest in this question. We cannot be expected
further to limit our already reduced land armaments or agree to
any system of limitation which would necessarily restrict us to a
smaller army than any of the larger powers. I realize, of course,
that the attitude of Russia may be a very important factor but this
is a matter of more immediate concern to the European and
Asiatic Powers. Our object in being represented at this
Conference is to show in every reasonable way our sympathy and
to give any aid consistent within our policy.
Third, naval conference. Of course, the United States is interested
in any naval conference. My general view on this subject is that a
naval conference, if called, should be separate entirely from the
land armament conference. If they are called together, it is evident
that France and some of the other countries will immediately
undertake to trade naval forces for land forces or land forces for
naval forces, to make one dependent more or less on the other. It
may be said that in limiting land forces, the naval forces must be
taken into consideration. This can easily be done in a separate
