Chapter 2, January–June 1989  79
vehicles) allow us to meet our essential military aim. (You should note, 
that while there is consensus on this point outside of the NSC staff, we 
believe Brent has reservations on the 1600 number.)6
— With respect to air breathing systems, force the Deputies to 
face up to the fact that we have chosen to preserve our flexibility at the 
expense of verifiability. To a first approximation, none of our air breath-
ing limitations (other than basic counts of bombers) is verifiable. The 
Deputies need to face up to that they will each individually sooner or later 
have to testify that such a provision is in our interest.7
— Similarly make sure that the Deputies agree that even though 
we have no air defense and the B-2 may be unaffordable, we still want 
to encourage a long-­term Soviet shift to air breathing systems.8
Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles. The paper says that some people think 
SLCMs are important and irreplaceable and others don’t; that everyone 
agrees we don’t know how to verify limits on them now; that there is 
disagreement on our prospects for finding an acceptable verification 
regime; and that we don’t have to make any decisions now. We think 
that everyone but State believes that a SLCM ban isn’t in our interest 
and is unverifiable.
SLCM is endlessly fascinating, but we’re not sure a discussion of it 
at this time leads anywhere. We suggest the following approach:
— Note that the paper sets for both sides of the issue on both SLCM 
utility and SLCM verification.
— Note that the Arms Control PCC has concluded that we need 
not alter our SLCM position during the initial round of negotiations.
— State that the review has identified this as an important issue 
where there is no consensus, but that we need not deal with it now.
— Seek agreement to note it and move on.9
We think the Deputies will probably agree, but you should recall 
that Brent personally believes SLCMs aren’t in our interest. Even if he’s 
correct, this isn’t a tar baby we need to grab now.
Verification. This agenda item is the most important of all. The paper:
— Describes the verification process;
— Mentions problems with verification of limits on mobile ICBMs 
(including disagreement over the significance of cheating in this area);10
6 Gates placed a checkmark beside this point, circled “1600,” and drew two short 
vertical lines in the left-­hand margin beside the first sentence.
7 Gates drew two short vertical lines in the right-­hand margin beside this sentence, 
and wrote “discounting rule” beside them. He also drew a vertical line in the left-­hand 
margin beside the last two sentences of the point, and wrote: “? CMs—­range, nuc vs. 
conv., bombers—US 10 cms, Sov. capable”
8 Gates underlined “encourage a long-­term Soviet shift to air breathing systems” 
and drew two vertical lines in the left-­hand margin beside this point.
9 Gates drew a bracket in the left-­hand margin beside the four points in this section.
10 Gates drew a vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this point.
