National Security Policy 699 limited and local use of nuclear weapons against military targets would be acceptable from the foreign policy point of view. 3. All other kinds of Communist aggression. For deterrent purposes we should not explicitly deny ourselves the use of nuclear weapons. It should, on the other hand, be evident to the Free World that we are not overly dependent on these weapons for deterrence or actual mili­ tary operations. In the event of such aggression, recourse to the use of nuclear weapons would, in most situations, have highly adverse con­ sequences from the foreign policy point of view. We should, therefore, plan and be prepared for a non-­nuclear response in these situations. The use of nuclear weapons should be regarded as a last resort. 154. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, May 4, 1959 OTHERS PRESENT Mr. Harr General Goodpaster Mr. Harr said he had asked to see the President because the changes incident to Mr. Herter’s assuming the Secretaryship of State provided a point in time for review of OCB affairs. A key question is that of State’s chairmanship of the Board. He recalled that this question had been considered with the President, at several times in the past, and that because of this consideration the President had appointed Mr. Herter as Chairman not ex officio but as an individ­ ual. The points of concern are first as to State Department domination and lack of impartiality in the conduct of the affairs of the Board (the consequence of which is that other agencies tend to “dry up”), and second that it has been difficult in the past achieving a proper coordi­ nation of Mutual Security affairs by the Board with the Board’s chair­ man being the number two man and the Mutual Security coordinator being the number three man in the State Department hierarchy. With these two posts now reversed, it seems even less likely that effective coordination will be achieved. 1 Source: Relationship of State and OCB. Confidential. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on May 5.
