March–August 1953
563
overthrown and the country would have been partitioned. Further, the
emissary wished the Ambassador to know that the Shah deeply appre-
ciated the continuing support for him which was being given by the
American Government.
The emissary wished to make clear to the Ambassador certain fun-
damental features of the Shah’s policy toward Dr. Mosadeq. The latter
had come to power as the result of careful planning over a period of
several years before actually assuming power. He had stirred the emo-
tions of the Iranian people when he took office, and he had had public
and Majlis support. The Shah had not willingly agreed to make Mo-
sadeq Prime Minister, but he had bowed to the forces behind him and
now believed that the only way to obtain Mosadeq’s eventual dismissal
from office was through the same parliamentary means which had
granted him the premiership. The Shah believed that time was dis-
crediting Mosadeq and that the Soviet menace to Iran had receded
since the death of Stalin so that Mosadeq’s removal in a legal way
would be achieved in the not too distant future. The Shah preferred this
method to others, such as a military coup, an arbitrary move of the
Shah removing Mosadeq and appointing another prime minister, the
imprisonment of Mosadeq, his exile, or even his death at the hands of a
Tehran mob. In all of these alternatives Mosadeq would be made a
martyr or a source of serious future trouble. It was the Shah’s policy
toward Dr. Mosadeq to bow slowly to Mosadeq’s pressure, but at the
same time to regain as much ground as possible through taking advan-
tage of shifting conditions. If the Shah had rigidly opposed Mosadeq,
the Shah would have been completely eliminated, like a tree which
would have crashed through the force of a violent wind. Such explana-
tions were made by the emissary to depict the Shah’s policy, which he
understood had caused a certain dissatisfaction on the part of Amer-
ican officials who wished the Shah to take a much stronger stand
toward Mosadeq.
In discussing various personalities, the emissary said that the Shah
did not extend confidence to the newly appointed Acting Minister of
Court, Mr. Abol Qasem Amini. However, Amini was important under
present circumstances and the Shah did not therefore wish to antago-
nize him. The emissary hoped that the Ambassador would keep the
Shah’s attitude toward Mr. Amini in mind in determining his own rela-
tions with Amini.
Turning to a discussion of the oil situation, the emissary said that
the Shah believed that it was in the real interest of Iran and of free
world unity for the Ambassador in the course of official meetings with
Dr. Mosadeq to discourage any attempts by the latter to discuss the oil
question and possible means of settling it. Dr. Mosadeq was not serious
in such talk. It would be possible to discuss oil matters, such as the
