942
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
292.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel1
Washington, September 15, 1979, 2245Z
243592. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With Weizman.
1. (Secret entire text.)
2. Secretary and Weizman met for about hour and one-quarter late
afternoon September 14, following meetings at Pentagon2 that lasted
through morning and early afternoon. With Weizman were Evron,
General Tamir and Col. Tehila. With the Secretary were Ambassador
Strauss, Saunders, Draper, Hunter and Korn. Following are main
points of the discussion.
3. Weizman opened with discussion of Israel’s need to assure itself
of modern fighter aircraft and tanks for the 1980s and its desire to pro-
duce the F–18 or an Israeli equivalent thereof. This, Weizman argued,
makes sense not only for Israel but for the US, since Israel’s producing
its fighter aircraft would ease the political burden on the US; for ex-
ample, if Israel hadn’t produced the Kfir3 it would have had to ask the
United States to furnish an equivalent number of aircraft. Israeli pro-
duction of aircraft would also reduce Israel’s need for US financial
assistance. Secretary thanked Weizman for his presentation and said he
would be discussing the matter with Brown.
4. Turning to autonomy negotiations, Weizman said that as we
knew “I’ve been autonomous on autonomy.” He had not been very
happy about the way the negotiations were being conducted. GOI
wants to carry out what it signed but the country is in a state of “in-
ternal crisis” and there is a lot of doubt and negative feeling about the
idea of autonomy. Israeli public is uneasy and suspects that the whole
point of Camp David as the Americans see it is to get Israel out of the
West Bank and Gaza and set up an independent Palestinian state there.
Noting that position taken by the Egyptians at Haifa was “rather mild,”
Weizman said he expected Israel would have fewer problems with
Egypt in the negotiations than with the United States. Weizman said
the course to take is to stick to Camp David and make it work. Secretary
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–2003. Se-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Korn; cleared by Stapleton (S/S–O) and Draper; ap-
proved by Saunders. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo, Jerusalem, Beirut, and the
White House.
2 The memorandum of conversation for Weizman’s September 14 meeting with
Brown at the Department of Defense is in the Washington National Records Center, OSD
Files, FRC 330–82–0205, Israel Oct 1979.
3 The Kfir fighter jet was first built for the Israeli Air Force by Israel Aerospace In-
dustries in 1975, and entered service in 1976.
