Panama 883 Reference was made to the fact that in Panama the rate of population growth was higher than the growth of national income, thus a climbing index of productivity was coupled with a drop in real per capita income and this was resulting in a deterioration of the standard of living. Similarly, the Panamanians pointed up the fact that the proximity of the Canal Zone should be an additional stimulus for the United States to render special assistance to Panama. President Guardia made passing reference to the internal political situation by saying that 60% of the population were under 25 years of age and with the impatience of youth coupled with the drop in per capital income to which he had previously referred, this created an atmosphere propitious to fanning anti-U.S. sentiments. The Panamanians broadly indicated there were two classes of things the U.S. should do, some in the political field and some in the economic field. In the political field were some matters which really belonged in the economic field. Among these were the matters relating to making the Canal Zone market available exclusively to Panama and the United States. They mentioned the discontent created in Panama by the purchase of Australian and New Zealand meat and felt that the wording of the 1955 agreement should limit the Canal Zone market to the United States and Panama. When it was pointed out that the amount of meat purchased from abroad was extremely small, the Panamanians indicated that it was not the quantity but the fact of purchase from abroad that aroused resentment. In the political field, the President mentioned two further items which he brought up with some embarrassment. They related to the flying of the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone and the use of Spanish as an official language in the Canal Zone. The President emphasized that if the U.S. would offer to do this spontaneously, the overall effect would be far more beneficial than if it were done grudgingly at a later date. The President then made a statement that if the U.S. might have to do more than Panama, Panamanians would nevertheless try to reciprocate as they felt a moral obligation on their part to assist in preserving the free way of life. Passing to the economic area, the President said that he felt there were no real problems in the economic field if time were not a factor. However, the young people who make up such a large part of the national population, particularly the University youth were impatient for speedy solutions. Education—In the field of education, which was an extremely important area in Panama, they would like to secure a loan for $12 ­million to push through a school development program. The rent now being paid-on leased schools could service the amortization of
