Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 563 with the rest of our nuclear arsenal. No sane leader could expect to gain an advantage from launching such a suicidal attack. Modernization and Restructuring To assure that our strategic forces will be a convincing deterrent in the future, we are carrying out the most extensive modernization and restructuring of our nuclear forces in over a decade. First, we have put three-quarters of our strategic warheads in our largely invulnerable submarines and mobile bombers; three-quarters of the Soviet Union’s warheads are on more vulnerable fixed land-based missiles. Second, we are adding to the capabilities of our strategic bombers. Our B–52 force is being equipped with long-range cruise missiles. That force eclipses Soviet air defense expenditures. These missiles will enable our B–52’s to remain outside Soviet air defenses and still strike significant Soviet targets with extraordinary accuracy. Third, we are placing more powerful, sophisticated missiles in our existing submarines. We are about to launch our new, longer-range Trident submarine; and we are developing a still more powerful and accurate missile for these Trident submarines. Fourth, we are substantially improving our land-based missile force. Our Minuteman III’s will be considerably more accurate. We are accelerating development of a new and much larger land-based missile called the M–X. And we are carefully analyzing the alternatives available for making our intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM’s) less vulnerable. The SALT agreement now being considered will not constrain a single one of these alternatives. Indeed, it will help make these alternatives feasible and safe. We will continue to maintain a convincing deterrent with a nuclear weapons force. But in a world of nuclear weapons, more is not necessarily better. We are not more secure today because we and the Soviets have tens of thousands of warheads rather than thousands. For the stark reality is that neither of us can win an all-out arms race. It is a futile search for a temporary advantage. We will match what they do, and they will do the same, in a spiral of ever-increasing risk and cost. Thus the power we share with the Soviet Union carries this imperative for our security: We must slow, and ultimately reverse, this dangerous and burdensome competition. That is an imperative recognized for nearly three decades. Every President since the beginning of the nuclear era—and both major political parties—have understood that security depends on both a sound defense and sound arms control. Background to SALT II Building on the efforts of Presidents Truman and Eisenhower, President Kennedy concluded the first arms control agreement with
