Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
563
with the rest of our nuclear arsenal. No sane leader could expect to gain
an advantage from launching such a suicidal attack.
Modernization and Restructuring
To assure that our strategic forces will be a convincing deterrent in
the future, we are carrying out the most extensive modernization and
restructuring of our nuclear forces in over a decade.
First, we have put three-quarters of our strategic warheads in our
largely invulnerable submarines and mobile bombers; three-quarters of
the Soviet Union’s warheads are on more vulnerable fixed land-based
missiles.
Second, we are adding to the capabilities of our strategic bombers.
Our B–52 force is being equipped with long-range cruise missiles. That
force eclipses Soviet air defense expenditures. These missiles will en-
able our B–52’s to remain outside Soviet air defenses and still strike sig-
nificant Soviet targets with extraordinary accuracy.
Third, we are placing more powerful, sophisticated missiles in our
existing submarines. We are about to launch our new, longer-range Tri-
dent submarine; and we are developing a still more powerful and accu-
rate missile for these Trident submarines.
Fourth, we are substantially improving our land-based missile
force. Our Minuteman III’s will be considerably more accurate. We are
accelerating development of a new and much larger land-based missile
called the M–X. And we are carefully analyzing the alternatives avail-
able for making our intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM’s) less vul-
nerable. The SALT agreement now being considered will not constrain
a single one of these alternatives. Indeed, it will help make these alter-
natives feasible and safe.
We will continue to maintain a convincing deterrent with a nuclear
weapons force. But in a world of nuclear weapons, more is not neces-
sarily better. We are not more secure today because we and the Soviets
have tens of thousands of warheads rather than thousands.
For the stark reality is that neither of us can win an all-out arms
race. It is a futile search for a temporary advantage. We will match what
they do, and they will do the same, in a spiral of ever-increasing risk
and cost.
Thus the power we share with the Soviet Union carries this imper-
ative for our security: We must slow, and ultimately reverse, this dan-
gerous and burdensome competition. That is an imperative recognized
for nearly three decades. Every President since the beginning of the nu-
clear era—and both major political parties—have understood that se-
curity depends on both a sound defense and sound arms control.
Background to SALT II
Building on the efforts of Presidents Truman and Eisenhower,
President Kennedy concluded the first arms control agreement with
