Chapter 5, May–June 1990  777
per year did not provide sufficient flexibility. So now we have provided 
you more flexibility, over a three year period.
Bartholomew: The need for flexibility made sense in the terms you 
spoke of, so we increased the number and spread it over a three year 
period. We thought that the main step for us was for more flexibility, 
so we added one test and cast it in a way that provides for additional 
flexibility. So you tell me how we could make this work. Do we have 
the right number of years? The right number of tests?
Khromov: We have still heard no answer to Mr. Karpov’s question 
about why make an exception for the SS–18. As of today, the United 
States and the Soviet Union have committed themselves to not test mis-
siles with more reentry vehicles than declared. Given the limitations 
the Soviet Union is to assume under the treaty which deal with the rate 
of reduction, the number of warheads, and openness of telemetry, the 
potential the SS–18 poses does not exceed that of the MX or Trident II, 
which also are tested with 10 reentry vehicles.
Bartholomew: Victor, this is the only missile where we are agreed 
there will be no new types. I’ve shown flexibility on tests, and on reduc-
tions. Help solve this, negotiating takes two.
Khromov: On heavy missiles, only the Soviet side made conces-
sions. I can repeat them all. The US has not made a single concession. 
You should not try to ascribe our concessions to your side.
Karpov: The question of heavy missiles is a question which has 
from the beginning been dealt with through limiting such missiles. 
Naturally, those were one-­sided unilateral limitations. This doesn’t 
make our concessions to you less valuable.
Bartholomew: At 10:30 we shouldn’t count concessions.
Karpov: I invite your attention to the characteristics of heavy mis-
siles, the MX, and the Trident II—CEP, yield, and hard target capability. 
They don’t differ much from the SS–18. You believe the treaty should 
not regulate your missiles, yet you wish to regulate the SS–18.
Bartholomew: I have taken a straightforward Yankee approach—­
took steps, opened doors, extended a hand. It doesn’t seem to be useful.
Karpov: Our view is if we limit flight testing, we should limit it for 
all types.
If we could turn to the joint statement on future negotiations, there 
is a problem on page 2. The problem is still there.
Bartholomew: You are my guest.
Karpov: Let us try the following approach to section 2. I suggest 
the following: (reads from a text) “For the purposes of strategic stability, 
priority shall be given to highly survivable systems, for example single 
warhead mobile ICBMs, and to measures reducing the concentration 
of warheads on strategic offensive arms, including heavy ICBMs and
