nothing further could be done until the Japanese had heard from their
Government.
An important amendment was one offered by the British designed to require
the acceptance of the agreement by the Provinces before it should come into
force. This amendment, however, as in the case of the whole draft, was left
unapproved, since it seemed futile to proceed until the Japanese Delegation
had received further instructions. The American Delegation had not, at the
time of the meeting on June 10, definitely determined its attitude toward the
amendment.
At an informal meeting at the American Legation with the Japanese
Delegation on June 18, Mr. Hioki stated that his Government was willing to
go ahead with the implementing of the Washington Treaty surtaxes,
provided certain alterations could be made in the draft which had been
submitted at the last meeting of the Delegates. The Japanese wished to
delete the first two sections of the draft, but advanced no reason for desiring
this change. They offered no substitute, however, for the two sections and
announced that no instruction had been received from the Japanese
Government on the subject of custodian banks. It was agreed that the
Japanese Delegates should confer with the British Delegation with regard to
the changes desired by the Japanese Government in the text of the draft
agreement. The American Delegation made no commitment, but expressed
a desire for a conference of the American, British and Japanese Delegates
after the latter had conferred with the British. Mr. MacMurray took
occasion to say, in connection with a suggestion made by the Japanese that
there should be a recess for the summer, with a definite understanding that
the Conference should reconvene at the end of September, that the
American Delegation felt that the foreign Delegations should make no
move which would give the Chinese opportunity, whether fairly or unfairly,
to say that the foreign Powers had not performed their pledges and were not
acting in good faith. He suggested that it would be well to avoid any
adjournment or recess by formal action and that a recess simply by tacit
consent would be preferable.
A final effort on the part of the foreign Delegates to come to an agreement
on the question of implementing the Washington surtaxes was made on July
