1476 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 859. Letter 1 from Clough to Martin1 Letter No. 1 Washington, December 23, 1957 Dear Ed: With Alex’s departure as the American protagonist in the Geneva discussions, I decided it would only be fitting to start a new letter series of which this is No. 1. Judging from the length of time it is taking Peiping to reply to our proposal to shift the talks down from the ambassadorial level, we must have presented them with a difficult decision. They may react in one of three possible ways: (1) break off the talks entirely with a violent blast at us; (2) inform us they desire to continue the talks but only when we appoint an ambassador to meet with them or (3) agree to continue the meetings as proposed by us. The first alternative I consider very unlikely. The second however is quite possible and appears to be Alex’s choice as the most probable. We have prepared a draft press release for use in this eventuality and I enclose a copy. I should appreciate any comments or changes you may suggest. As you will see, the purpose of the release is to imply that the downgrading of the talks resulted from our dissatisfaction with the Chinese Communist response to our initia­ tives in the talks. At the same time we want to make clear that we are not breaking off the talks. That we have appointed an experienced offi­ cer to continue them and by not explicitly relating our action to failure of the Chinese Communists to do what we want them to, we leave the way open to appoint an ambassador whenever we consider it desirable to do so. It is possible that the Chinese Communists may accept our pro­ posal and appoint someone to meet with you. It seems to me that the likelihood of this happening diminishes as time passes without a response from Peiping. It is probably premature as you suggest in your letter of December 17 to decide the adviser question until we know what the Chinese Communist response is. If you feel that you could manage with Cameron LaClair and Sue Gross that would of course simplify matters administra­ tively. I suppose it is true that at a lower than ambassadorial level, the Communist statements at the meetings are likely to be even more routine and predictable than they have been in the past. Orders are being written for Dexter to leave for Geneva the first week in January. We hope by that time to know what Peiping intends to 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Official–Informal.
