1262 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement nature of the explosion. It is estimated that this system could detect and identify with 90–100 per cent certainty nuclear tests of 20 KT or larger conducted as shallow sub-­surface, surface or air bursts up to 50,000 ft in remote areas of the world. Underground explosions of 20 KT or larger in remote parts of the world could be detected with a certainty of 90–100 per cent but not identified as nuclear in nature. Identifica­ tion of such underground disturbances may be possible through the use of inspection teams investigating about 100 suspected test areas per year in remote regions of the world. Underwater explosions of 20 KT or larger anywhere in the world could be reliably detected and probably identified as explosions rather than earthquakes. PRESENT AND POTENTIAL CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS FOR THE DETECTION OF NUCLEAR TESTS INTRODUCTION: This report describes the present system for long range detection and identification of nuclear tests in the USSR including an evaluation of its capabilities and limitations. The results of a study of the technical feasibility of monitoring a test suspension is presented, including the outline of a surveillance and inspection sys­ tem for detecting and identifying, if possible, nuclear tests conducted in the USSR, China and in remote areas of the world. 1. DESCRIPTION OF THE AFOAT–1 LONG RANGE DETECTION SYSTEM: a. General. The present Long Range Detection System is deployed around the USSR and consists of four major components, i.e., acoustic, seismic, electromagnetic and nuclear. The purpose of this system is to determine the fact of an explosion, time, location, height of burst and yield, and finally from the analysis of the nuclear debris to reconstruct, insofar as possible, the detailed characteristics of the nuclear device tested. Scientific observation posts for each of the four techniques are located as close as possible to the USSR and are operated by units of the Army, Navy and Air Force as appropriate. Preliminary analysis of the radioactive debris is accomplished in field radiochemical laborato­ ries and more comprehensive and detailed analysis of the samples is car­ ried out in a central laboratory in California, all operated by AFOAT–1. In addition, highly specialized measurements are made by laboratories of the Atomic Energy Commission, civilian contractors and university laboratories in the U.S. Collection and preliminary evaluation of data from all these laboratories are effected by AFOAT–1 analysts assisted by special studies at RAND Corporation. Finally, all data and evalu­ ations are reviewed by the Foreign Weapons Evaluation Committee, Professor Hans A. Bethe, Chairman, a committee which is responsible jointly to the Division of Military Application, AEC, and to AFOAT–1.
