Chapter 2, January–June 1989 53 16. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated DEFENSE AND SPACE (D&S) NEGOTIATIONS In contrast to START, where substantial convergence of U.S. and Soviet approaches is recorded in a Joint Draft Text (JDT) of several hundred pages, there is no JDT in the D&S talks and agreement on only a handful of issues, reflecting continuing differences on broad objectives as well as specific positions. Yet at Soviet insistence (at least so far) the two negotiations remain linked. This paper reviews U.S. and Soviet goals in D&S, discusses key negotiating issues, looks at the impact of our internal defense review, and describes possible outcomes of the START/D&S dilemma. Soviet Goals in D&S The Soviets have traditionally devoted more effort than the U.S. to defending themselves against nuclear attack (e.g., extensive air defenses, operational Moscow ABM complex, active research on advanced ABM technologies). But they have opposed SDI ever since President Reagan’s 1983 speech because they: — wish to avoid an expensive competition that could be disruptive of their economic reforms plans; — fear our lead in advanced technologies could give us a military advantage in defensive systems (as well as in other military applications that might spin off from SDI); and — believe SDI could lead to termination of the ABM Treaty, which the Soviets see as the foundation of a stable and predictable strategic environment. The main Soviet objective in D&S has therefore been to block or at least inhibit SDI, both directly (through treaty provisions that legally constrain the program) and indirectly (by seeking to undermine U.S. public and Congressional support for it). A key element of their strategy has been to link conclusion of START to agreement on D&S. Their rationale for linkage is that, unless defenses are severely constrained, START’s reductions would be destabilizing because the combination of fewer forces and widespread defenses capable of blunting retaliation would increase first strike incentives. 1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat, S/S-IRM Records, Lot 93D188, Memorandum of Conversations Pertaining to the United States and USSR Relations, Baker/Shevardnadze in Moscow Copy of May 6, 1989 S/P-Ross to Baker briefing book for Moscow Ministerial. Secret. Ross sent the paper to Baker under cover of a May 6 memorandum. (Ibid.)
