384
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The President agreed that we should not cancel the fishing agree-
ment but tighten allocations. He said this should be done irrespective
of the decision to be taken on grain.
Lloyd Cutler cautioned that it would depend on the type of fishing
and on the agreement concerned. He said we needed Soviet cooperation
on salmon. The President responded that this should be done on a
case-by-case basis.
Lloyd Cutler also pointed out that he felt he should point out to
the group that the power existed for the President to freeze Soviet assets.
The Council then turned to the question of multilateral actions.
The Council approved the suggestion that we urge the UK, FRG and
France to increase broadcasts to Muslim countries in Soviet Central
Asia.
On the proposal to provide a daily circular to the UN and others
in the status of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, the President
asked whether this could be done in coordination with others. He also
questioned whether we should do it daily but rather periodically. He
thought that the circulars should also go to all the media and that we
should coordinate with the BBC.
The group also confirmed that we should continue worldwide
demarches urging others to take actions complementing our unilat-
eral initiatives.
Turning to the United Nations, the Secretary of State said that
Don McHenry was checking whether the General Assembly has the
jurisdiction for peace and security without Security Council action or
consideration. He said that Ambassador McHenry would call back
shortly.
Turning to the issue of multilateral economic actions and the ques-
tion of COCOM restraints, Dr. Brzezinski said that we were prepared
to pursue the “Belgian formula” in COCOM and this would involve
liberalizing sensitive exports to China on a case-by-case basis thereby
creating a de facto differential. However, we would not announce
formally that COCOM had created such a differential. The President
approved this approach.
On the question of consultations with others to reinforce U.S. eco-
nomic actions, the President said that we should consult particularly
on credits. That we should deny Soviet Union credits and urge others
to do the same. The Secretary of State pointed out that we do not
provide credits to the Soviet Union. The President responded by saying
we should nonetheless urge others not to provide further credit.
Returning to the COCOM issue, the Vice President suggested to
the Secretary of Defense that he use the fact of the China differential
in the discussions with the Chinese next week. The President asked
