Colombia  355
CO–25.	
Memorandum from the Director of the International 
Cooperation Administration (Riddleberger) and the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs 
(Rubottom) to the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1

Washington, March 25, 1960.
SUBJECT
Proposed Program for Assistance to Colombia’s Agrarian Reform Program
Problem:
When Colombian President Lleras Camargo makes his official visit 
to Washington, April 5–8,2 he is expected to inform us of his strong 
interest in obtaining U.S. Government assistance for Colombia’s land 
reform program. We believe we should respond very sympathetically 
looking toward the possibility of subsequently extending a loan or 
loans to assist Colombia in its land reform program—more specifically 
in programs of land development and settlement.
Discussion:
1. In Colombia, as in other under-­developed Latin American coun-
tries, the basic economic problem in which progress is essential to the 
achievement of U.S. objectives is two-­fold: (a) How to increase the 
national income; (b) how to achieve its more equitable distribution.
2. The bulk of our economic aid—­grants, loans, technical assis-
tance—­is devoted primarily to problem (a), to increasing the national 
income. However, a greater peril to our objectives may lie in problem 
(b),—­in the potential popular reaction against the inequitable distribu-
tion of income and in the popular identification of the United States 
with the wealthy. No matter how much progress governmental and 
private capital may make in raising the national income, that very 
progress and our basic objectives will remain in grave danger if gross 
disparities persist in income distribution. While continuing our efforts 
to promote economic growth, we need to devise ways through which 
our aid may be more effective in achieving progress toward a more 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 821.16/3–2560. Confidential. Drafted by 
Wymberley D. Coerr of the Office of West Coast Affairs on March 23; revised by William 
V. Turnage, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, 
and Dennis A. Fitzgerald, Deputy Director for Operations, International Cooperation 
Administration. The memorandum was concurred in by Turnage, John O. Bell, Special 
Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination, and Charles R. Harley, Chief of the Latin 
American Division, Office of International Finance, Treasury Department.
2 See the Editorial Note, Document CO–27.
