200
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
remove the Secretary from the decision process in requesting from
the Attorney General waivers of ineligibility for aliens excludable
under the Immigration Act because of political affiliation.8 A decision
on this matter awaits consultation with the two Judiciary Committee
Chairmen, Rodino and Eastland, by the Secretary and the Attorney
General.
Regarding expanded refugee and asylum policies, the Eilberg leg-
islation includes an expanded definition of refugees which the Admin-
istration supported, but the bill effectively eliminates the parole au-
thority and requires mandatory consultation for the admission of
refugees by class.9
Administratively, we are expanding our program for African ref-
ugees with enlarged assistance in the educational field.
II. Techniques for Dealing with Congress
1. Have Clear Positions on Specific Issues
As a basis for orderly policy and rational presentation to Congress,
we must develop clear policy lines which combine general objectives
and specific courses of action for each human rights issue and each
country which violates human rights. We are in the early stages of such
a policy development process. It should be completed as soon as pos-
sible and implemented before we begin the next round of authorization
and appropriation battles early next year. This will make our job with
Congress much easier. As we take our positions to Congress on each
substantive issue which arises (for instance, amendments to IFI legisla-
tion) talking points should be drawn up and given wide distribution.
Consideration should be given to the issuance of an Administration
policy statement or letter on the issue which can then be used as the
basis for calls on individual Congressmen by high and mid-level of-
ficers from concerned government organizations. Leaders of various
interested groups on the Hill should be contacted and offered briefings
8 The Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 1978 (H.R. 6689; P.L. 95–105;
91 Stat. 844–866), which the President signed into law on August 17, 1977, contained the
McGovern amendment, which sought to relax visa provisions for non-immigrant vis-
itors. In late August, the Department of State announced that an official of the French
General Confederation of Labor, which had been described as Communist-run, had been
granted a visa to attend an American labor conference scheduled to take place in New
York in September. (Graham Hovey, “French Labor Leader is Granted U.S. Visa,” The
New York Times, August 27, 1977, p. 2)
9 Reference is to H.R. 7175, introduced in the House by Eilberg on May 13, which
sought to amend the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 (P.L. 89–236). Public Law
89–236, also known as the Hart–Cellar Act after Senator Philip Hart (D–Michigan) and
Representative Emmanuel Cellar (D–New York), abolished the national origins quota
system established by the Immigration Act of 1924 and overturned many of the restric-
tions contained within the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 (McCarran-Walter
Act, P.L. 82–414; 66 Stat. 163–282).
