January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1115 Extent of Opposition Government officials are said to be particularly worried by the extent of community support for the demonstrations. Although most demonstrators apparently are the traditionally volatile students, many laborers and small shopkeepers, already angry over the government’s wage and price policies, joined the strikes voluntarily. [handling restriction not declassified] Prayer leaders in the mosques also supported the strikes. One mullah in Hamah evidently called for the creation of an Islamic state, reflecting conservative Sunni views that reject Alawites as true Muslims and oppose the regime’s Baathist secular and socialist policies. [handling restriction not declassified] The recent demonstrations point to a growing Sunni alliance, including religious oppositionists objecting to Alawite domination as well as merchants, professionals, and laborers protesting the regime’s economic and social policies. Assad so far shows no sign of making the major policy changes that would break this alliance. He has not made a sufficient effort to give Sunnis a greater substantive role in the government, has failed to follow through on promises to stamp out corruption, and has taken only limited steps to respond to the grievances of merchants and the wage demands of laborers. [handling restriction not declassified] Repression Begins [1½ lines not declassified] departing their home base north of Damascus yesterday—probably heading for Aleppo. Assad probably has decided to intimidate the opposition throughout Syria by making an example of Aleppo, which historically has resisted political control by Damascus. Its distance from the capital also makes Aleppo a less sensitive area to begin a crackdown. [handling restriction not declassified] Assad’s use of the regular Army in Aleppo and elsewhere, however, risks splitting the military along sectarian lines. Like the antigovernment activists, most Army recruits are Sunnis. Although the Army units in general probably would remain loyal, as they did during disturbances in Latakia last September, some Sunni troops probably would be reluctant to fire on their coreligionists. [handling restriction not declassified] If significant numbers of Sunnis were killed on both sides, sectarian animosities almost certainly would spread in the military, undermining the effectiveness and loyalty of all but the elite and heavily Alawite Defense Companies and Special Forces. Extensive use of regular military units to quell Sunni-led civil disturbances could result in refusals to follow orders, widespread desertions, and clashes between Sunni and Alawite units. [handling restriction not declassified]
