January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1115
Extent of Opposition
Government officials are said to be particularly worried by the ex-
tent of community support for the demonstrations. Although most
demonstrators apparently are the traditionally volatile students, many
laborers and small shopkeepers, already angry over the government’s
wage and price policies, joined the strikes voluntarily. [handling restric-
tion not declassified]
Prayer leaders in the mosques also supported the strikes. One
mullah in Hamah evidently called for the creation of an Islamic state,
reflecting conservative Sunni views that reject Alawites as true Mus-
lims and oppose the regime’s Baathist secular and socialist policies.
[handling restriction not declassified]
The recent demonstrations point to a growing Sunni alliance, in-
cluding religious oppositionists objecting to Alawite domination as
well as merchants, professionals, and laborers protesting the regime’s
economic and social policies. Assad so far shows no sign of making the
major policy changes that would break this alliance. He has not made a
sufficient effort to give Sunnis a greater substantive role in the gov-
ernment, has failed to follow through on promises to stamp out corrup-
tion, and has taken only limited steps to respond to the grievances of
merchants and the wage demands of laborers. [handling restriction not
declassified]
Repression Begins
[1½ lines not declassified] departing their home base north of Da-
mascus yesterday—probably heading for Aleppo. Assad probably has
decided to intimidate the opposition throughout Syria by making an
example of Aleppo, which historically has resisted political control by
Damascus. Its distance from the capital also makes Aleppo a less sensi-
tive area to begin a crackdown. [handling restriction not declassified]
Assad’s use of the regular Army in Aleppo and elsewhere, how-
ever, risks splitting the military along sectarian lines. Like the antigov-
ernment activists, most Army recruits are Sunnis. Although the Army
units in general probably would remain loyal, as they did during dis-
turbances in Latakia last September, some Sunni troops probably
would be reluctant to fire on their coreligionists. [handling restriction not
declassified]
If significant numbers of Sunnis were killed on both sides, sec-
tarian animosities almost certainly would spread in the military, un-
dermining the effectiveness and loyalty of all but the elite and heavily
Alawite Defense Companies and Special Forces. Extensive use of reg-
ular military units to quell Sunni-led civil disturbances could result in
refusals to follow orders, widespread desertions, and clashes between
Sunni and Alawite units. [handling restriction not declassified]
