864
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Mubarak: Sadat does not want to spoil the peace process.
Carter: Egyptian silence weakens Israeli opposition to
the
settlements.
Mubarak agrees. We will move on this issue; some comments have
taken place. On other issues notes that Israel would like to have the U.S.
only the status of observer in the ongoing negotiations and have so in-
formed the Egyptians. Reiterates that Nimeiri needs urgent help as per
talks with Javits. Rhodesian statement underlines Egyptian desire for
Chinook helicopters.
Carter concludes meeting by restating what he will do in Vienna8
and Tokyo.9
8 Carter was in Vienna June 15–18 for the signing of the SALT II Treaty.
9 See footnote 8, Document 259.
261.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Alexandria to the
Department of State1
Alexandria, June 12, 1979, 0530Z
486. From Leonard USMEDEL 035. Subject: Alexandria Negotia-
tions: Discussion of U.S. Role.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Summary: Second session of Alexandria autonomy talks2 were
devoted almost entirely to Israeli questioning of U.S. role in the negoti-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 4, Autonomy Talks: 5–6/79. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information
to Cairo, Jerusalem, and Tel Aviv. Printed from a corrected copy. Printed from a copy
that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 The Alexandria sessions of the autonomy talks opened at the San Stefano Hotel on
June 11. Although the first meeting of the session was designed to deal largely with struc-
tural and procedural matters, a number of controversies came to the fore. Following a
sharp exchange between the Israeli and Egyptian delegations over Israeli settlement
policy, the first arose over whether the sessions would have a “chairman”—language fa-
vored by the Israelis—or a “host,” preside over the proceedings. A second “sharp differ-
ence of view” between the Israeli and Egyptian delegations occurred when Rosenne “ca-
sually mentioned that the participants in the talks were Egypt and Israel, with the U.S. ‘as
an observer or full partner.’” The comment drew objections from Boutros Ghali and
Khalil who stated the view that the United States was a full party to the talks. At Burg’s
suggestion, the question of the U.S. role was deferred to the second session. (Telegram
485 from Alexandria, June 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D790265–0079)
