North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
889
strained, of course, by Secretary Blumenthal’s announced opposition to
direct contributions. However, the logic of Under Secretary Solomon’s
criticism of the OECD opening position might lead Treasury to ac-
ceptance in principle of direct contributions. In that case, the main con-
straint on Treasury could be concern that direct contributions could not
be sold on Capitol Hill. Further consultations on the Hill will help
clarify that issue.
Other Measures
The second issue before the PRC relates to measures other than
buffer stocking. Because of the $800 million US arrearage to the hard-
and soft-loan windows of international development lending institu-
tions, there is little that we can offer here. The discussion paper puts the
best face possible at this time on a US approach to this issue.
Recommended Next Steps
The discussion paper requests PRC guidance on whether the US
can consider making direct contributions to a common fund. If that is
the case, further staff work and consultations with the Congress will be
necessary.
I recommend that you approve the consideration of direct contri-
butions and the consequent staff work and consultations.6
I also recommend that you raise at the PRC meeting the possibility
that the US discuss the direct contributions issue within the OECD.
This may be farther than other agencies are willing to go without a
reading of Congressional attitudes. However, I believe that cautious
OECD consultations are a logical consequence of a decision to consider
making direct contributions.7
The PRC is also asked to refer the issue of direct contributions to
the interagency Commodity Task Force, which is chaired by State (Katz
or Bosworth) and which provides guidance and instructions to the US
delegation in Geneva.
I recommend that you approve this delegation of responsibility to
the Commodity Task Force.8
The discussion paper suggests that the PRC refer the Other Meas-
ures issue to the Commodity Task Force for the determination of the
manner and time of its presentation during the negotiations in Geneva.
I recommend approval of this step.9
6 Brzezinski indicated his approval of this recommendation, writing “ok.”
7 Brzezinski underlined the words “that cautious OECD” in this sentence. He did
not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
8 Brzezinski did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
9 Brzezinski did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
