1074  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
only one or two warheads to be mounted, and the old platforms would 
be destroyed. Thus, the downloading of the number of warheads on the 
“SS–N–18” SLBM and the Minuteman-3 ICBM would not be regarded 
as covered by the corresponding provisions of the START Treaty.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the download-
ing of the number of warheads on the “SS–N–18” missiles carried out 
by the Soviet side before the exchange of data for the Memorandum of 
Understanding totaled 256 units (on 64 missiles with seven warheads, 
while the remaining missiles had been equipped earlier for three war-
heads each), and the potential downloading of the number of warheads 
on your Minuteman-3 missiles can total in this case up to 1000 units.
If we can resolve all the above mentioned issues in a mutually 
acceptable fashion then the entire package of interrelated agreements 
reached by our foreign ministers in Houston would finally be put into 
operation in its entirety including, inter alia, such problems as the 
definition of new types of ballistic missiles and downloading of the 
accountable number of warheads on existing types of ballistic missiles. 
Incidentally, in the framework of our work on the Houston package, 
already in January we moved significantly toward the U.S. side regard-
ing, in particular, the accounting and inspection of heavy bombers. Our 
agreement to these solutions was given with the understanding that the 
U.S. side would take into account our concerns, above all in regard to 
the problems mentioned in your letter.
As to your proposals regarding unimpeded access to telemet-
ric information, I can assure you that we shall study most attentively 
the “comprehensive” proposals of the U.S. side, and we will strive to 
achieve full mutual understanding about this issue.
I share your opinion on the importance of this issue which is 
directly linked with ensuring a strict regime of verification of compli-
ance with Treaty limitations.
Though the START Treaty will contain other guarantees for thor-
ough verification, this does not eliminate the need for careful working 
out of provisions dealing with telemetry. We must achieve as much as 
possible from the point of view of substantive and mutually acceptable 
solutions by the time of signing of the Treaty.
As we agreed, I have given instructions to send authoritative spe-
cialists on telemetric information to Geneva for intensive work on this 
issue at the expert level with their American colleagues.
George, I believe we have begun a good, substantive discussion on 
the problems of START. I would like to express my confidence that this 
will lead to success.
In particular, I like the idea of holding a special meeting (and 
possibly several meetings) between Minister of Foreign Affairs A. A.
