872 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Additional improvements have been made in North American defense during FY 1959, particularly in the areas of warning and defense against the air breathing threat; however, concurrent Soviet offensive improvements have made any relative U.S. gain question­ able. The North American defense system is not capable of preventing an attack which could seriously damage the United States although it should significantly degrade any such attack and it does complicate seriously the attackers’ problems. The ready forces of the United States are capable of responding selectively and flexibly to local aggression and to meet the initial require­ ments of general war. However, while the over-­all nuclear posture of all Services has improved, modernization of non-­nuclear fire support has not kept pace. The scope and timing of response to local aggres­ sion would be limited by a number of factors, including: the nature and location of the aggression, the degree to which mal­deployment for ini­ tial tasks of general war could be accepted, the availability of transpor­ tation, and whether or not nuclear weapons are to be employed. The over-­all military capabilities of our Allies to support U.S. and collective defense organization strategic concepts possibly increased in the Far East during FY 1959, but probably decreased on balance in the Middle East and has not significantly changed in Europe. The capabilities of our Allies to assist in coping with local aggression vary from country to country. With few exceptions, the capabilities of our Allies to assist in coping with local aggression in other than their own general area are very limited. The United States and its Allies are capable of controlling essential air communications except on the periphery of the Soviet Bloc. Extreme difficulty will be incurred in controlling essential sea areas until such time as the Soviet submarine capability is reduced to manageable pro­ portions. The mining, mine countermeasures and harbor defense pro­ grams continue to be only partially satisfactory. The military forces, as the largest segment of U.S. population abroad, are capable of significant reinforcement of overt and covert political, economic, psychological, technical and cultural measures to achieve national objectives. Although this capability has not been fully exploited, increased emphasis has been given to cold war activities and the U.S. position has thus been strengthend in several areas. A. AN EFFECTIVE NUCLEAR RETALIATORY CAPABILITY, ­ADEQUATELY SAFEGUARDED AND READY FOR IMMEDIATE ACTION. The Strategic Air Command (SAC) has primary responsibility for nuclear retaliation and is charged with exploiting U.S. current superior­ ity in nuclear weapons and long-­range delivery systems against selected
