Eastern Europe Region in the human rights movement in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and for updating covert action themes in support of this goal.2 2. The Soviet human rights movement has suffered important losses in the past year. Moscow has expelled some of the most effective dissident leaders, like mathematician Leonid Plyushch and now Bukovskiy, or harassed them into emigrating, as in the case of Andrey Amalrik. Life has become even more difficult for the dissenter who is unprotected by publicity and its attendant constraints against official reprisals. The latest form of reprisal is physical violence, disguised as random street crimes. In April, dissident historian Konstantin Bogatyrev died from massive wounds inflicted by “unknown assailants.” Most of his friends believe the attack was KGB-inspired, and, according to several sources, the KGB threatened Bogatyrev’s doctor. More recently, Nobel Peace Prize winner, Andrey Sakharov, and others observing a protest vigil on Soviet Constitution Day (5 December) were assaulted by KGB-infiltrated bystanders. This tactic of physical assaults may have spread to other countries. In Czechoslovakia, for example, former politician Dr. Frantisek Kriegel was assaulted by masked men following his involvement in anti-government protests. 3. An effective countermeasure for these tactics is publicity. So far the human rights movement has survived official reprisals but would probably not survive a total, Stalin-style crackdown. Such a crackdown has not occurred in part because Soviet authorities remain sensitive to the pressures of world opinion. Addressees are asked to tap media assets, liaison and other local contacts to continue the campaign to keep dissidence alive in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. 4. The following State Department-approved themes are intended as updated guidelines for your covert action efforts: A. Continue to insist that CSCE means something, particularly Basket Three which eases regulations concerning the practice of religion, travel and the flow of information. Point out areas where the Soviet bloc signatories might demonstrate closer compliance. Encourage, for example, broader dissemination of printed material, Western newspapers, books, bibles, etc., to the East European population. Press for increased cooperation among mass media organizations and publishing houses. Publicize instances where sensitivity over charges of 2 On April 22, the Department of State also approved a “Perspectives” paper on Soviet interference in other countries’ affairs. The “Perspectives” guided worldwide media assets to “remind audiences of Moscow’s continued meddling in East Europe’s internal affairs,” from Hungary in 1956 to Czechoslovakia in 1968. The paper continued: “The 600,000-man Red Army still stationed in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and East Germany is a daily reminder of the potential danger in adopting policies not sanctioned by Moscow.” (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence
