declarations, and the Arbitrator is constrained to hold that these charges of general persecution are not adequately supported. There are also numerous charges of petty persecution, some of which if taken individually might be sustained, but all of which put together are not sufficiently serious to affect the decision of the weighty question under consideration. Conclusion. The Arbitrator is far from approving the course of Chilean administration and condoning the acts committed against Peruvians to which reference has been made, but finds no reason to conclude that a fair plebiscite in the present circumstances cannot be held under proper conditions or that a plebiscite should not be had. The agreement which the Parties made that the ultimate disposition of the territory of Tacna and Arica should be determined by popular vote is in accord with democratic postulates. It furnished when it was made a desirable alternative to a continuance of strife and it affords today a method of avoiding the recurrence of a not improbably disastrous clash of opposing sentiments and interests which enter into the very fiber of the respective nations. In agreeing upon a determination of the embittered controversy by popular vote, the Parties had recourse to a solution which the present circumstances not only do not render impracticable but rather the more imperative as a means of amicable disposition. The Parties in the Treaty of Ancon provided no alternative mode of settlement and made no provision for limitation of time or for forfeiture. It is manifest that if abuses of administration could have the effect of terminating such an agreement, it would be necessary to establish such serious conditions as the consequence of administrative wrongs as would operate to frustrate the purpose of the agreement, and, in the opinion of the Arbitrator, a situation of such gravity has not been shown. The Arbitrator holds that the provisions of the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon are still in effect; that the plebiscite should be held; and that the interests of both Parties can be properly safeguarded by establishing suitable conditions therefor. SECOND—THE CONDITIONS OF THE PLEBISCITE The Supplementary Act of the Protocol of Arbitration provides that “In case the holding of a plebiscite should be declared in order, the Arbitrator is empowered to determine the conditions thereof.” The Parties having failed to agree on the special protocol contemplated by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon prescribing “the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out” have submitted this question to the Arbitrator and the present Award is therefore to be deemed to be the substitute for the special protocol. The Treaty of Ancon contains no provision as to the conditions of the plebiscite, stating merely that it is to be a decision “by popular vote.” As the time for the plebiscite was not fixed, save that it was
