Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —While we must consider an appropriate policy response concerning Eastern Europe in advance and discuss it with our allies, we need to be careful not to lock ourselves into a policy response which might turn out to be incorrect in the event. We must recognize that intervention in Poland is the doing of the Soviet Union clients. They will respond with varying degrees of enthusiasm, with the GDR certainly and Czechoslovakia probably egging Moscow on, Bulgaria reticent, Hungary obviously reluctant and Romania perhaps dissociating itself. While some Eastern European military units may go into Poland, they will probably only have a symbolic role to play as was the case in Czechoslovakia in 1968. There is also the question of the general scenario under which any intervention might take place and the strong possibility that it will be under the guise of “Warsaw Pact maneuvers” or some kind of invitation—perhaps genuine—from the Polish Government. Our policy response in Eastern Europe will have to take all of these factors into account. —There is an important tactical point as well. Our allies are prepared to agree that a strong policy response is required vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. They are probably prepared even to sacrifice some important economic interests to make such a policy response. However, they will not be prepared to agree that the same or similar measures should be automatically applied to Eastern Europe—for all the reasons above plus others. The most serious objections would come from the FRG, as Schmidt would certainly not be ready to sacrifice the future of inner- German relations as part of a response to Soviet intervention in Poland. The question of specific steps to be taken in Eastern Europe could sidetrack the discussion of measures to be applied to the Soviet Union, and over the longer term, a US effort to bring the Europeans along on sanctions against Eastern Europe would run into considerable resistance and play into the hands of Soviet efforts to divide the US from its allies. We must, in this regard, keep well in mind the fact that the Western Europeans have gone considerably farther than we in building economic and political relations with Eastern Europe. —A similar general consideration to be borne in mind is that of reversibility. If the cause of sanctions against Eastern Europe is Soviet/ Warsaw Pact intervention in Poland, what would be the logical cause of removing these sanctions? Withdrawal of Soviet troops from Poland? A Polish Government “acceptable to the Polish people”? In other words, whatever measures we impose will be with us for a long time unless we want to run the risk of being perceived as inconsistent in our policy. —These considerations argue for moving ahead slowly and cautiously in planning our policy response in Eastern Europe. While we should look at the range of political and economic steps open to us and calculate their costs and benefits, we should not be “drawing up
