180
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
2. The Shah now wants to leave and has asked us through intermedi-
aries to make arrangements to go to Mexico. We approached the Mexi-
cans at the Presidential level last night. Sunday is apparently the earliest
date a transfer can be arranged, and more pressure on the Mexicans
may be required. State is helping to arrange secure transport to the
airport in New York. Secretary Vance took note of the President’s
concern that the move take place before Khomeini can lock himself
into an ultimatum linking the treatment of the hostages to the Shah’s
departure. However, Secretary Vance does not believe the arrange-
ments can be completed with the Mexicans before Sunday. (TS)
3. Saudi Arabia. Ambassador West is to see Crown Prince Fahd
today to ask his views on the threat to Americans in Saudi Arabia. The
SCC recognized that the possibility of a U.S. evacuation cannot be
divorced from the larger question of U.S. strategic position in the region.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that an evacuation could seriously destabilize the
regime and undermine our strategic position in the entire region. It
would be a signal to the Saudis that the U.S. is disengaging from the
region—and that could have the gravest consequences for our vital
interests.9 Accordingly, we should ask the Saudis to assure the security
of our people (and not talk of evacuation), and we should even consider
offering U.S. military assistance—including the 82nd Airborne if
required—to insure the security of the Eastern Province, if the Saudis
would welcome it. This question will be reviewed further after we hear
Fahd’s response. (TS)
4. Reduction at U.S. Embassies. Dr. Brzezinski raised the question of
the impact of the reduction order, particularly in Oman which appeared
to be quite secure. Secretary Vance said that he was not confident of
the security of any of the smaller states in that area. It is only a handful
of people being removed in any event, and he was inclined to let the
order proceed despite a few squawks of protest. The President’s meet-
ing with American Moslem organizations next week will provide a
useful forum to address the status of our relations with the Islamic
states. (S)
5. Espionage Charges. We expect the Iranians to make a major case
about U.S. espionage activities at the embassy in Tehran.10 In general,
we would prefer to have that information come out in an international
forum rather than in trials of our people. It is certain to be a major
media event, and we will have to be carefully prepared in our responses.
State and CIA are working on a strategy paper which will be ready
9 Carter wrote next to this sentence: “I agree.” Regarding the U.S. concern about
the safety of Americans in Saudi Arabia, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII,
Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula, Documents 204 and 205.
10 See Document 58.
