Afghanistan 639 spontaneous popular resistance to a Marxist regime, the Soviets at that time began to concoct charges of U.S. and other foreign interference. However, the Soviets undoubtedly did suspect that the U.S. and China could not be counted on to resist forever the temptation to exploit a growing anti-Soviet insurgency and that the Soviet Union, if it failed to act, would eventually find itself faced with a radical Islamic southern neighbor unfriendly to the Soviet Union and susceptible to potential overtures from the U.S. and China. 6. Soviet plotting against Afghan Prime Minister Amin in the months preceding the Soviet invasion has been well documented elsewhere, as has Amin’s awareness of Soviet attitudes toward him. The Soviets clearly believed that Amin’s excesses were primarily responsible for popular disaffection with the April 1978 revolution, that his removal was necessary to win the war against the insurgents, and that Babrak Karmal could be trusted to follow Soviet advice on broadening popular support for the regime. Moreover, the deep mutual distrust and suspicion between the Soviets and Amin must have caused the Soviets to consider the possibility that Amin, like Sadat and Siad Barre, would suddenly turn against them and order the Soviet advisors out of Afghanistan. 7. Either an insurgent victory or an anti-Soviet turnabout by Amin would have been a serious blow to Soviet prestige and foreign policy interests. Moreover, the Soviets would have had great ideological and political difficulties in explaining the replacement of a socialist regime by an Islamic republic, in contrast to the Iranian revolution which the Soviets portray as a progressive step from monarchy. Not the least of Soviet concerns were the potentially troublesome effects of the loss of a neighboring Marxist state, with which the Soviet Union had a friendship treaty including a security commitment, on Eastern Europe, other pro-Soviet “progressive” governments in the Third World and even on the Muslim population of Soviet Central Asia. Brezhnev has alluded to those concerns in a conversation with a Western visitor. 8. We do not accept the thesis occasionally mooted that the move into Afghanistan was a direct reaction to the NATO TNF decision or to the growing ties between the U.S. and China. But it is certainly true that the international situation at the end of 1979 was more propitious for a Soviet move into Afghanistan than it might be later, if the Soviets had let matters drift until they were faced with an imminent prospect of losing Afghanistan. U.S.-Soviet relations were already worsening as a result of the dispute over the Soviet brigade in Cuba, the U.S. commitment to increase its defense spending and its military presence in the Indian Ocean, the NATO decision on TNF rejecting Brezhnev’s initiative to forestall it, and rapidly improving relations between the U.S. and China. The Soviets thus saw poor immediate prospects for
