Arms Control and Disarmament  1579
429.	 Telegram Supnu 294 from Geneva1
Geneva, February 23, 1959, 2 p.m.
Supnu 294. Following are US del ideas on how a possible recess 
might be handled and what might be done after a recess:
1. As outlined in Supnu 293 we believe final days of conference 
should be focused on veto. We would then envisage statement by West­
ern delegations that failure to achieve agreement on central issues of 
control, namely, veto, staffing, inspections, demonstrated necessity to 
recess conference and report to individual governments to see what 
further measures might be devised to assist agreement on these key 
issues. Statement could include idea that Soviets had obviously not yet 
been convinced of reasonableness Western position on control by US 
and UK delegations; therefore desirable to refer issues to wider inter­
national forum in order to secure the judgment of world community. 
Therefore Western delegations expected their governments would call 
for meeting of UN Disarmament Commission.
2. Letters from President and UK Prime Minister to Khrushchev 
could be used to dramatize Soviet intransigence on basic issues. If let­
ters sent before planned recess and did not contain specific reference 
to stopping conference Soviets would have opening for reply which 
might make it difficult not further prolong negotiations. On other hand 
it might not be desirable to have call for recess first made by Presiden­
tial letter. Accordingly delegation tends believe letter from President 
should be sent on heels of rather than before recess.
3. In separate message we will outline our ideas on fallback 
position with regard to tests. In general we think it will be useful if 
announcement could be made that for some period of time US would 
forego that kind of tests for which there now exist adequate means of 
detection without an international control system. This would of course 
mean atmospheric tests. It would also be helpful if US announced that 
in addition to underground weapons development tests it was going to 
undertake underground testing in attempt further to develop knowl­
edge of how effective controls of such tests might best be established 
and would solicit Soviet cooperation in studies along this line. US could 
reserve right to test at high altitudes if adequate measures for control 
this type test not found and agreed. Point elimination of atmospheric 
tests would remove radioactivity hazard might perhaps not necessarily 
be made in initial announcement but could of course be used to elicit 
1 Source: U.S. Delegation ideas on handling a recess in nuclear testing suspension 
talks. Secret. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/2–2359.
