September 18–December 16, 1978
551
(A) The Egyptian proposed interpretative note on Article VI (2),
and the proposed linking between the exchange of ambassadors and
West Bank/Gaza autonomy are unacceptable rpt unacceptable.
(B) On Article IV, the GOI feels that Sadat is putting the wrong
construction on the present language. GOI fully accepts that each party
should have the right to initiate a review of the provisions covered on
this article. While the GOI does not accept Sadat’s proposal for a man-
datory review in five years, it believes that the problem presented by
this article can be resolved. (It is worth noting that Dayan said nothing
about the Article VI (5) issue.)
(C) On the West Bank/Gaza letter, Israel believes this too can be
resolved and is prepared to continue negotiations in an effort to find a
formulation that is mutually acceptable.
3. The rest of the meeting was taken up by Begin allowing his Min-
isters to express their views. Burg and Sharon made statements, the
latter being predictably negative and critical of the U.S. for “unfairly
pressuring” Israel to make concessions.
4. I did get the feeling, however, that the Israelis were taking a
somewhat less gloomy and totally negative view of the situation this
morning. They are still adamantly opposed to linkage and the Egyptian
note on Article VI, but there was more stress today on the areas that
might be resolved.3
Vance
3 Before leaving Israel for Egypt, Vance met for one hour with Dayan where they
discussed a number of Dayan’s ideas for solving the current textual problems. On Article
IV, Vance reported that Dayan “indicated that he thought a solution could be found,
perhaps even with a slight change in the treaty text.” On Article VI, paragraph 2, Dayan
said that “he thought they might be able to accept” the Egyptian language of the interpre-
tive note if Israel could add a sentence of its own, though “he did not explain what he had
in mind.” Moreover, Dayan also proposed using the Camp David language in the ex-
change of ambassadors as well as further negotiations to find a solution to the joint letter
problem, and stated that the Israelis would draft their own legal opinion on Article VI,
paragraph 5. After arriving in Cairo, Vance briefed Sadat on his discussions with the Is-
raelis. (Telegram Secto 14065 from Cairo, December 14; National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, P840153–1476)
