152  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
UNQUOTE has technical meaning not applicable to many Americans 
and Chinese within scope of arrangements.
3. After full consideration we believe that basic text our 599 is 
sound and should be pressed vigorously with oral understanding with 
Wang that word QUOTE promptly UNQUOTE is defined as indicated 
Secretary’s 569, paragraph 1. We would not be willing proceed to item 2 
of agenda until all Americans actually released or acceptable time limit 
agreed upon.
4. If it should prove utterly impossible get Wang’s agreement to 
foregoing without an QUOTE understanding UNQUOTE, you are 
authorized indicate you would consider ad referendum an oral QUOTE 
understanding UNQUOTE which would cover both Wang’s jurisdiction 
point and definition word QUOTE promptly UNQUOTE. If we agreed 
to QUOTE understanding UNQUOTE it could not repeat not be private. 
It would have to be announced simultaneously with agreement. Text this 
QUOTE understanding UNQUOTE telegraphed separately.
Dulles
121.	 Telegram 603 to Geneva1
Washington, August 22, 1955, 3:53 p.m.
603. For Johnson.
Deptel 602. Following is text of “understanding” authorized as 
fall-back position:
“Nothing in agreed announcements are intended involve any 
question of sovereignty or jurisdiction and it is assumed that measures 
referred to in the announcements are taken within framework of laws 
and legal procedures of their respective countries. It is understood that 
the PRC has completed the review of some unfinished civil and crim­
inal cases involving Americans and that these Americans will be able 
promptly to depart for the U.S. It is understood that the review of all 
remaining civil and criminal cases involving Americans will be com­
pleted within (blank) weeks and that they will thereupon be able to 
depart for the U.S.”
Dulles
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2255. Secret; Niact. Drafted by 
Sebald; cleared by Phleger and McConaughy in draft and by Dulles.
