1956 703 471. Telegram 1559 to Geneva1 Washington, January 30, 1956, 6:13 p.m. 1559. For Johnson. Guidance for February 4 meeting. 1. Concur in your estimate (Your 1426) that most likely Communist tactic next meeting is renewed attack on US position regarding renun­ ciation of force. You should respond along lines your presentation last meeting. 2. Reiterate demand for expeditious release Americans. Note that flagrancy Chinese Communist breach of Agreed Announcement cumulative with each added week of non-­performance. Again reject in vigorous terms Communist attempt exclude imprisoned ­Americans from application Agreed Announcement. Point out that imprisoned ­Americans were very persons about whom we were making repre­ sentations when Agreed Announcement was drafted and issued. Also point out that instead of fulfilling commitment to take appropriate meas­ures expedite Americans return, in at least two cases some six weeks after issuance Agreed Announcement, Americans who had been held in prison several years were tried for first time and sentenced to long prison terms. This is callous violation their pledge. Longer they unjustifiably continue hold Americans, more apparent it becomes to people of world that they using human beings as political hostages. Such action is repugnant to all civilized nations. FYI During coming meetings you should continue build strong case against Communists aimed particularly at their failure to honor commitments and demon­ strated use individuals as political pawns. END FYI 3. Inform Wang US is investigating case of Yuan Jui-­hsiang, alleged to have been taken into custody by US Immigration Service, but does not intend to investigate other names previously submitted by Wang in absence specific showing claiming that US Government obstruct­ ing departure these persons. Refuse to accept any more names unless Wang makes such showing. Failure of Chinese in this country to write letters to Communist China is no evidence either that they wish to go to Communist China or that they have encountered obstruction. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–3056. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Phleger, Clough, and McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and in draft by Dulles.
