286  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
affirms that, to allay such concerns to the degree we can, there will 
be no further withdrawals of forces from the Western Pacific beyond 
those already scheduled for Korea. (I might note, in that connection, 
the strong effect that that policy has on our aircraft carrier force level. 
It means that we will have to continue to deploy two carriers in the 
Western Pacific. Those, combined with the two deployed carriers in 
the Mediterranean, translate into a total carrier force requirement of 
12, given practical rotation and overhaul factors. Reducing the carrier 
force level to less than 12 would require us to reduce these overseas 
deployments in one way or another.) The CG also directs the already 
announced increase in Air Force fighter aircraft (from 60 to 72) in Korea, 
planning for joint exercises in the analysis of Korean logistic require-
ments, and the examination of low-­cost hedges against the possibility 
of ground force redeployment. The Far East section of the CG also dis-
cusses the issue of a Sino-Soviet war, as well as the implications in that 
region should we become involved in a world-­wide war with the Soviet 
Union.
The Section in the CG on the Middle East notes that while Arab 
inventories of military equipment are expected to remain considerably 
larger than those of Israel, the ratio is improving for the Israelis, and 
we would expect them to prevail in any war at least through 1983. The 
CG also notes that the outcome of any associated naval confrontation 
between the United States and the Soviet Union would depend heavily 
on the amount of prior reinforcement on either side. The normal two-­
carrier force we keep in the Mediterranean would have to be doubled 
for us to have confidence in its survival if opposed by the Soviets in 
the Eastern Mediterranean. [4 lines not declassified] The CG discusses 
both the Soviets’ and our capability to intervene with military force in 
a Mid-East war, and directs that we maintain the capability to counter 
Soviet intervention.
The concern we attach to the Persian Gulf area is noted in the very 
front of the CG with the words: “events in the Persian Gulf could soften 
the glue that binds the (NATO) alliance together as surely as could an 
imbalance of military force across the inter-German border”. The sec-
tion in the CG covering the Persian Gulf outlines the military forces in 
the area, including the local Soviet threat, and discusses United States 
options, such as the possible resupply of Iran, defense of oil facilities 
and sea lines of communication, and even the use of US forces in the 
area. However, pending results of current studies, we are not at the 
point of being able to draw many conclusions with confidence. For the 
moment, the CG directs maintenance of the current Middle East Force, 
intermittent naval and tactical air deployments to the Indian Ocean 
with joint exercises, and limiting construction for Diego Garcia to that 
already programmed.
