International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1061 and complement the unique potential of the U.S. private sector— academia, PVO’s, U.S. private business, and private individuals. III. Coordinating Mechanisms. Twenty-two agencies engage in international health related activities. A way is needed to relate and strengthen the separate purposes and potential contributions of these agencies to the benefit of overall government goals such as those currently espoused by the President. An explicit policy will be instrumental in creating such procedures. In order to establish a governmentwide policy, keep it current, and manage its implementation, the major problem of divided responsibility and authority among the largest agencies will have to be overcome. There is general agreement among the agencies that coordination can and should be improved. Two levels of interagency coordination are required: a policy level and a strategic program level. The policy level responsibilities include: • the planning and evolution of U.S. Government international health policy; • establishment of the government-wide goals and principles for agencies to use in designing international health programs; • resolution of any impasse from the strategic level of coordination, especially regarding acceptance and assignment of lead responsibility for different international health activities; • publication and transmission to the President and Congress of an annual report on international health activities. Public input should be invited to assist in the performance of all these responsibilities. Strategic level responsibilities include: • the planning and evolution of U.S. Government international health strategy; • interrelation of goals and activities of international health programs throughout government; • development and promotion of international health initiatives coming from ongoing government programs, international science and health attaches (described in the following paragraphs), the U.S. private sector, foreign countries, or international organizations; • maintenance of information on relevant governmental and worldwide international health activity. The key issues to be considered in improving coordination for international health are: structure, lead, and relation to other related coordinating bodies. Structure. Of the 22 agencies currently involved in international health activities, AID, HEW and State are the most directly involved, followed by ACTION, DoD and Treasury. Broad policy is most easily developed among those agencies most active in international health. Strategy and broad program coordination, however, requires wider in-
