International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1061
and complement the unique potential of the U.S. private sector—
academia, PVO’s, U.S. private business, and private individuals.
III. Coordinating Mechanisms. Twenty-two agencies engage in inter-
national health related activities. A way is needed to relate and
strengthen the separate purposes and potential contributions of these
agencies to the benefit of overall government goals such as those cur-
rently espoused by the President. An explicit policy will be instru-
mental in creating such procedures. In order to establish a government-
wide policy, keep it current, and manage its implementation, the major
problem of divided responsibility and authority among the largest
agencies will have to be overcome.
There is general agreement among the agencies that coordination
can and should be improved. Two levels of interagency coordination
are required: a policy level and a strategic program level.
The policy level responsibilities include:
• the planning and evolution of U.S. Government international
health policy;
• establishment of the government-wide goals and principles for
agencies to use in designing international health programs;
• resolution of any impasse from the strategic level of coordina-
tion, especially regarding acceptance and assignment of lead responsi-
bility for different international health activities;
• publication and transmission to the President and Congress of
an annual report on international health activities.
Public input should be invited to assist in the performance of all
these responsibilities.
Strategic level responsibilities include:
• the planning and evolution of U.S. Government international
health strategy;
• interrelation of goals and activities of international health pro-
grams throughout government;
• development and promotion of international health initiatives
coming from ongoing government programs, international science and
health attaches (described in the following paragraphs), the U.S. pri-
vate sector, foreign countries, or international organizations;
• maintenance of information on relevant governmental and
worldwide international health activity.
The key issues to be considered in improving coordination for in-
ternational health are: structure, lead, and relation to other related
coordinating bodies.
Structure. Of the 22 agencies currently involved in international
health activities, AID, HEW and State are the most directly involved,
followed by ACTION, DoD and Treasury. Broad policy is most easily
developed among those agencies most active in international health.
Strategy and broad program coordination, however, requires wider in-
