692  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
The Guatemalan left generally tends to be intensely nationalis-
tic, or at least to value greatly the political uses of hyper-­nationalism. 
American business in Guatemala seems likely, in certain cases, to play 
into the hands of demagogues and keep the nationalism issue alive, 
making our efforts to sponsor a moderate left more difficult.
Ydígoras’ approach to the communists has been a source of grave 
concern to us. However, we must recognize that it has not been entirely 
devoid of merits. It has enabled him to boast of respecting individual 
liberties and has reduced tensions. It has also helped to sort the goats 
from the sheep, which was an almost hopeless task under Castillo. 
The return of some prominent, fondly remembered Arbencista exiles 
has deprived them of martyrs’ crowns and revealed some as ordi-
nary human beings who are somewhat out of step with the times. The 
great defect in Ydígoras’ handling of the communist problem has been 
his unwillingness to clamp down on clearly identified agitators and 
organizers.
3. AREVALO:
The Embassy’s views about Arevalo are that we must recognize 
that he is alive, that we cannot confidently hope that he will be run over 
by a truck and that, at the present time, he is the only sure-­fire rallying 
point for the bulk of Guatemalans—­either because they love him or 
because they believe his return is inevitable. The Department recorded 
its views on the subject in its instruction No. A-155 of May 29.9 This 
will probably serve Ambassador Mallory as a point of departure for 
some phases of his discussions.
4. INTER-AMERICAN HIGHWAY:
Ambassador Mallory will probably bring us up to date on the prob-
lems connected with completion and surfacing of the Inter-American 
Highway in Guatemala. It might be interesting to discuss with him 
ways and means of diverting to this purpose some of the unexpended 
grant-­aid money that is now earmarked for projects that do not interest 
Ydígoras, because they are identified with Castillo and might be cred-
ited to the MDN if carried through.
9 The referenced instruction set forth two objectives: “(1) To minimize the threat to 
our interests if Arévalo, a man with a long anti-American record, should reappear on the 
Guatemalan political scene in the near future, and (2) to postpone, if possible and as long 
as possible, Arévalo’s return to Guatemala and utilize the time available before a succes-
sor to the Ydígoras Government must be chosen to ensure the most satisfactory possible 
succession.” (714.00/5–2959)
