International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
665
many and Japan are increasing their aid substantially, despite virtually
static budgets. Italy has pledged to double its aid, and to give first pri-
ority to increasing food production. Member countries have recently
agreed to double the resources of the World Bank’s Consultative Group
on International Agricultural Research (from $100 million to $200 mil-
lion annually). (C)
Against this background, the Venice Summit could be the occasion
for a major push to eliminate hunger by the year 2000, as proposed by
your Hunger Commission.3 Whether we can seize this occasion will de-
pend partly on decisions you will soon make about FY 1981 Develop-
ment Assistance and PL–480. If our program for next year does not pro-
vide for substantial food aid and a modest increase in aid for food
production, we will not be taken seriously by our allies when we ask
them to step up the war on hunger. (C)
If our allies do take the proposal seriously, it is possible that agree-
ment might be reached on setting up an international consortium,
perhaps under IBRD auspices, to mount a coordinated program of
worldwide assistance for increased food output. This would not only
help millions of poor people; it would also reduce the likelihood of
higher global food prices, and hence future US inflation. (C)
4. Conclusion. We have some chance in the next few months of
registering economic successes on the international economic front—in
energy, monetary affairs, and the war on hunger. The decisions that
you soon make—on an import fee, FY 1981 fiscal policy, and aid for
food production in LDCs—will have some bearing on the outcome. (C)
3 The Presidential Commission on World Hunger released its preliminary report on
December 10. (Seth S. King, “U.S. Panel Asks Doubling of Aid to Food-Short Lands,” The
New York Times, December 11, 1979, p. A11) See Document 337. Substantial portions of
the Commission’s preliminary report are printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II,
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 263.
