Negotiating Channels 465 177. Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Washington, February 6, 1980 Over ten days ago, you and Secretary Vance signed off on the proposal that we developed with our French friends.2 Based on all that we have seen in the past 48 hours, we have good reason to believe that Bani-Sadr and the Revolutionary Council have accepted the bulk of our proposal. We are awaiting a response through the Swiss3 which we should get by mid-morning. Once we agree to this scenario, we will have to live with it and had best all understand it and the accompanying risks. A few points that should be made: 1. This whole effort is foolish and suicidal unless you accept/believe that the leadership of Iran desires to resolve the hostage crisis peacefully. I believe that they do, although no one knows the real feelings of the Ayatollah Khomeini. The indications from Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh, and the Revolutionary Council are certainly positive in this regard. I am assuming that they will inform Khomeini at some point of their intentions and he will avoid responsibility for the plan (which might be an admission of a mistake) by taking the position that it is a decision which will have to be made by the Revolutionary Council and the elected leadership of the country. 2. While the scenario that has been developed is precise in terms of reciprocal steps, we have to realize the good possibility that Ghotbzadeh or Bani-Sadr will deviate from the scenario along the way for personal or political benefit. We should not forget that this whole 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 2/80. Eyes Only. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner of the memorandum. 2 See Document 168. 3 The Department informed Lang on February 5 that Bourguet and Villalon wished to communicate with the Department through him and queried Lang to determine whether Iran proposed any possible changes in the scenario and, if so, how to handle this. Lang was also given a copy of telegram 1314 from London (see Document 157). (Carter Library, Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler’s Files, Box 2) Lang responded with a detailed response on February 6. (Ibid.) The Department then asked Lang to meet with Bourguet and Villalon on February 7. (February 6; ibid.) Lang met with Bani-Sadr and Salamatian on February 6, handing them the messages in Document 174, which they read “with very great interest.” Ghotbzadeh stated that he placed the “highest price” on the report on Soviet deployments. (Summary of Report from Lang on his meetings with Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, February 7; Carter Library, Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler, Box 2)
