National Security Policy 647 hit hard on the side of the Administration, stating that it is not the func­ tion of the Congress to interfere in military strategy. Even Mr. Vinson had added some words of help in this regard. Here the President stated that he was not overly concerned with this particular item since he felt he could handle it. He digressed to point up that in the matters of hous­ ing and depressed areas, where the Congress appears determined to expend large sums in excess of those recommended, he must win. If not, he fears the most serious consequences to the value of the dollar. He pointed out an article he had read today in the New York Times finan­ cial section which indicated a movement of U.S. capital overseas which is reaching the proportion of a “flight from the dollar.” Apparently pri­ vate investors are convinced that the Europeans are building a more viable economy than ours and will overtake us. * * * General Twining then mentioned a matter pertaining to command structure of Unified Commands. In the old law the term “operational control” had been employed, implying only the vaguest type of com­ mand. The new law has undergone a change in wording which now substitutes the term “operational command.” In the course of the pro­ ceedings, the term of operational command had been defined the same as the old operational control. Based on this, the Marines have com­ plained to the Congress about the definition of operational command as employed by the Department of Defense, and which, by the President’s desires, gives the Unified Commanders complete command responsi­ bility except for technical administrative matters. In the course of the hearings, Mr. Vinson had asked General Twining for the Department of Defense definition. General Twining had explained the difference. Mr. Vinson had then requested that the new definition be incorporated into the Congressional Record. This has been done. In this matter, the President stated he was not concerned, for he is the Commander-­in- Chief and can construe the wording as he sees fit. He can be called to account for this matter only by the courts. * * * As General Twining was departing, the President asked that he take a check into the matter of comparative grades and position vacancies among the three Services. This had come to the President’s attention primarily through briefings that had been held by the Navy requesting new legislation to overcome their rather considerable World War II hump. He cited certain cases with relation to promotion inequi­ ties within and among Services. General Twining said he would check into the matter with the Joint Chiefs of Staff. John S.D. Eisenhower
