44  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
12.	
Record of Decisions of an Arms Control Policy Coordinating 
Committee Meeting1
Washington, April 12, 1989
The PCC heard a debrief of the initial CFE round by Ambassador 
Ledogar. No decisions were taken or required.
An interagency paper “Criteria for Evaluating CFE Measures with 
Respect to Verification” was distributed. The PCC agreed that mem-
bers would review the paper and report any problems to the NSC staff 
by COB April 13. If no objections are registered, the document will be 
formally promulgated by the NSC Executive Secretary for use as a ref-
erence document.
The PCC reviewed an interagency paper on Gomel. PCC mem-
bers agreed that the radar at Gomel has been rendered inoperative 
and the violation of the ABM Treaty corrected. They also agreed that 
the Soviets have not scrupulously carried out the steps agreed to 
in the SCC. The PCC could not reach consensus on the next steps. 
Agency positions will be submitted to the PCC Executive Secretary 
by COB April 13. The Acting SCC Commissioner and the OSD PCC 
representative will clarify their common understanding of Option 3 in 
the interagency paper.
With respect to the ongoing review of START:
1. The PCC reached agreement to reaffirm the 1600 SNDV limit for 
the present. The decision will be reviewed once a U.S. mobile ICBM 
decision has been made.
2. The PCC agreed that the initial U.S. position when START talks 
resume is to retain the 3000/3300 ICBM warhead sublimit. The PCC 
could not reach consensus on whether to encourage or discourage 
Ambassador Burt from suggesting that there is flexibility with respect 
to this limit.
3. The PCC failed to reach consensus with respect to heavy ICBMs. 
The PCC agreed to drop the option of immediately modifying the U.S. 
position and allowing testing and modernization of heavy ICBMs, but 
retained the remaining three options in the existing issue paper.
4. The PCC failed to reach consensus on substituting a launch 
weight constraint for the existing U.S. throwweight constraint.
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, Richard A. Davis Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01590–009, Arms Control PCC 
[2]. Secret.
