Negotiating Channels
399
man” down there. At that point, I began to take all that I had heard
about the Panamanians and even my own role in this a bit more
seriously. Both Hal Saunders and I agree that we have no choice but
to keep the Panamanian channel open and nurture it. As he says,
the UN channel could close up or something could develop in the
Panamanian channel—“we have pursued vigorously and seriously
leads that were on the surface much less substantial than this one”.
Probably Ghotbzedeh will not be elected and we will be dealing
with an entire new cast of characters. Even if he fails to win the election,
there is always the chance that Khomeini will insist that he continue
as Foreign Minister and/or as the person to try to resolve the hos-
tage situation.
Even if we assume on the frontend that nothing will come of the
Panamanian channel, it is in our own interest to keep them generally
informed and involved as they have one very critical piece of the
puzzle—the Shah.
The few times that I have been actively involved in foreign policy
matters—the Panama Canal Treaty, the Mideast arms package, the
Middle East, etc.—I have bent overboard to operate in tandem with
the State Department, usually with Warren Christopher. But I got the
distinct impression from Cy on my latest trip that the Panamanian
contact was not serious, that he is suspicious of Torrijos and that the
whole thing was resented because it had been done out of here and
by me. In reaction to that, I got Ambler Moss involved, passing a
message from you to Torrijos through him. Cy insisted that I restate
in that message the fact that we assumed that we continued to have
their firm commitment not to extradite the Shah.4
My only point in telling you all of this is that there is absolutely
nothing to be lost by keeping the Panamanians generally informed and
involved in this process. I don’t have the time or inclination to fool
with this, but it is going to require someone at a high level treating it
in a serious way. To date, that has not happened.
I have spent a lot of time in the past few days thinking about the
hostage situation. I really haven’t given it much thought in human
terms for the past few weeks. I know that it is a heavy personal burden
for you and Cy. I have no wife or children, and should the time come
that you needed someone to take considerable personal risks in pursu-
4 Jordan had given Carter’s message to Moss by telephone, and Moss then relayed
the President’s message to Torrijos and Royo, January 13. Torrijos dictated a “note
verbale” in which he expressed Panama’s desire to be more involved in UN deliberations
and reiterated his promise that the Shah would not be extradited. (Telegram 352 from
Panama, January 14; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870108–
1025; N800001–0663) The text of Carter’s message is not repeated in the telegram.
