442 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I We and the Canadians have recognized our need to provide some predictability, some dependability upon a supply of nuclear fuels to other nations, commensurate with a mutual profession against proliferation of nuclear explosives and the adherence to international safeguards. We have all been concerned about inflation and have made our plans to deal with this all-pervasive threat throughout the world. This is a time when we also recognize our strength, our stability, the benefits of peace. And our hope is that in the analysis of transient problems, with which we are trying to deal successfully, that we need not ever lose sight of the base of common purpose that binds us together in a successful endeavor in the free and democratic nations of the world. We will be carefully monitoring progress after this summit adjourns, to make sure that those commitments made in sincerity are not forgotten nor abandoned in the months ahead. I would like to say, finally, that we have not forgotten the developing nations of the world. We are fortunate, we’ve been blessed with economic and political and military strength and with a fine, high standard of living for our own people. We recognize the need to share this with other, less developed countries. And all these cumulative commitments, I think, will be very good and constructive for the entire world economy in the months ahead. I personally believe that the strong statement on controlling air piracy, terrorism, is in itself worth the entire preparation and conduct of the summit. We are determined that this commitment be carried out individually and collectively. And our Foreign Ministers have been instructed immediately to contact other nations around the world without delay, to encourage them to join in with us in this substantive and, I think, adequate move to prevent air hijacking in the future. I leave this summit conference with a resolve to carry out our purposes, to continue our mutual discussions and consultations, and with a new sense of confidence. This has been a very successful meeting among us. The preparation for it was very instructive and educational, and the superb chairmanship of Chancellor Schmidt has helped to ensure its success.
