172 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 We should not escalate until we have exhausted diplomatic remedies. Our interests will not be fully satisfied unless all the hostages are safely returned. Secretary Vance observed that items 1–4 could be done without seriously threatening the hostages. The break point comes at mining. Dr. Brzezinski and Secretary Brown said that the threat of mining could be used to get others to cooperate with us in bringing pressure on Iran. Secretary Vance responded that, if that were done under Chapter 7 sanctions, that would be one thing. If not, it would be quite different. Hamilton Jordan added that the Soviets could veto sanctions, and that would mean the end of SALT II. Each participant was then asked for his views. Secretary Brown said the key was whether or not the hostages were directly threatened. If so, we should be ready to carry out severe actions. He agreed that a decision to mine would put the hostages under more serious danger. There was a 50–50 chance that some might be killed in response. The question is how long we can wait. Over time the chances of harm coming to the hostages increases and our ability to act declines. Items 1–3 could be done quickly. Secretary Vance said it will take at least a month to exhaust available diplomatic remedies. He did not believe we would get the support even of many of our close allies on a blockade, noting that not one country was willing to join us in 1967 opening of the Strait of Tiran.6 General Jones said that the key was to keep world opinion and the Moslem world with us. Strong action could work either way depending on whether it was perceived as justified or not. He noted that his French counterpart recommended against the use of force as counterproductive in this situation. The French would probably not join with us in an economic embargo. If we mine harbors and some hostages are killed, we may be seen as guilty. We might consider mining only imports to start.7 Secretary Vance said that before mining we should get virtually all Americans out of the Moslem world. Admiral Turner said the U.S. position was eroding, noting the events in Mecca and Pakistan. Those in Tehran are as convinced as we are that their position is righteous. If we get ahead of Khomeini, we risk 6 Egypt imposed a naval blockade on the Strait of Tiran on May 22, 1967, blocking all Israeli shipping through the Red Sea. President Lyndon Johnson tried unsuccessfully to get the Strait reopened. 7 Carter underlined “only imports” and wrote a question mark in the margin.
