Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 79 tical as if I had been there myself.”3 He noted that FRG Chancellor Schmidt at first felt it was a token visit, but after spending four hours with his Cabinet and the Mondale mission, Schmidt was impressed with the substance of the discussions. “I’ve enjoyed being President so far, and I hope to maintain that status,” said President Carter, “but I know a mistake can get immediately magnified. You have been here a long time and I reserve the right to come to you with special problems. I have a genuine desire to work closely with you. Cy Vance has my permanent authorization to tell you my plans on foreign policy.” Then the President ran down a list of issues under consideration, including SALT, Rhodesia, Panama, Middle East, Cyprus and NATO. SECRETARY VANCE spoke to the Congressmen about an immediate problem in Egypt growing out of President Sadat’s removal of subsidy for basic commodities. This resulted in price increases which caused riots in the country. President Sadat did not handle the situation forcefully and had to lower the prices again to prevent rioting. He was damaged by the way he handled the situation. Egyptian Foreign Minister Fahmy asked our Ambassador in Egypt for additional economic aid. Secretary Vance explained that the Administration proposes to shift funds from long-term development to short-term commodity assistance in order to help Egypt. The total would be $190 million. President Sadat is the key to the Middle East situation, explained Secretary Vance. The PRESIDENT said that everybody knows that Sadat has demonstrated a good attitude and that strengthening him would pay dividends. REPRESENTATIVE HAMILTON noted that while there are political reasons to support Sadat, we are making a mistake for the longrange. The commodity import program is difficult to administer and has been “very slippery.” He said that such long-range economic projects as power plants, irrigation projects and industrial credit should not be knocked out because they will be the basis for a sound Egyptian economy. “If the political situation requires it, then reluctantly I guess we must make the move for short-term commodity aid.” SENATOR CASE said there is no disagreement with Secretary Vance’s request in the short-term, but we should reconsider our longterm goals. REPRESENTATIVE FASCELL said $190 million is not a lot of money and the political pay-off is obvious, but where we go is important. “Egypt is the biggest sinkhole in the Middle East and this is short- 3 See Document 16.
