Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
77
“Q. Jim Klurfeld from Newsday. On this same situation, there
were reports that you were unhappy with the statement made on the
Sakharov situation. I just wonder if you can tell us who did clear that
statement. I think the President indicated yesterday he did not clear it.
Who did clear it? And whether you feel that this is an instance in which
you should not have spoken out.
“Secretary Vance: Let me say I did not see it; it was cleared at lower
levels. I am not going to give the name of the individual. I have the re-
sponsibility in this Department, and therefore I accept that responsi-
bility fully. Let me say that I respect Mr. Sakharov very deeply; I re-
spect his, Mr. Sakharov’s, principles and his pursuit of those principles.
“Q. Your predecessor frequently said in speeches that not only is it
inadvisable but rather it is counterproductive to speak out, specifically
in the case of Soviet emigration—or emigration from the Soviet Union
by minorities, including Jews, which dropped sharply after the United
States tried to exert pressure. Do you subscribe to that theory, particu-
larly, that speaking out is actually counterproductive?
“Secretary Vance: No, I do not share that view.
“Q. If you don’t share that view, could you say what your view is
on that specific aspect of the problem?
“Secretary Vance: My view is that at times we will feel it appro-
priate and necessary to speak out and there will be other times when
we will not.” (Ibid., pages 137–138, 140–141; brackets in the original)
In a January 31 evening report to President Jimmy Carter, Vance
summarized the major themes of the press conference:
“You may already have seen the first press reports on my press
conference this morning so I will not review in detail with you what
transpired. The questions asked were along predictable lines, although
I was struck by the degree of interest, even sharpness, on human rights
issues. Since we have announced that this administration will speak
out on selected international human rights issues, we will of course be
asked continually why we are commenting on some and not on others.
I am confident, however, that we have a credible rationale for making
public statements on human rights questions and that the country ex-
pects your administration to pay more attention to such issues in the
foreign affairs field. We have chosen Pat Derian to be the State Depart-
ment Human Rights Coordinator which will give us a well qualified
and sensitive person to follow human rights issues worldwide.”
(Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 37, State Department Eve-
ning Reports, 1–2/77)
