Covert and Overt Operations 865 and his offers of money to certain leaders among them was disruptive to the whole effort. ([less than 1 line not declassified] Comment: Oveisi believed that an apparent loss of interest in him by the Egyptians was the result of the Shah negatively influencing President Anwar Sadat.) Saber returned to Cairo with Oveisi’s message and carefully presented it to the Shah and the royal family. The Shah told Saber that he appreciated Oveisi’s explanation, would heed his words, and wished Oveisi well. Shortly after Saber left, Zahedi called an aide of Oveisi and said that the Shah and the royal family had agreed to stop supporting the various factions. Zahedi explained further that in fact only one exile leader had actually been given money, and that was General Ariana in Paris who had received U.S. dollars 100,000. 2. On 16–17 July, Oveisi travelled to Geneva to meet with Ayatollah Hojat, a religious leader from Qom, and a number of his followers. Hojat had reportedly been closely associated with Ayatollah Khomeini but recently had become disillusioned with the course of events in Iran and decided to go into exile. Hojat used a medical problem as an excuse to travel to Switzerland and now plans to base himself in London and eventually lead an anti-Khomeini publicity campaign. Hojat accepted U.S. dollars 20,000 from Oveisi to cover his living expenses in London until he is ready to begin his anti-Khomeini campaign. He also agreed to provide Oveisi with religious contacts in Iran. After the meeting, Hojat’s followers returned to Iran. During the Geneva meeting, Hojat told Oveisi that one of the major causes of his disillusionment with Khomeini was Khomeini’s policy of crushing any form of opposition to him. Hojat had once told Khomeini that while he was not opposed to selective executions, he felt that they should go unpublicized, and that widespread awareness of the killings was promoting a poor image of Iran in the world. Khomeini had responded to Hojat that world opinion meant nothing to him and that the killings would continue. Khomeini went on to explain that mercy was interpreted as weakness and that killing was necessary for the revolution to survive. Hojat also said that Khomeini was using Palestinians to eliminate opposition to him outside of Iran and was providing these members with the names of those to be eliminated and the support to carry out the missions. 3. On 22 July Oveisi and an aide departed for Cairo at the invitation of Anwar Sadat. After the completion of the Cairo visit, Oveisi intends to travel to Hamburg where he will meet with the son of Ayatollah Shariat-Madari in an attempt to gain more active support for his movement from Shariat-Madari. 4. ACQ: [date not declassified] 5. [Omitted here is dissemination information.]
