January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1145 The President asked, if the Palestinians on the West Bank and Gaza want to go together on implementation, is this President Sadat’s first choice? President Sadat said he would not advise it. There are difficulties on the West Bank: the PLO, Jordan, and the Israelis all maneuver against one another on the West Bank. He does not want to let King Hussein as an outsider upset our work. We should reach agreement, and say we will start implementing it in Gaza. Then the three of us can ask Hussein to resume his responsibilities for the West Bank as Egypt would be doing in Gaza. We could leave it for one or two years, to buy time, then the West Bank would come along. General Ali said that he last met with the Israelis a month ago, with military authorities, with Palestinian leaders. He asked whether Egypt and the Gazans should apply the SGA in Gaza first. They are ready to start. They are ready. The President said he has no evidence to contradict this view, but is less sure that the Gazans would be willing, without agreement by the PLO, Arafat, and Hussein. President Sadat said that he agrees; he does not trust any of them. But if we have a model, he will impose it. Let us get a model in Gaza (and the West Bank?)—for there is no alternative—and Egypt will apply it to Gaza; he will find local mayors to do so. The President asked if this is not acceptable to them, how will President Sadat impose it. President Sadat said that Begin should simply have given full autonomy after the Camp David Accords were signed, then said to the Palestinians, when you are ready to sit with us, you can govern yourselves. If they are ready, they can discuss all that is in Camp David. Anyway, we will win, even if they refuse. Time is on our side. The President asked whether Begin had taken the Gaza-first idea to the Cabinet. Ambassador Linowitz said Begin is worried that Gaza-first would be a precedent for the West Bank. He thinks that maybe President Sadat means by “impose” that Israel will transfer authority, and let the Gazans pick it up or not. There is a question in Begin’s mind: since there are more difficulties on the West Bank, if there is full agreement on Gaza, and some progress on the West Bank, will we move forward with Gaza-first before finishing on the West Bank? President Sadat said that he will think of it. This is a breakthrough. It is a subtle idea. Maybe we will be forced to it. He would prefer agreement about both sides, then implementing Gaza first. The West Bank is a quagmire for Hussein, the PLO, and the Israelis.
