3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
218
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
behalf of “American special services,” and asks the United States to
prevent the publication of the book. Shulman agreed to look into the
matter.
8. Shcharansky. The Secretary observed that accusations of Shchar-
ansky’s alleged contacts with the United States government had again
appeared in the Soviet press that morning, and recalled the President’s
categorical denial to Foreign Minister Gromyko that there had been
any connections between the CIA and Shcharansky. He reminded Do-
brynin of the serious effect a trial of Shcharansky would have on rela-
tions between the two countries. Dobrynin inquired whether the Presi-
dent had examined the evidence lately. The Secretary said that the
President had checked with the Director of the CIA. Dobrynin said that
the Soviet officials in charge of the judicial process say there were such
connections, and that he had the impression the trial would go for-
ward, although he did not know when it would be. He added that the
campaign against the trial by Jewish groups and others made the
matter more difficult; that resentment at high levels—including the
Central Committee—had been building up over what they saw as a
challenging demand not to touch a dissident because he was Jewish,
and that this resentment “by people who are not directly involved in
Soviet-American relations” had led to a determination not to yield to
this dictation from abroad. Dobrynin ventured the personal opinion
that the President’s statement may have delayed the trial, but now
pressure had been building up as a result of the clearly organized cam-
paign of letters from Jewish communities all over the United States,
and the matter had become a domestic issue within the government
and the party, and the investigation and preparations for the court
were still continuing.
9. UN Hijacking Resolution.6 The Secretary expressed the hope that
the Soviet Union and its colleagues would support this measure ac-
tively. Dobrynin inquired whether there had been any trouble about
this with the Soviet delegation. The Secretary said that some of the East
European countries had been dragging their feet. Dobrynin suggested
that the matter be discussed with the Soviet delegation in New York,
which the Secretary said would be done.
10. South African Issue in Security Council. The Secretary reviewed
the action anticipated later that day on the several resolutions on the
subject and indicated how the United States would vote on them. Re-
ferring to the anticipated United States vetoes, Dobrynin observed that
Ambassador Young had said he was obliged to follow instructions, to
6 U.N. Resolution 32/8 condemned hijacking and encouraged countries to
strengthen security measures in an effort to prevent hijacking. For the text of the resolu-
tion, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1977, pp. 374–375.
