798 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 involve a fine rather than jail terms. The Justice Representative noted that “It is difficult to be a martyr over money.”10 (S) 5. Congressional Letter. Dr. Brzezinski read to the group a letter which is circulating on the Hill11 as a possible message from Members of Congress to the new Iranian Majlis. It was recognized that the Congress could do whatever it wished on this issue, but all agreed that the Congressional Liaison staffs should coordinate with the Congressional leadership to insure that any letter would be consistent with U.S. policy and coordinated with our own efforts. (C) (At that point the meeting was reduced to principals and key participants.) 6. Possible Trials of Hostages. Dr. Brzezinski recalled that in an NSC meeting at Camp David last November,12 the President had authorized sending a warning or ultimatum to Iran about possible trials of the hostages. That message stated that any public trial of U.S. persons would result in interruption of Iranian commerce; any harm to any of the American hostages would result in direct retaliatory actions by the U.S.13 Subsequently, on December 7, the President had indicated as much publicly, and had used the phrase “interruption of commerce.” The private message had been drafted by Dr. Brzezinski and Secretary Vance and was transmitted to Bani-Sadr via the Swiss. That was in the final days of Bani-Sadr’s term as Foreign Minister, and we have no confirmation of what was done with the message or who in Iran may have learned of it. This past Sunday, the President had again referred to U.S. action in the event of trials.14 (S) Dr. Brzezinski said it was necessary to distinguish between a show trial which would publicly humiliate our people and a “farce” in which the Iranians claim a secret trial had been held and then expel our people. He thought we could live with the latter. Secretary Muskie said we could not know in advance what might be done. What we need is a way to justify our public posture so as not to strengthen the hand of the hardliners and militants. Many are coming to believe that 10 Carter wrote “I agree” in the right margin after this sentence. 11 Printed as Document 309. 12 See Document 51. 13 See Document 52. 14 On Sunday June 1, Carter appeared on CBS’s “Face the Nation.” In response to a reporter’s question as to whether Carter would tolerate the hostages being put on trial, Carter said: “The third week in November [1979]—I think it was the 20th—we issued a statement that still prevails, in effect, prescribing what actions our nation would reserve as options if the hostages are tried or abused in any way. Those actions would be very severe against Iran. We have not closed any option for our nation to exercise. But for me to spell it in detail what we would do, I think, would be inappropriate.” (Department of State Bulletin, July 1980, pp. 1–2) For the November 20 statement, see Document 41.
