January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1119 Given the elections here and the shaky political situation in Israel, we may very well not be able to achieve an agreement this spring on terms that will meet our larger interests or Sadat’s. Because that likelihood is so great, I believe we must carefully examine a strategy of deciding before May how the negotiations might be put into neutral or low gear through November while making fairly firm—if not precise— commitments on what we will do in early 1981 assuming the President is re-elected. Some General Propositions Even though all of us understand the larger context in which our decision on overall strategy will be made, it is worth having the larger considerations in front of us: 1. The autonomy negotiations have a wider purpose. The effort to achieve full autonomy for the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza is our response to the plea from most of the people of the Middle East to promise the Palestinians a state of their own. Since we are offering far less than that—even if we achieve the full goals of Camp David—we must achieve everything we envisioned at Camp David or we will have little hope that an agreement on autonomy will achieve our larger purposes in the Middle East. A lesser achievement will further isolate Sadat and assure that the Egyptian-Israeli peace cannot become the nucleus of a moderate coalition in the Middle East; achieving our goal is necessary to vindicate Sadat’s policies—and ours. Vindicating Camp David and the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty should be as important to Israel’s interests as to ours because—whatever might be wished—the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty and normalization of relations was never intended to stand on its own without progress for the Palestinians. 2. A larger U.S. purpose in the Middle East is to demonstrate American diplomatic power and continued Soviet inability to solve one of the area’s main problems in a just and secure way. This has been true for a long time, but the point has been underscored by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.3 It is unrealistic to think that we will be able to realize our plans for building our security position in Southwestern Asia if we cannot demonstrate our power by dealing effectively and fairly with this problem. The Soviets in the period from 1954 through 1973 sought to strengthen their position in the Arab world by demonstrating that their military and economic assistance provided the answers to the Arab-Israeli problem and to the area’s (particularly Egypt’s) economic development needs. Three wars in that period demonstrated that So- 3 See footnote 2, Document 325.
