Guatemala  693
GT–19.	
Memorandum from the Ambassador in Guatemala 
(Mallory) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, June 24, 1959.
SUBJECT
Reconsideration of Assistance to Guatemala.
At a meeting held in your office on Tuesday, June 16,2 it was 
decided that the policy of supporting President Ydígoras of Guatemala 
and his Government should be actively pursued. It was decided that 
on my return to Guatemala I should fully assure the President of the 
interest of the Government of the United States in supporting him. It 
was also decided that I should seek an appraisal of requests for loan 
assistance and an appraisal of the existing aid program to the end of 
presenting an assistance package on such terms as would appear most 
attractive. I have consulted with appropriate officers of ARA, with offi-
cials of the Development Loan Fund, the President and officers of the 
Export-Import Bank, and with officials of the International Cooperation 
Administration. Subject to your approval, the following package has 
been agreed to.
1. The DLF will complete details on the $5 million rubber loan to 
be administered through the Bank of Guatemala.3 In this connection, 
[illegible in the original] is in agreement that rubber technicians may 
be maintained on the staff of USOM/G for the purpose of providing 
technical advice and assistance to the Bank of Guatemala.
2. The Eximbank is completing consideration of the request of the 
Government of Guatemala for a loan of $5 million for industrializa-
tion projects to be made to the Bank of Guatemala. The Eximbank has 
authorized me to state to President Ydígoras that consideration of this 
loan is well advanced, that there are certain functional information, 
and request that Dr. Mirón, head of the Bank of Guatemala, come to 
Washington opportunely for this purpose.4
3. It has been agreed that an offer be made to President Ydígoras 
to re-­program the special assistance funds remaining unspent, that is, 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 61 D 473, “Guatemala.” Official 
Use Only. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 No memorandum of this conversation was found.
3 See footnote to the memorandum by King, March 25, 1959, Document GT-16.
4 Eximbank authorized a $4.84 million credit on December 4, 1959.
