Afghanistan 85 ships unnecessarily) the issue, if in fact it is raised by the Afghans, may be quickly squelched. 12. Conclusions: Taraki’s first visit abroad as the leader of a revolutionary Afghan regime could produce results which would have farreaching impact on this government’s ultimate survival and ability to deliver on many of its reforms and promises. The trip undoubtedly will be utilized to symbolize the new “special relationship” between the two countries, a relationship which has already gone well beyond the close ties developed under previous Afghan regimes. How far the Soviet leadership will go in meeting the genuine needs of Taraki and his colleagues remains to be seen, but we anticipate that Moscow will probably choose to err on the generous side, since this regime, and the type of revolution it represents, serves a number of Moscow’s ideological and security interests. Dubs 34. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, January 26, 1979 SUBJECT Covert Action Options Paper on Afghanistan 1. Forwarded herewith (Tab A) is a first cut of a covert action options paper on Afghanistan, which outlines alternative programs of varying costs and risks. 2. The Chief, Near East and South Asia Division, who has been advised of the National Security Council’s interest in Afghanistan, is 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 8 May 1978–7 Dec 1978. Secret. Attached but not printed is a covering memorandum from Inderfurth to Brzezinski and Aaron, February 1, which forwarded Carlucci’s memorandum and attachments. Inderfurth asserted that the CIA paper’s call to expose Afghanistan’s problems and its status as a Soviet pawn would be “counterproductive” because it contradicted another part of the paper that noted the negative psychological impact of Soviet influence on the region. Bringing more attention to the situation, he argued, would only exacerbate the problem. In response, Henze wrote at the bottom of Inderfurth’s memorandum: “Well you have to generate some waves to make progress.” Brzezinski wrote at the top of Carlucci’s memorandum: “Let planning proceed. ZB.”
