Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX ing, although Yugoslavia had no territorial dispute with Greece, only a desire that the Macedonian minority in Greece have the same rights as other Greek citizens. (This unexpected revelation could have been a sop to Ambassador Belovski—a Macedonian—who was beside Ljubicic or as a preface to comments later in the visit indicating concern about possible establishment of a NATO headquarters in Greece.) Ljubicic said the Italian government failed to curb the increasingly active opponents of the recent Italian-Yugoslav agreement on borders. He complained of Italian troops disposed toward Yugoslavia, of their intercepts of Yugoslav military communications, and of Italians “entering into” Yugoslav military communications. Ljubicic characterized it as a small quarrel between neighbors, but said there was no reason for Italy and Austria to do this. He said greater cooperation with Austria, Greece and Italy were sought and that the Yugoslavs were ready to offer proof that there is no reason for suspicion. He then described the dispute with West Germany over the issue of extradition of the captured terrorists. Turning to the US, he noted Yugoslav appreciation for US attitudes on Yugoslavia and the contacts and communications between President Carter and Tito. He said this diminished distrust, but some forces existed in the US which could undertake actions against Yugoslavia under some conditions. Brown reaffirmed Ljubicic’s appraisal of the Carter-Tito contacts and said Carter had sought Tito’s advice in delicate situations. He agreed on the value of cooperation in countering terrorism. He said that a recent conversation with the Italian Minister of Defense3 convinced him that the Italians wished to cooperate in countering terrorists. He expressed the belief that the Greeks had no fear of a military threat from a strong Yugoslavia. Brown reflected that some residue of distrust existed from earlier decades, but that it was decreasing and should not be important for the future. Ljubicic said that Stane Dolanc would visit Greece to clarify questions and establish normal relations. He told Brown that he appreciated Brown’s views on Italy and Greece and that he would invite the Italian and Greek defense ministers to Yugoslavia. Regarding electronic reconnaissance, he said, smiling, that the US should provide the devices to Yugoslavia so they could listen. 3 Italian Minister of Defense Attilio Ruffini traveled to Washington September 11– 12 to sign an MOU on defense procurement at the Pentagon. Ruffini met with Brown on September 11, and discussed the need for greater industrial collaboration, improvement of community relations where bases are located, and assistance for security services.
