Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II the observance of human rights in particular, or US foreign policy interests in general. One of many good examples is the break with Brazil which was the direct result of the publication of the 1976 report.12 If we make a firm decision to adopt this strategy, I believe we can make a convincing case that these kinds of public reporting requirements accomplish little and are often actively counterproductive. But this time we have to be united in what we are doing and not apologetic about appearing to “oppose human rights”. The most limiting factor in this strategy is timing. There is an obvious gain to be had from taking advantage of the UN anniversary of the Treaties, but more important is the fact that the groundwork must be laid now so that the issue can be taken up first thing in the next session. Otherwise it will get hung up behind SALT and they won’t get to it for yet another year. Committee consideration of the Treaty should take very little time (SFRC reported it out last year), and the floor debate could then be scheduled while the Committees are having extensive hearings on SALT. Recommendation: 1. That you approve a formal Dodson-Tarnoff request for NSC clearance on the draft country reports before November 30.13 2. That you give me guidance on the proposed longer term strategy. Do you like the idea? Do you want a memo presenting it for the President’s approval?14 3. It would be possible to make a strong effort on the treaties without trying to revoke the reporting requirements. Do you prefer this option?15 12 Inderfurth placed two parallel lines in the left-hand margin next to the portion of this paragraph that begins with the word “available” to the end of this sentence and added: “We should catalogue other such examples if we intend to make this fight. RI.” 13 Brzezinski placed a check mark on the approval line. Bartholomew added the following handwritten notation at the end of the memorandum: “I think this is first class and strongly support Jessica’s line!” 14 Brzezinski did not approve or disapprove either of these recommendations. 15 Brzezinski did not approve or disapprove this recommendation.
