Chapter 6, June–December 1990 813 heavy ICBMs quite yet, trying at least for an explicit Soviet commitment to deMIRVing in START II. You also said you do not like the linkage between heavy ICBMs and non-­circumvention. [Omitted here is material not related to START.] inspections of the PBV) have been studied.3 These measures, however, have been found either not to increase significantly the cost or difficulty of maintaining a feasible breakout capability, or to require redesign of existing PBVs and an intrusive exchange of design data. The breakout potential associated with downloading poses a risk of becoming a ratification issue both because of verification problems and because downloading could be perceived as a mechanism to avoid real reductions in START. In this sense, downloading would be an additional item on the following list that treaty critics might use to argue that START will not result in significant reductions in strategic nuclear weapons: — SSBN exclusions (4–5 submarines in the water, but not accountable): – up to 1000 Typhoon RVs; – up to 960 Trident D–5 RVs. — RV counting: – up to about 1900 Soviet RVs (6 breakout RVs on each SS–N– 23, 4 breakout RVs on each SS–18); – up to about 1820 U.S. RVs (4 breakout RVs on each D–5, 2 breakout RVs on each Peacekeeper). — ALCM counting: – up to about 1300 Soviet weapons (4 legal ALCMs on 210 Soviet ALCM carriers; up to 6 additional, illegal ALCMs on each Bear H; – up to 1500 U.S. weapons (10 legal ALCMs on 150 U.S. ALCM carriers. — Bomber warheads (up to 10–24 bombs and short-­range air-­to-­ surface missiles on each heavy bomber that are not counted in the 6000 aggregate. It is worth noting that there are reasons why each of the above provisions is in the U.S. interest and that downloading would be defended on a similar basis. The proposed U.S. position on downloading is designed to meet important U.S. programmatic objectives and minimize breakout by limiting the number of missile types that could be downloaded, limiting downloading to two RVs per missile, increasing the frequency of on-­site inspection of downloaded missiles, and banning downloading of heavy ICBMs. 3 The beginning of this sentence is omitted in the original.
