formerly of the Department, will go as legal adviser. If you approve of this
course, I think very soon the complete delegation should be announced by
you.
Second. I have, of course, considered carefully the suggestion you made
about Mr. Mellon, Senator Swanson and myself. I am a little afraid it would
look like overloading the delegation and make it appear to the other
countries that we were overanxious to have an agreement. We are anxious
to have an agreement and I think it is important to us that we should, if we
can get one, but we are in a rather independent position owing to the fact
that we can accept as low a basis as any other country. I will not discuss the
various questions as I wish to present to you the complete program which
we expect to finish this week. So far as I am concerned personally, I am
entirely at your disposal. If I thought it would really do any good by tending
to assure the ultimate success of the Conference, I should not hesitate to
advise you to instruct me to go. My only anxiety in this matter is for you to
get an agreement, which I believe will redound very greatly to the credit of
your Administration. Naturally the proceedings may develop at Geneva in
such a way as to render it advisable for the Secretary of State to appear later
on. If an emergency should arise in which my attendance would clear up a
sudden complication and save the conference from failure, I should say by
all means that the step would clearly be justified.
Third. The third alternative is that someone be sent with Mr. Gibson. I have
no doubt you have explored this situation thoroughly. On this I make the
following suggestions: (a) if it was deemed wise to give Admiral Jones
additional prestige, he could be made a co-delegate with Mr. Gibson. He is
a level-headed man and I think very liberal and is anxious to have an
agreement; (b) if any civilian is selected outside of the Senate, the only
recommendations I can think of are ex-Senator Underwood and Honorable
John W. Davis; (c) if Senators are selected, the natural thing would be to
send two—a Republican and a Democrat—and they would ordinarily be the
Chairman and ranking member of the Foreign Relations Committee or the
Chairman and ranking member of the Naval Committee or the Republican
and Democratic leaders in the Senate. You know this situation better than I
do so I do not think I need to discuss it.
