September 18–December 16, 1978 503 President Sadat: The last time you were really frustrated. President Carter: Yes, I was. I’ve been that way several times, but you have always helped me get over a frustrating moment. I hope that is the same situation now. President Sadat: You have already achieved 90 percent of the most dangerous problems that have almost lasted thirty years, but it is thousands of years. Believe me, you have achieved 90 percent. My assessment is that we shall reassess the situation here. I shall send you every detail, everything. President Carter: That sounds good. I think you know what the Israelis’ position is now. I am looking forward to your reassessment. I hope you will let me make a few comments to you before you send it to me. Do you have time to listen for just a moment? President Sadat: Yes, yes. President Carter: The Israelis have accepted the treaty text and all the annexes—the one that we have negotiated. We support the treaty text and annexes as well. I hope that you can do the same. This leaves the letter which we also support, by the way, and which was drafted by us. As a matter of fact your proposal2 which was made by Mr. Mubarak when he was here is a very constructive document and reasonably acceptable to everyone, to us at least, except for the police force which would create new problems. I hope that you will look at your draft of the letter and see if you can leave out the last paragraph. President Sadat: I will see to this. As I told you, Mr. President, I will be sending you everything in detail, even before I send you the reassessment. President Carter: When will I receive this from you? President Sadat: Well, I will send it next week. Our week starts on Saturday, in two days. President Carter: All right. It is very important, President Sadat, that you not get in a position with the world public opinion where we and Israel agree and you don’t, because I know that you have been very constructive. President Sadat: I know this, Mr. President. President Carter: What I hope that you can do is to accept the treaty and the annexes and also accept the letter that we have put forward. I mentioned briefly to Prime Minister Begin yesterday3 the need to move on the West Bank and Gaza election and the self-government and the fact that it may be advisable to delay the interim withdrawal until that 2 See Document 139. 3 See Document 141.
