Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
3
3.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Moscow, March 30, 1977, 11:15 a.m.–2:15 p.m.
SUBJECT
Berlin, Cyprus, Arms Control, CSCE, Bilateral Matters
PARTICIPANTS
UNITED STATES
USSR
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Deputy Chairman of the Council
Mr. Paul Warnke
of Ministers L.V. Smirnov
Assistant Secretary
Deputy Foreign Minister
Arthur Hartman
Georgiy Korniyenko
Mr. William Hyland
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. O. Sokolov
Slocombe
Mr. V.M. Sukhrodrev, Interpreter
Mr. William D. Krimer,
Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite capabilities.]
ANTI-SATELLITE CAPABILITIES
The Secretary said that in this connection2 he wanted to raise the
issue of placing limits on the anti-satellite capabilities of both sides. We
had noted that such capabilities were in the process of being devel-
oped. We firmly believed that an attempt should be made to stabilize
the strategic situation by discussing such capabilities, and were pre-
pared to enter into discussions with the Soviet Union concerning their
limitation. In the interim, he would suggest that it would be useful to
exercise restraint in testing anti-satellite systems.
Gromyko said he could not say that no problem existed in this area.
He would be prepared to examine any proposal the United States could
submit.
The Secretary thought that was good, because he believed it impor-
tant that we do this.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Anti-Satellite Capabilities.]
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 8, Vance to Moscow, March 28–30, 1977. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took place at the
Kremlin. Drafted by Krimer on April 2; reviewed by Hyland; and approved by Twaddell
on April 12. The conversation is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, So-
viet Union, Document 21.
2 Gromyko and Vance had just briefly discussed a possible international treaty
whereby states would promise not to be the first to use nuclear weapons.
