Chapter 2, January–June 1989  115
an indication of Soviet acceptance of that interpretation. The Soviets 
have rejected the broad interpretation, but have not made clear what 
interpretation they believe is reflected by the WSJS. Soviet views have 
ranged at times between an interpretation more restrictive than the nar-
row interpretation, and the narrow interpretation. Hence, U.S. initia-
tives in Defense & Space have sought to obtain an indication that the 
Soviets accept our interpretation of the WSJS before a Defense & Space 
Treaty is signed. (S)
U.S. Position: Space-­based Testing Initiative. To clarify testing per-
mitted during the non-­withdrawal period and to address stated Soviet 
concerns that U.S. testing in space could become de facto deployment, 
the U.S. stated on 28 October 1988 in an authoritative unilateral assur-
ance that:
“In order to demonstrate that the testing of space based compo-
nents capable of substituting for ABM interceptor missiles, which is 
permitted by the ABM Treaty, does not represent the deployment of 
such components, the United States is prepared to carry out such per-
mitted testing only from designated ABM test satellites. Any space 
object in earth orbit from which a component of an ABM system capa-
ble of substituting for an ABM interceptor missile is tested to counter 
a strategic ballistic missile or its elements in flight trajectory shall be 
designated as an ABM Test satellite. Further, it is the view of the United 
States that the number of U.S. designated ABM test satellites in orbit 
simultaneously shall not exceed a number well short of that associated 
with any realistic deployed capability. The United States believes the 
number 15 falls well below that threshold.” (S)
To help clarify ABM testing permitted during the non-­withdrawal 
period and to provide for greater predictability, the U.S. also proposed 
in the draft Predictability Protocol that the Parties shall provide each 
other with the following data:
1. Identification, no more than 12 hours after launch of each space 
object in earth orbit from which a component of an ABM system capable 
of substituting for an ABM interceptor missile is to be tested to counter 
a strategic ballistic missile or its elements in flight trajectory;
2. Notification within 12 hours after the re-­entry of an ABM Test 
Satellite from its orbit or after a change in orbit; and,
3. Notification of a test using such a space object in earth orbit to 
counter a strategic ballistic missile or its elements in flight trajectory no 
less than two hours prior to the conduct of any such test.
Thus, should the Soviets accept the current U.S. draft predict-
ability protocol, they would necessarily accept certain ABM testing 
in space, thereby implicitly accepting some aspects of the broad inter-
pretation. (S)
