Venezuela 1245 companies, and of the Department, should be to reduce the possibility of further harmful action by the new government, and to modify or to ameliorate the effect of the decree itself. It was recognized that Venezuela’s government would be sensitive to any action which could be interpreted as retaliation by the companies against the tax decree. It was agreed that the companies should attempt to inform influential Venezuelans of the probable economic consequences of the tax decree and should avoid public statements that might further exacerbate the issue. It was agreed that the Department would undertake to induce the Venezuelan Government to educate the Venezuelan public on the economic issues involved so as to remove the matter as far as possible from a political and emotional plane. The Department suggested that each company evaluate the effect of the decree on its own operation and on Venezuela’s competitive position in the world oil market both in the short term and as far in the future years as can be projected. Although industry is still assessing the financial impact of the new tax regime, there is little doubt of the detrimental effects of this action on investment climate, on Venezuelan oil in world markets, on Industry operations in Venezuela, and, in general, the impairment of confidence which, up to now, has caused foreign capital to invest vast sums of money in Venezuela. In summary, although the petroleum industry realized from the beginning that by converting their concessions to the Petroleum Law of 1943 the legal possibility existed that unlimited income taxes could be imposed, industry had the assurance from the outset that the Venezuelan Government’s intent was to share equally with the concessionaires the profits arising from their operations. While the Venezuelan Government has had the legal right since 1943 to rupture the 50–50 principle, it never did so. On the contrary, until December 19, 1958, the 50–50 principle was repeatedly reaffirmed by the government. The sovereign right of the Venezuelan Government to do this is not challenged; however, the wisdom of handling the matter as it did is questioned, particularly due to the adverse effect on investment climate and the ultimate detriment to the economic well-­ being of the country. Neither the Department nor American petroleum companies regard the situation created by the Venezuelan tax decree as having that finality which would preclude discussion between Venezuela and industry of the issues involving mutual interests. Protests have been registered with the Venezuelan Government stressing the lack of prior notice and opportunity to be heard both on the part of the U.S. Government and the oil industry. It is hoped that as a result, the Venezuelan Government
