996  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
to Shevardnadze, send a letter on the assurances on the SS–N–18, and 
we’d be prepared to look at what you send.
Burt: Our current approach is to ban downloading all together, but 
to give each an exemption for one missile. You would be able to down-
load on the SS–N–18 and we’d download on the Minuteman three.
Bartholomew: This is a real departure from what we have been 
talking about, but we thought maybe it could be helpful to you.
Burt: Our view was that we try to take account of your approach 
on the downloading by including the SS–N–18s, and you take a look at 
ours and this is why we try to lay it out as a compromise.
Obukhov: You know really we waited for more than a month to 
hear about Houston.
Bessmertnykh: When we discussed this in your office,4 Bartholomew 
said the bomber issue was very important to you. I told Moscow this. 
Now we’re accepting this issue. Of course there has to be a balance. At 
the end of the road there’s got to be a balance and an agreement on this 
issue, and this is a short-­cut way to solve this. Maybe you can look at it 
this way, maybe this is the way out.
Burt: We understand your point on equity. But before you begin 
talking of this kind of approach on downloading, there was pretty 
strong interest on the Soviet side that you were interested in a ban on 
downloading. I’m curious why are you are no longer interested in that. 
Having downloading in effect undercuts the meaning of the agreement 
in some respects because you can reduce the number of warheads, but 
you can go ahead and increase the number of warheads very rapidly.
Obukhov: Well, it’s more natural to permit downloading since 
downloading, after all, is not increasing warheads, it’s reducing them.
Burt: Well, why don’t we bracket this one. In any case, there is a 
helpful position on the PPCMs, the reciprocation with respect to sites 
being discussed later or maybe that could be discussed in the commis-
sion. Why not just say reciprocal risks with respect to sites.
Obukhov: Will the US side be satisfied with this approach?
Burt: Well there may be two solutions on the types question. If 
we agree on the criterion that separates the new from old, we realize 
there has to be launch weight, length, diameter—­we just don’t agree 
on throwweight. We think the Soviet Union wants to use throwweight 
because you have a new missile under development that would not cre-
ate problems with regard to the other criterion but would with regard 
to throwweight. If that’s the problem, we could exempt that missile.
4 See Document 196.
