National Security Policy 273 USSR, despite Chinese Communist pressures, would probably seek to close out the actions as quickly as feasible, and attempt to compensate for Communist military defeat by political exploitation of the US use of nuclear weapons. B. Free World Reactions 34. The predominant immediate Free World reaction to the US use of nuclear weapons against Communist China would be highly adverse, with many allies as well as the neutrals considering that the US was risking general war over what most of the world regards as unimportant parcels of real estate. Most of our allies, including those in NATO, would probably shun any responsibility for, or connection with, the US action, in an attempt to avoid involvement in hostilities devel­ oping from Quemoy and Matsu. In Asia, only a few countries, notably Nationalist China and South Korea, would be encouraged by the vigor of the US response to Chinese Communist aggression, whereas strong antagonism would be aroused generally throughout the continent by US use of nuclear weapons. 35. The adverse reaction would tend to be modified to the degree that the US action brought the hostilities to an early successful end without heavy civilian casualties. Under these conditions, some Asian countries would probably come to have greater confidence in the abil­ ity of the United States to defend them against Communist aggression. But the reaction in most countries would remain adverse. 36. Conversely, if the conflict were prolonged or were to spread, and especially if large-­scale casualties were inflicted on Chinese civilians, the adverse consequences for the US might be irreparable. Particularly in Asia. We might be forced to withdraw from our bases in Japan, and Japanese pressure for our withdrawal from Okinawa would increase. Our influence in most other Asian countries would be seriously undermined. In Western Europe fears of general nuclear war and popular pressures on governments to end the fighting would increase. V. THE CASE OF CHINESE COMMUNIST INVASION OF TAIWAN 37. Assumptions. As a result of effective Chinese Communist interdiction of the offshore islands, the GRC successfully evacuates Quemoy and Matsu, unopposed and with the assistance of the US Seventh Fleet. There follows a buildup of invasion forces and air-­ power in East China. The GRC calls on the UN to condemn such war preparations, and asks for military assistance; the US reiterates readi­ ness to aid the GRC if it is attacked. Japan announces it will never con­ sent to its bases being used for atomic warfare, while the Philippines and South Korea announce their support of the GRC. There is a
