Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX would be negligible at best. What seems far more likely is that the Yugoslavs, who have always contended that, if attacked by the Soviets, they will do all they can to drag the West into the struggle, see both the MK–46 and the Harpoon as means for keeping the Adriatic open as a highway for resupply and perhaps reenforcement from the West. While we may not much enjoy contemplating the course of conduct for ourselves that such thinking would imply, we can hardly take issue with the rationale or point of view behind it. 9. One further word on what may be going on in Yugoslav minds right now that has led to the rather startling turn in our direction. As Washington knows, Yugoslav-Soviet relations have been getting steadily worse, especially since the Afghan invasion. The Yugoslavs have been surprisingly open in their condemnation of the Soviets, and in their efforts to lead the Non-Aligned to condemn the Soviet aggression. The Soviets have reacted, as one might expect. But the reaction has been surprisingly harsh, and getting more so. While this is not the place to attempt an analysis of the reasons for the Soviet reaction, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that it is, at least in part, an attempt to cow the post-Tito leadership ab initio, in the belief that over the long haul Moscow will gain more by applying the baseball bat at a time of uncertainty and fear in Belgrade than by a display of patience and forebearance. Equally, we might assume that the GOY, from fear or a desire to show Moscow it cannot be pushed around (or both), has decided to strengthen its military cooperation with the US, knowing that the Soviets will learn of the move. If this is the case, then we have a great deal to lose—and not just in the military sphere—by actions on our part that imply to the new Yugoslav leadership that it had better accommodate while it can because the West is unprepared to offer much more than tea and sympathy.6 10. There is a term (which I have now forgotten) in the science of logic for the process of setting up false arguments so that by knocking them down you support your own case. I may have engaged in that practice in this cable. But the facts are nonetheless clear: —Tito is dying, and Yugoslavia is already moving into the post- Tito period; —Yugoslav-Soviet relations are in a worse state than at any time since Tito more-or-less patched up his quarrel with Moscow in 1955; —The GOY has turned to the US for military support on a scale not seen since the closing out of our MAP in the 1950’s. 6 On his copy, Brzezinski highlighted this sentence and wrote in the margin “this is a key p[oin]t.”
