52 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement STOCKPILING OF CIVILIAN SURVIVAL ITEMS 23. Civilian items essential to initial recovery from nuclear attack should be identified, minimum requirements determined, and indus­ trial inventories located and related to Government and State stocks. Where total availabilities appear inadequate, measures should be developed to meet minimum requirements with the least disruption of the economy, the least cost to the Government, and maximum encour­ agement of private participation. CIVIL DEFENSE 24. An essential ingredient of our domestic strength is improved and strengthened civil defense which seeks, by both preventive and ameliorative measures, to minimize damage from nuclear attack and to contribute to deterring such attack. 25. In order that Federal, State and local governments may carry out their essential responsibilities during and after nuclear attack or other grave emergency, the capability of State and local governments to function effectively should be strengthened by Federal assistance in the form of guidance, direction and resources. Such assistance should include pre-­attack planning for the use of local resources and, as pro­ vided in paragraph 11 hereof, of military forces not required in the exe­ cution of essential military missions. 26. Civil defense policy for protection of the civil population in case of nuclear attack, while continuing to include local planning for the emergency dispersal of urban populations on attack warning, incor­ porates the concept of fallout shelter in accordance with NSC 5807/1. 27. The United States should continue its present policy of sup­ porting activities which will: a. Warn the people of impending attack and make possible essen­ tial communication before, during and after attack. b. Give emphasis to the protection (including dispersal where nec­ essary) of essential civilian survival supplies, equipment and facilities. c. Provide for a continuing effort in research and development of civilian measures in radiological defense, defense against chemical and biological warfare, mass communications, medical care, survival requirements, and other survival measures. d. Provide appropriate and adequate information to the public of the nature and extent of the dangers from nuclear attack on the United States now and in the future, and of the measures being taken or which could be taken to alleviate them.
