604 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 BS told me he would see what he could do. You see we are organizing a religious service for Easter and envision the sending of a doctor from the Red Lion and Sun. . . (I personally fear that he will not have the power to do more. . . 4. Re point 5, Kaiser will tell you how to transmit it to Gh. Gh is giving a press conference now and I think that the message to BS has become, for him, doubly welcome. He is going to try again to avoid the worst, but equally it will permit him to escape from the difficult situation he finds himself in with the message to the Imam. I informed BS that a copy of the message had been transmitted directly to GH who held a press conference. 5. German 229. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated I. Cottam/Ghotbzadeh Conversation—0730 EST–March 31 Cottam found Ghotbzadeh in a good mood. He said an announcement on the transfer of the hostages would be made tonight Tehran time. The actual transfer should take place tomorrow.2 Ghotbzadeh seemed offended by our dispute with him over the validity of the “Khomeini letter”.3 II. Lang/Villalon Conversation Villalon told Lang that the hostages would be transferred not to the Foreign Ministry but to some other location where there were more suitable facilities for an extended stay. He said the “students” had proposed to the government that after the transfer they come to the 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Memoranda of Conversations. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted on March 31 by Precht. A handwritten note in the upper right hand corner reads: “Latest authoritative sitrep 9 A.M. Monday.” 2 In his memoir, Carter quotes a portion of his March 30 diary entry that reads: “About 1:45, Cy reported that Ghotbsadeh had sent word to us that Bani-Sadr will make a statement tomorrow at noon Tehran time [4:30 A.M. in Washington], saying that the Revolutionary Council with Khomeini’s approval had decided to transfer the hostages away from the students to the government on Tuesday.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 502; brackets are in the original) 3 See Document 226.
