496  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
substantial sums are believed to be held by members of the family out-
side the Dominican Republic.
2. The climate for dictators has materially worsened in recent years. 
Trujillo knows his days of power are numbered. Further, he knows that 
no member of his family has the ability to continue the dictatorship. 
Trujillo desires to retire but, like all dictators, is in a quandary as to how 
to do it.
3. Trujillo is a man of great pride and of great love of his country, 
his people and his family. Trujillo desires when he passes from the scene 
to insure the continuance for his people of their high standards and to 
assure for himself in history the role of “El Benefactor.” On the other 
hand, with his love of his family, he seems to be equally determined to 
provide for the future welfare and safety of his family and of the mem-
bers of his government. It is highly doubtful that he will voluntarily 
surrender power unless he can achieve both these goals.
4. Although Trujillo has promised to hold free municipal and 
national elections within one year and two years, respectively, there is 
a strong possibility that he may be overthrown before elections can be 
held unless he takes positive actions to convince the opposition that he 
sincerely intends to permit the establishment of constitutional, demo-
cratic government.
5. If Trujillo should abdicate or be overthrown unexpectedly, there 
is a strong possibility that bloody, chaotic conditions would prevail 
for an indefinite period unless steps are taken now for the prevention 
thereof. Possibly a radical, anti-United States, pro-Castro government 
would be established to replace Trujillo. Such a regime probably would 
kill or imprison the Trujillo family and friends, confiscate and nation-
alize all of Trujillo’s extensive commercial Dominican enterprises as 
well as foreign-owned Dominican business enterprises, without com-
pensation. Nationalization of the economy would seriously jeopardize 
any United States efforts to encourage free enterprise concepts, and 
Communistic practices might be firmly established.
6. In order to forestall bloodshed, chaotic conditions and the pos-
sible establishment of a Communistic government in the Dominican 
Republic, it would be extremely desirable, if possible, to induce Trujillo 
to retire, to establish a provisional government in such a manner as 
would insure an orderly transition to a democratic form of government 
and, finally, to provide for elections within a reasonable period after his 
retirement.
D. CONCLUSIONS:
1. I believe there is a possibility that I may be able to induce Trujillo 
to retire in a manner which would be beneficial to the United States. 
Trujillo knows better than anyone the foregoing facts. He has already
