426 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I States. This is true for Japan and for the newly industrializing nations of the region. The latter group, in particular, presents us with new challenges as they are becoming increasingly competitive with us in world markets. We must insure that this competition is conducted according to accepted international trade rules and that we have domestic policies in place to cushion any adjustment costs to our own industries and workers. It is essential to the growth and development of both Asia and the American West to keep our markets open. This is not an easy task for public officials or for the Western businesses and workers that must compete. However, there is hardly anything more important to the future of the advanced developing nations of Asia nor any greater test of our ability to keep open the world economy. There are many other subjects which I would like to discuss—our recent ANZUS consultations,8 the emergence of ASEAN for which Vice President Mondale expressed our strong support on his recent trip, and the question of relations with Vietnam, to whom we have made a reasonable offer to establish diplomatic relations and to lift the trade embargo. Unfortunately, time will not permit. Human Rights There are two humanitarian problems of deep concern—the plight of the Indochina refugees and food shortages. Refugees are still fleeing from Vietnam and the incomprehensible horrors of Cambodia; in fact, at an increasing rate lately. Many set out in rickety boats with few supplies, and estimates are that only half make it to another port. There they often languish in barely adequate conditions in makeshift camps. The Vice President and I were deeply moved by what we saw, and the Vice President reported his findings to President Carter and Secretary Vance. Our view is that the United States, with its great humanitarian tradition, cannot turn its back on this continued outflow of people. On June 14 the Administration announced its intention to receive 25,000 Indochinese refugees per year.9 We will do our part, but we call on other nations to join us in an international effort to deal with this tragic situation and to assist in alleviating the burden on the Southeast Asian and Pacific countries who temporarily accommodate Indochinese refugees. Some nations, like France, Australia, Canada have responded well; others have been less helpful. 8 For text of the final communique issued by the ANZUS Council (Australia, New Zealand, United States) on June 8, 1978, see BULLETIN of July 1978, p. 48. [Footnote in the original.] 9 See “U.S. Will Admit More ‘Boat People,’ State Dept. Says,” The Washington Post, June 16, 1978, p. A–6.
