426
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
States. This is true for Japan and for the newly industrializing nations
of the region. The latter group, in particular, presents us with new chal-
lenges as they are becoming increasingly competitive with us in world
markets. We must insure that this competition is conducted according
to accepted international trade rules and that we have domestic policies
in place to cushion any adjustment costs to our own industries and
workers. It is essential to the growth and development of both Asia and
the American West to keep our markets open.
This is not an easy task for public officials or for the Western busi-
nesses and workers that must compete. However, there is hardly any-
thing more important to the future of the advanced developing na-
tions of Asia nor any greater test of our ability to keep open the world
economy.
There are many other subjects which I would like to discuss—our
recent ANZUS consultations,8 the emergence of ASEAN for which Vice
President Mondale expressed our strong support on his recent trip, and
the question of relations with Vietnam, to whom we have made a rea-
sonable offer to establish diplomatic relations and to lift the trade em-
bargo. Unfortunately, time will not permit.
Human Rights
There are two humanitarian problems of deep concern—the plight
of the Indochina refugees and food shortages. Refugees are still fleeing
from Vietnam and the incomprehensible horrors of Cambodia; in fact,
at an increasing rate lately. Many set out in rickety boats with few sup-
plies, and estimates are that only half make it to another port. There
they often languish in barely adequate conditions in makeshift camps.
The Vice President and I were deeply moved by what we saw, and the
Vice President reported his findings to President Carter and Secretary
Vance. Our view is that the United States, with its great humanitarian
tradition, cannot turn its back on this continued outflow of people.
On June 14 the Administration announced its intention to receive
25,000 Indochinese refugees per year.9 We will do our part, but we call
on other nations to join us in an international effort to deal with this
tragic situation and to assist in alleviating the burden on the Southeast
Asian and Pacific countries who temporarily accommodate Indochi-
nese refugees. Some nations, like France, Australia, Canada have re-
sponded well; others have been less helpful.
8 For text of the final communique issued by the ANZUS Council (Australia, New
Zealand, United States) on June 8, 1978, see BULLETIN of July 1978, p. 48. [Footnote in
the original.]
9 See “U.S. Will Admit More ‘Boat People,’ State Dept. Says,” The Washington Post,
June 16, 1978, p. A–6.
