from the more than 4,000,000 men under arms in 1918 to a present regular army of about 118,000 for the more than 118,000,000 of our own population and that of our over-seas possessions. Thus, as regards land armament we have voluntarily reduced to the minimum. We have every reason to rejoice that our situation has permitted this but no justification for overlooking the different problems with which other countries are faced. We would naturally welcome any steps which other powers might take toward the limitation of land armament; we shall be glad if we can at any time exert a helpful influence in this direction. As regards naval armament this Government would welcome any practical steps which might tend toward the further limitation of competitive naval construction. In this connection it should be borne in mind that while a substantial part of the program presented to the Washington Conference by the American delegation was realized, no agreement was reached as to the limitation of competitive building of naval craft other than capital ships and aircraft carriers. This Government would welcome an agreement which would complete the work begun at Washington, particularly as there is danger that the competitive construction which formerly existed, particularly with respect to capital ships, may still be continued, in a less aggravated form it is true, with respect to cruisers and other types of naval craft not dealt with by the Washington Treaties. Our representatives at the Geneva meeting will help to the uttermost of their ability in preparing the way for agreements for the further limitation of naval armament at no distant date. Our people are practical idealists. They believe in dealing with what is visible and tangible. The dramatic success of the proposal by Mr. Hughes at the Washington Conference, based on tonnage allotments for capital ships, was due in no small measure to the fact that it dealt with real and measurable objects. Thus our representatives at Geneva will endeavor, as far as possible, to use their influence in favor of projects which may be practical in their application and realizable in their development.
