500
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
4. The sections dealing with Iran badly need to be reworked:
a. Parts actually seem to embrace the revolution.
b. The tone is (even before our hostages are out): We have always
liked you and we still do.
c. You must repeat for the American people the tough steps already
taken—cut off oil imports, frozen assets, no spare parts, Allied coopera-
tion, refusal to bend to demands.
d. The press has widely reported (front-page New York Times
yesterday) that we will cut off all trade with Iran within a few days.3
This would be an appropriate time to make the announcement so that
we follow through on your promise to continue to turn the economic
screws on Iran while our hostages are there.
5. The centerpiece of your new Southwest Asia policy is aid to
Pakistan—yet the $400 million is already being discounted and dispar-
aged by Pakistan. Perhaps we could mention a consortium of western
aid which you have organized and pledges from our Allies could be
obtained within the next few days to bolster the package. Also, I see
no reason for delay in converting the Executive agreement into a treaty.
It now appears we are unwilling to give Pakistan the full protection
she feels necessary (see front-page Washington Star today).4
6. Your dramatic decisions to bolster defense spending need to be
better emphasized. Having done it you should clearly explain the need
and let people know the boldness of your response.
7. The portions on Russia (pages 8–9 of Draft B–5, 1/17/80) seem
misguided. It appears that we are saying we are no threat to their
interests and that they face a choice they have already made. We should
try to steer them back to a cooperative position, but not indicate they
have yet to make their choice. The whole point of the Afghanistan
invasion is that it is a clear departure from their policies and that they
have opted for the wrong path.
8. I am simultaneously sending to you under separate memo my
suggested language for the economic/energy portion of the speech. I
am also sending Charlie Schultze’s suggested version, which incorpo-
rates the comments of Secretaries Duncan and Miller.5
3 See Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Plans Embargo on Iran on its Own as Allies Shun
Idea,” New York Times, January 18, 1980, p. A1.
4 The article in the Washington Star was not found, but there was a front page
Washington Post article on the subject that day. See John M. Goshko, “U.S. Forging Ahead
on Aid to Pakistan,” Washington Post, January 19, 1980, p. A9.
5 Neither Eizenstat’s nor Schultze’s memorandum was found.
