1124
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
However, we believe we should continue to underline the importance
of Tlatelolco adherence to the suppliers. Their pressing the point at all
with Argentina could help assure favorable action by Argentina later
on the treaty.
With respect to the reprocessing controls noted in your memo-
randum, as noted, we have already questioned the Canadians on this
point and hope to get a readout from them later this week. If the Cana-
dians were to include such a requirement in their proposal, we would
be in a position to pursue it with the other suppliers. However, while
we agree that this kind of control would be highly desirable, we do not
believe that it is achievable. It would in effect grant the supplier of
heavy water technology control over the reprocessing of essentially all
nuclear fuel in Argentina, including fuel from the German reactor as
well as indigenously supplied fuel in indigenously built reactors.
In the unlikely event that the Canadians were to agree to seek such
a control, the Germans could and probably would argue that their com-
mitment not to undercut the Canadians applied only to NPT-type safe-
guards and possible linkage to deferral of reprocessing, but not to this
kind of extended “contamination.” It appears even more certain that
the Swiss would not agree. Thus, the main result could well be to make
the sale of heavy water production technology by the Germans and
Swiss appear more attractive to the Argentines, thereby making us take
the blame if the Canadians lose the sale (which appears probable). Such
a result would seriously damage our relations with Canada without
any non-proliferation benefit being achieved.
Finally, all three potential suppliers may view such a suggestion as
going beyond the approaches we have been seeking thus far because of
the extended contamination noted above. They are unlikely to be im-
pressed with arguments based on our law which is, at any rate, am-
biguous on this point. To make such controls a centerpiece of our next
approaches, therefore, could well be at the cost of achieving some of the
other highly important conditions outlined in this memorandum.
With these factors in mind, we believe our next steps should con-
centrate on those elements which have a realistic chance of being
achieved not only with the Canadians but also with the Germans and
Swiss. In view of the competition for supply of this technology, sup-
plier agreement remains the key to securing additional assurances
against its misuse.
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary3
3 Bremer signed the memorandum for Tarnoff.
