National Security Policy 539 and more disinclined to react vigorously. Consequently, they now seem disposed to test Western firmness and probe for weaknesses in the hope that some key position may be abandoned without serious resistance, or that the Western alliance will split over some such issue. 6. In employing pressures against the West, the Soviet leadership doubtless intends to proceed with care. But its preoccupation with cal­ culations of power, and its evident confidence in the strength of the Communist position, may lead it to underestimate dangers. We believe that if the current attitude of the Communist leaders persists, the dan­ ger of war arising from miscalculations will be increased. 7. The USSR has directed a major effort over the last several years toward underdeveloped countries. Its trade and aid programs, propa­ ganda and cultural offensives are intended to displace Western influ­ ence, and to orient the policies of such states increasingly toward the Communist Bloc. The Soviet leaders believe that if they can associate the aspirations of underdeveloped peoples with their own cause they can increasingly constrict the political maneuverability of their main enemies, the Western Powers. We believe that the Soviet leaders will continue to regard the effort to develop Communist influence in under­ developed countries as a major facet of their policy. The USSR’s targets among the underdeveloped countries may shift considerably, in accord­ ance with changing opportunities and local setbacks. In those countries where its efforts are most successful, the USSR may increasingly be tempted to support local communists in attempts to seize power. But the Soviets would carefully weigh such gains against the harmful con­ sequences such a policy would inevitably evoke elsewhere. They will probably generally maintain the pose of peaceful cooperation. Since the claim to a “peace-­loving” policy is one of the principal elements of the Soviet appeal to the neutralist states, the desire to sustain the plausibil­ ity of this claim will impose some restraint on the hard and uncompro­ mising tone of Soviet policy toward the West. 8. The major Soviet effort to extend influence in underdeveloped areas has been made in the Middle East, where the West has important economic and strategic interests. The USSR will continue its policy of economic and military aid to Arab states, hoping to deepen the conflict of Arab nationalism with the West. The initial aim of this policy is to displace Western and increase Soviet influence, and to make Western access to the resources of the area precarious. The Soviet leaders prob­ ably also contemplate the eventual achievement of a long-sought Russian goal—­land access to the strategic areas of the Middle East. To this end, they will continue to encourage and support such movements as that for an independent pro-Soviet Kurdish state and for a pro-Com­ munist government in Iraq, and will also continue pressures against Iran and Turkey.
