Chapter 6, June–December 1990  893
165.	 National Security Directive 501
Washington, October 12, 1990
MEMORANDUM FOR
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Assistant to The President for National Security Affairs
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
SUBJECT
Decisions on START and CFE Issues (U)
I remain committed to achieving START and CFE agreements that 
enhance U.S. national security and strengthen international stability. 
Consistent with that objective, completion of both treaties during the 
remainder of 1990 remains an important goal. I have made the follow-
ing decisions to achieve these two objectives. (C)
START
1. Backfire. The United States has reached an agreement in prin-
ciple with the Soviet Union on a politically binding commitment not 
to give Backfire the capability to operate at intercontinental ranges, 
through in-­flight refueling or in any other manner. On that basis, the 
United States can accept Soviet agreement to limit the total number of 
air force and naval Backfires to no more than 500–525 aircraft. (S)
2. Missile and Re-Entry Vehicle Elimination. The United States 
should continue to oppose any requirements that missiles and/or re-­
entry vehicles be eliminated as a consequence of reductions mandated 
by the START Treaty, except for reductions required to meet agreed 
numerical limits on non-­deployed ICBMs for mobile launchers. (S)
3. Non-Circumvention. The United States will refuse to accept 
any limitation in START on the existing pattern of cooperation with the 
United Kingdom to help maintain and modernize the British indepen-
dent nuclear deterrent. In that context, and in close consultation with 
our British ally, the United States may provide assurances to the Soviet 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, H-Files, NSD Files, OA/ID 90004–026, NSD–50—October 12, 1990—Decisions 
on START and CFE Issues. Secret.
