Afghanistan
137
concerned, except that the scope of the operation would be somewhat
enlarged, and with it, the visibility. The distinction between non-lethal
and lethal would be believed by nobody, even if it were closely main-
tained; hence it would not significantly reduce Pakistan-US propa-
ganda vulnerability below that which would otherwise exist.
5. Unconventional Warfare Support—On-Site Survey. In view of the
unsatisfactory state of present US knowledge of the nature, extent of
and potential for support of the Afghan insurgency from Pakistani soil,
this option is one which should logically precede all the others. If the
Soviets became aware of such a survey, they might interpret it as a
possible harbinger of a more active US role both in the Afghan insur-
gency effort and in providing security backing for Pakistan against
Soviet pressure. If the USSR drew this conclusion it would be likely
to become more active diplomatically. The Soviets would seek to alarm
the Indians about an imminent strengthening of the US security rela-
tionship with Pakistan. They would present more demarches to the
Pakistanis about the dangers Islamabad was bringing on itself by tying
itself to an unreliable and ephemeral US relationship. Beyond this,
however, the Soviets would probably wait upon events before taking
more vigorous action.
6. and 7: Unconventional Warfare Support—Phases I and II. At some
point in the sequence between phases I and II, the Soviets would be
likely to begin to incite unrest among Pakistan’s Baluchis, if they had
not already done so. The Soviets in this phase would also become more
likely to make a direct demarche to the US, warning Washington against
expanding interference in fraternal Afghanistan. The USSR might now
add demarches to leaders they might think susceptible in Western
Europe, arguing that the US was once again venturing on the same
adventuristic line of policy that proved so disastrous in Vietnam, that
the US was endangering the stability of detente not only between US
and USSR but also for West Europeans, that the USSR had demon-
strated its responsibility and restraint during the Sino-Vietnamese war,
in contrast to US incitement of that war, but that the USSR could not
be expected to stand idly by and see a socialist neighboring state
undermined and “destabilized” as in distant Chile by the perfidious
CIA. In talking to the Iranians, the Soviets would seek to counter anti-
Kabul sentiments in Tehran by playing upon Iranian paranoia about
US imperialism left over from the Shah relationship, and by intensifying
any efforts which may be already under way to persuade Khomeini
that US covert action is responsible for some of Iran’s present troubles
with its own minorities. Finally, the USSR would seek to alarm the
Indians about an imminent strengthening of the US security relation-
ship with Pakistan, and would inter alia suggest that the US was about
to adopt a more permissive attitude toward Pakistan’s acquisition of
a nuclear capability.
