390
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
that this would be 90 percent effective and would avoid the confronta-
tional aspects of attempting to extend the reach of our domestic regula-
tions. (C)
Secretary Miller noted that the sanctions are showing results in at
least some cases. He cited a request from the National Iranian Gas
Company which is “desperate” to purchase $3.5 million in equipment
which is necessary to keep a $1.7 billion project going. We are, of course,
not going to agree, but Treasury is asking for additional information
to try to identify the project and the precise type of equipment which
is needed.4 (C)
2. Economic Warfare. Mr. Aaron noted that Henry Owen is heading
a small group to do an analysis of how we are equipped to conduct
economic warfare. We need more coordination in this area. The group
will be in touch with the various agencies, with the objective of having
some results which can be presented to the President within the
week. (S)
Secretary Bergland agreed that it would be useful to call in the
major U.S. grain traders and warn them about cooperating in trading
activities in third countries which would circumvent our policy. He
said that this would only be effective if he could threaten to publicize
any untoward activity on their part. The SCC agreed that publicizing
such activity would be entirely consistent with our policy and he should
not hesitate to so inform the grain traders.5 (S)
3. Congressional Strategy. With Congress coming back next week,
the public attention to our actions on Iran and Afghanistan will increase
sharply. Mr. Aaron asked that State complete the work on the aid
package for Pakistan and have it ready to go at the first of the week.
By the end of this week, we should begin a systematic briefing of
returning members of congress and key staff aides.6 State and NSC
will work closely together on this. (C)
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
6. Public Posture. The working group which met yesterday under
Jerry Schecter to examine possible themes to use in our public positions
has tasked several areas of research. CIA is preparing a paper on the
background and identities of some of the student kidnappers which
can be used publicly. State and CIA are also doing a paper on the
vulnerability and isolation of Iran and their deteriorating economic
situation in the face of economic sanctions. CIA is doing a paper which
4 Carter wrote in the right margin beside this paragraph: “Block other sources
if possible.”
5 Carter wrote “do so” in the right margin beside the last sentence of this paragraph.
6 Carter wrote “good” in the right margin.
