January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1179
The President said that this is a broad charge.
Prime Minister Begin said that means during the transitional pe-
riod. That is the time to start it, when the Self-Governing Authority is
established and inaugurated. First, elections will be held. Second, there
will be the withdrawal of the military government. Third, then the Con-
tinuing Committee will be set up “during the transitional period.” It
could be after four years, but that would be a distortion. It should be in
the next few months. The question should be: what do we do about the
Continuing Committee now?
Ambassador Linowitz said that we want agreement on what will be
submitted for approval (of the Palestinians). Therefore, it can be set up
after inauguration of the Self-Governing Authority. Is this agreed?
Prime Minister Begin said certainly: it is written. He says this in the
President’s presence. Israel will not deviate from the Camp David Ac-
cords—they feel, however that it (the Continuing Committee) should
be at the proper time.
Ambassador Linowitz said that the agreement among the parties
calls for a Self-Governing Authority. It must be approved by the Pales-
tinian people. Through the agreement—therefore as part of it—once
the Self-Governing Authority is in being, there shall be a Continuing
Committee, and to it will be referred water, economic relations, maybe
land, for unanimous agreement.
Prime Minister Begin said that this is in “other matters.” It is agreed.
(There was then discussion among the Israeli delegation). We agree.
But we will not do it today (i.e. start the Continuing Committee). When
it is agreed.
Minister Burg clarified: when the Self-Governing Authority starts
functioning.
There are two things to try to keep up the momentum. First, here
there was a misunderstanding of the Continuing Committee’s func-
tions. It has been solved. Israel will abide by the agreement. Second is
the question when it should start working; that is only after the Self-
Governing Authority is set up.
The President said but we should delineate what it will do, and de-
cide that now.
Prime Minister Begin said it may. We should have wide discussions.
Minister Burg said we can get our people—maybe 3 or 4 of them—
today to work it out.
Prime Minister Begin said that his third point is that “Israeli citizens,
inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district will be under the ju-
risdiction of Israel.” It is clear that autonomy is for the Arabs.
The President asked if this included the settlements?
