Arms Control and Disarmament  1665
pressure and the initiative with a flow of new ideas and provision of a 
large fraction of the funds.
The President repeated that as to the principle, he was in accord. 
He felt he could do something to help if the project is shaped up in 
a concrete way. Dr. Rabi pointed out that other nations participating 
should pay for part of the operation. This would add to their self-­
respect. Dr. Piore said that a radio-­astronomy laboratory just now com­
ing into operation might be a very useful place to apply this. The South 
Americans, for example, have no facilities in this field. The President 
said he simply asked that the group work up a concrete plan.
He then spoke on what he termed the basic truth to which he 
always comes back. He said we have got to find an answer to cooper­
ating closely with other countries, “or else.” He did not think we could 
carry forward the heavy burdens for armaments that we are now sup­
porting. Inevitably we would have to go to controls throughout our 
society, or at the least to bureaucratic domination. He thought that all 
of the suggestions made indicated promising ways for progress, and 
challenged the scientists to show ways to go forward beyond what our 
military and political leaders are able to conceive. The crux, however, 
is to organize these efforts. He said he does not believe that the Soviets 
want war, but pointed out that Khrushchev is quite ready to engage in 
military bluffs to advance Soviet foreign policy. Dr. Rabi pointed out 
that he thinks neither country is seriously thinking about going to war, 
commenting on rows of apartments being built that he saw in Russia.
The President said he is ready to do anything he could to join in 
such an activity. Dr. Wiesner referred to the great lack of public under­
standing of the issues. The public, he said, thinks of test suspension as 
being dangerous to our well-­being (which he considers to be an incor­
rect judgment). The President picked up this point, saying that his great­
est obsession is just this problem. He thinks the most important thing 
for people today is to get the American people to understand the basic 
factors of international and domestic issues. Such an understanding is 
the indispensable firm base from which governmental action can be 
undertaken. This is a terribly difficult task, however—not to be accom­
plished simply by saying it needs to be done. He mentioned many of 
the efforts that he makes to form and lead public opinion.
As the group dispersed, the President asked how the proposal for 
the linear accelerator is progressing. Dr. Killian said the paper work is 
in good shape and AEC is at the point of putting the proposal to the 
Congress.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
