758  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
169.	 Letter From Smith (S/P) to Herter1
Washington, July 1, 1959
Dear Mr. Secretary:
Before your meeting with the President tomorrow on military pol­
icy, I hope that you will have a chance to read this letter.
I thought yesterday’s meeting with Secretary McElroy and Admiral 
Radford was discouraging. At Geneva, Secretary McElroy seemed sym­
pathetic to the foreign policy considerations that you urged on him. 
However, Admiral Radford’s views seem to have changed Secretary 
McElroy’s mind.
Nothing that I heard at yesterday’s meeting led me to doubt the 
validity of the position that present American military posture and 
doctrine do not meet the imperative requirements of US foreign pol­
icy. It seemed clear to me from the discussion that we do not have a 
significant limited war capability unless it is assumed that we will 
automatically use nuclear weapons in almost any kind of military sit­
uation. As Admiral Radford made clear, the prospect is for rapidly 
increasing dependence on nuclear weapons. This means that any lim­
ited engagement will likely result in total war. I think you put your 
finger on a striking fact in pointing out yesterday the anomaly of our 
planning for the use of weapons having a yield of over l megaton for 
tactical purposes.
Not only is the present military posture incompatible with 
American foreign policy requirements, but it is also deemed to be 
wrong by a majority of the Joint Chiefs of Staff—by those Services 
which would have to bear the brunt of fighting limited wars. This is 
not a new conclusion of the Army, the Navy, and the Marines. They 
argued strongly against the present military doctrine in the NSC last 
year. Our present military doctrine is also considered to be wrong by 
the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission.
Every officer in the State Department concerned with this problem 
has been briefed on the proposed State Department position and has 
endorsed it.
1 Source: Bureau comments on NSC 5906 and use of nuclear weapons in limited 
war. Top Secret. 6 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548, Military and Naval Policy.
