564 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV • Meet with the JCS perhaps once a year away from the White House to discuss their view of the state of the world. Invite the JCS to important state dinners, and dine with the JCS, the CINCs and their wives once each year. Meet the JCS and their Operations Deputies in the Pentagon nerve center (the “Tank”) perhaps once a year, focusing on readiness and leadership instead of programs and management—­ which absorb the bulk of the JCS/Presidential discussions. Announce and publicize each meeting with the JCS—­wherever held and on whatever subject. •Host a Q and A session with the senior enlisted members of the Services (each Service has one member so designated) to hear the views of the people at the bottom of the pyramid. • Improve liaison between the President and the Services/JCS in administrative, morale and welfare matters, by appointing a senior military office to serve as Deputy Military Assistant to the President. (in Marty Beaman’s office). • Attend Service Academy football games and one of their commencement exercises each year. • Establish a Presidential-­level program to reward military achievement or excellence, akin to the Medal of Freedom program. 121. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, April 10, 1979 SUBJECT Ground Mobile M-X (U) Harold has responded (Tab A) to your questions of last week regarding the study of ground mobile basing systems for an M–X missile.2 In reading the memo you might note the following points: First, the road mobile system that the study team seems to favor carries an “M–X” missile that is about the size of the Minuteman III missile. While its more energetic fuel allows it to throw more RVs over 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 5, Defense Department: 3–4/79. Secret. Sent for information. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum. 2 See Document 117.
