Arms Control and Disarmament 1485 397. Memorandum of Conversation Between John Foster Dulles and Gray1 Washington, November 26, 1958 On 26 November, I met with Secretary Dulles. For the first portion of the meeting Mr. Philip J. Farley was in attendance. The first subject for discussion was Senator Gore’s memorandum to the President which I had circulated to the Secretary of State and others under date of 26 November. I suggested to the Secretary of State that, with his approval, we might make use of the interdepartmental machinery, which had previously been set up by Mr. Farley, to deal with problems arising out of the Geneva Conferences. I indicated that I had earlier received Mr. Farley’s agreement to such a procedure. The Secretary felt that this was altogether appropriate. He said, however, that inasmuch as the Gore proposal was something timed for an impending breakup of the conference, he felt that there was no great rush because he believed that the conference would not break up very soon. He indicated, however, that a more pressing problem which the interdepartmental machinery should address itself to was the question of a link with other disarmament measures. He indicated that the Brit­ ish were eager to destroy this link for their own domestic political pur­ poses and that we might have a very difficult time holding them with us. I agreed that this matter should have top priority but that the Gore memorandum should be considered as an auxiliary problem. The Sec­ retary instructed Mr. Farley to proceed. I had pointed out to Mr. Dulles that Mr. McCone was out of town until December 1 and that Mr. McElroy and Mr. Quarles were imme­ diately unavailable because of Defense budget problems. Mr. Dulles then pointed out to me that he would be absent from Washington from Sunday, November 30th until Friday, December 5th. At this point Mr. Farley departed the meeting. I then discussed with Secretary Dulles my concern of not having been involved in the decisions reached at his house on Sunday, Novem­ ber 16. The Secretary assured me that this was an oversight and apolo­ gized, saying that he felt that it was more of an operating decision, but agreed with me that high policy had indeed been involved. He then 1 Source: Use of interdepartmental machinery to deal with issues arising from nuclear test suspension conference. Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up. Drafted December 5.
