572 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement has never created international conflict or danger war. Quite to con­ trary has greatly benefited stability Far East and has contributed to world peace and security. 6. Wang said in line with consistent stand, PRC willing strive for peaceful settlement disputes when circumstances permit. This includes such domestic matters as Chiang clique. However, this being matter of Chinese domestic affairs must not be made subject these talks. 7. Wang said present situation in Taiwan area is that U.S. side has initiated use of force and is threatening use force in interfering with liberation Taiwan and coastal islands. Is this situation which creates danger to peace? I had chosen skip over this fact, however it cannot be evaded. 8. Wang said each day U.S. armed forces remain in Taiwan area is a day of threat to PRC. According to UN Charter, PRC entitled demand U.S. side remove its forces from Taiwan area in order preserve its terri­ torial integrity. In interest of relaxing tensions, China proposed as it did at Bandung conference that China and U.S. enter into negotiations to ease and eliminate tension Taiwan area. 9. Wang said party which now using force and threat force is none other than U.S. side. However China is not afraid of American force and threats. China not afraid of proposing enter into negotiations precisely because it determined not to yield to American force and threats. I had indicated that U.S. unwilling enter into negotiations under threat Chinese might use force at any time. Fact is contrary. It is Chinese side being threatened and U.S. side which already initiated use force. 10. Wang said nonetheless, China still desires settle disputes including dispute in Taiwan area through peaceful negotiations. Such negotiations aimed at removing force and threat of force which U.S. already applying against China. PRC side has consistently advocated negotiations, however I must not think PRC side thereby recognizing status quo of U.S. seizure Taiwan and interference PRC internal affairs, which is last thing PRC side will ever do. 11. Wang said new draft envisages two steps. Expresses determi­ nation to settle disputes through peaceful means without threat or use force. U.S. side has also indicated it would subscribe this principle. PRC side has taken account of view of U.S. side and draft adds Ambassadors should continue these talks to seek practical means for realization this desire. 12. Wang said PRC side considers that relaxation tension in ­Taiwan area is too serious to be lightly disposed of in Ambassadorial talks. Settlement these questions should be left to conference Foreign Ministers China and U.S. In presenting latest draft PRC side preserved its proposal for conference between Foreign Ministers China and U.S.
