360  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
8. Wang said with respect to question renunciation of force, we 
should distinguish between civil war (internal conflicts) and interna­
tional disputes. Civil conflicts clearly would fall outside terms of ref­
erence these talks. But even with respect to civil conflicts China had 
striven for peaceful solutions when circumstances permitted. Fact was 
that Chiang clique under wings of foreign forces had refused peaceful 
settlement and carried on harassing activities. Wang’s side could not 
stand by and do nothing.
9. He said that with respect to international disputes, they had 
always upheld their settlement by negotiation. China in association 
with other countries had initiated the Five Principles of Peaceful 
­Coexistence. They had consistently supported the provisions of Charter 
of United Nations concerning settlement of disputes by peaceful means 
and calling for no recourse to force. During Asian African conference in 
Bandung China had explicitly stated its position this regard and joined 
with others in issuing statements. With respect Sino-­American relations 
Chou En-­lai had repeatedly and explicitly stated that there was no war 
between China and United States, that Chinese people did not want to 
fight with America, and we should sit down and negotiate. Secretary 
of State Dulles had also said that no fighting going on in Taiwan area 
between Chinese and Americans. Therefore, there was no question of 
arranging cease-­fire between China and America.
10. He said if we were to discuss renunciation of force that it was pre­
cisely US which was using force to achieve national objectives. Taiwan 
was Chinese territory. It was restored to China after World War II. And 
yet US had encroached upon it, and occupied it and would use force to 
prevent liberation of Taiwan and islands off coast China. If we discussed 
question then we would have to discuss withdrawal all US forces from 
Taiwan and islands. They had recognized that it would be very difficult 
to settle this question in these talks so they did not raise it. However, if 
we wished to discuss it here and I had full authority to discuss and settle 
this problem he was ready to discuss it with me.
11. He concluded saying that in previous meeting I had said I had 
faith and hope that two of us would make progress on practical matters 
and would strive to do so. He warmly welcomed this statement and 
assured me he would strive to best his ability realize that hope. Mean­
while, he wanted point out in all frankness that if we were to realize 
hope of both of us we would have to strive harder than before, and both 
should prove desire we had expressed by our actual deeds.
12. In reply I said he had made a long statement and I wanted to 
carefully study and consider it. But first I wanted to deal with question 
of implementation agreed announcement. He had expressed desire not 
to spend too much time on details and I certainly agree as I had told him 
at last meeting. Furthermore, I did not see why it should be necessary
