National Security Policy  411
The group then presented a letter for the President’s approval 
entitled “Instructions for the Expenditure for Nuclear Weapons in 
Accordance with the Presidential Authorization dated May 22, 1957.” 
Mr. Gray brought the President up to date on this subject by remind­
ing him that the matter had been discussed this last September in 
Newport, at which time Mr. Gray had presented a version of these 
instructions agreed between Department of State and Department 
of Defense. At that time the President had raised certain questions. 
Mr. Gray stated that the language had been agreed but had at that 
time been too broad in that it allowed [text not declassified] attack any 
element of Sino-Soviet forces, without restriction. He pointed out the 
revised language in this letter states with relation to retaliatory mis­
sions: [text not declassified].
In regard to this language, the President questioned the status of 
China pointing out that only the Soviet Union has been mentioned.
(At this time word was received that the ATLAS satellite was trans­
mitting the President’s voice over the radio.)
Mr. Quarles, in answer to the President’s question, stated that this 
limitation does not preclude an attack on China.
The President then asked whether these instructions were confined 
to a situation in which the enemy used nuclear weapons. Mr.  Gray 
responded to this by pointing out that they apply to any attack, nuclear 
or non-­nuclear, which threatens to destroy U.S. forces overseas. He 
pointed out, however, that it requires a clear situation [text not declassi­
fied]. Mr. Quarles affirmed this statement adding that pursuit into any 
territory as necessary is permitted except into the USSR, unless [text not 
declassified] there has been an attack on the U.S.—­in which case pursuit 
into the USSR is authorized.
The President expressed his concern by citing the example in which 
an enemy submarine shoots two torpedoes into a carrier. In this case, 
does the commander suddenly decide that he must destroy targets on 
land in order to assure the safety of the rest of the force? In other words, 
he points out there is an infinite variety of conditions possible. To this 
Mr. Quarles answered that this letter sets forth principles only and that 
each commander will receive separate instructions, each set to be spe­
cifically approved by the President.
The President continued to stress the point of degree of retaliation. 
He cited the case of China. There he felt that we might hit bases which 
threaten U.S. forces and would not go so far as to hit Chungking with 
big weapons. Mr. Gray said that retaliation would be only sufficient to 
eliminate the local threat of Sino-Soviet Bloc forces.
The President continued to express doubt on the degree of 
response, citing the USS PANAY incident of 1937 as a case of attack on 
a portion of a U.S. force. This type of incident is exactly what he does
