Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
569
as a result of the Shah’s return to the States. On balance, in terms of
our national interest, it is preferable to have the operation performed
in the United States rather than Egypt.
Summary: The Shah has a terminal illness and is a dying man. Dr.
Norman Rich, who accompanied us and who has worked with Dr.
DeBakey and is an expert in this area, estimates that he has no more
than one or two years to live. If you decide to allow the Shah to return
to the United States for the operation on humanitarian grounds, I think
it is important that he understand clearly the ramifications of his return
to the States and accept some personal responsibility for a decision to
return. Although we are not saying that this would work, we believe
that if the Shah was confronted with the stark realities of the situation
and the ramifications of each of the options, he might decide to ask
Dr. DeBakey to perform the surgery in Panama.
We would suggest an approach to the Shah that is frank and
acknowledge our willingness to receive him in the United States. We
would use talking points along the following lines:
—The President understands that surgery may be necessary and
is concerned that the surgery be conducted under conditions that are
satisfactory both to yourself and to your doctors.
—If your doctors analyze the need for surgery to be both critical
and pressing, we are willing to have you return to the United States
for surgery. We are sure that you would want to know and understand
our frank analysis of possible consequences of your return.
—We understand that another option is for surgery in Egypt. We
believe that if the surgery were performed in Egypt it would have a
very detrimental impact on Sadat’s internal position, which is already
precarious, and will increase his isolation in the Islamic world. The
President would strongly prefer that, if you are convinced the surgery
cannot be performed in Panama, it should be done in the United States
rather than Egypt. The President is confident that you share this per-
sonal concern for President Sadat and wanted you to have the benefit
of our own analysis.
—You should realize that the President of the United States
believes, at a minimum, that it would prolong the detention of the
American hostages in Iran and increase the chances of some immediate
harm coming to them.
—We understand that Dr. DeBakey will perform the surgery wher-
ever you decide.
—We realize the conditions in Panama are not as good as they
might be elsewhere. We know that this is a difficult decision for you
to make. You and your family are justifiably concerned about the
chances of the success of the operation. You are faced with a very hard
