National Security Policy 195 The Situation Now The United States has had, for quite a few years, the assured nuclear retaliatory capability to destroy Russia. Russia probably is convinced she will be destroyed if she attacks the United States in general war. Russia on the other hand probably also is convinced she cannot destroy U.S. retaliatory power, in a surprise attack, or by any other means. The United States does not find itself in a wholly satisfactory inter­ national position at the present time. American prestige is not as great as it has been in the past, our influence throughout the world is lessen­ ing somewhat, our military and economic power does not command the respect and admiration it once did. The Soviets and the other Communist States have lived under the shadow of powerful United States nuclear retaliatory forces for a decade—­and have become accustomed to their existence, and yet—­the Communists have taken actions to expand their control over more ter­ ritory and more people of the world without let up. Egypt and Syria are coming more and more under communist domination. Nasser is in Russia being advised that the sure way of fill­ ing his empty coffers is to seize all Middle East oil properties, a view he may find attractive if he can figure how to do it—­and the Soviets will assist in the machinations to accomplish this end. Indonesia is in a turmoil and the probability of this rich undevel­ oped country coming under communist control is greater than it was a year ago. Should Indonesia go communist, Thailand, Laos and other Asian countries may follow suit to accommodate themselves to what they may consider the winning side. Russia has made technical advances as well. The USSR has devel­ oped the capability to wreak severe damage on the United States with nuclear weapons. She has a large number of submarines. She has devel­ oped some ICBM capability. She was the first to put a satellite in orbit. The world was surprised at the technological advances made by Russia, and probably credits the USSR with capabilities greater than actually exist. It is just recently that the world has come to place significance on the USSR ability to severely damage the United States with several weapons systems regardless of the efforts we may make on our conti­ nental defense. People are now commencing to question our policies, or perhaps only our relative superiority to the USSR, probably due to many fac­ tors, but certainly including the continuing expansion of communism,
