National Security Policy  389
Defense was awaiting a next move from someone else, probably the 
President himself.
The President then said that he felt there had been some prog­
ress and that he was hopeful that Mr. McElroy was finding it possi­
ble to make an adjustment in the Defense figures which would meet 
the ­budget problem. He based this optimism on a report of a meet­
ing between Mr. Anderson and Mr. McElroy on Sunday. I indicated 
to the President that I believed his optimism misplaced and that as of 
the morning of December 8, Mr. McElroy was not prepared to make 
any meaningful adjustment. I told the President that Mr. McElroy was 
meeting again with Secretary Anderson at 11 o’clock on the morning of 
the 8th.
The President then asked me how I felt the Defense Department 
interpreted the Presidential statement in the NSC on December 6. I 
told him that Defense felt that the budget had gone through the nor­
mal budgetary process; that they had presented it to the President; 
and that it should be printed as presented. I told him on the other 
hand that I felt the Budget interpretation was that the whole budget 
was subject still to challenge specifically including the programs pre­
sented in the meeting.
The President then said that what he had meant by budgetary pro­
cess was an examination of non-­program areas, such as administrative 
costs, housing, construction, inventories, logistic support, etc., and that 
there had been no discussion in his presence of these matters.
I then pointed out to the President that time was an important 
factor inasmuch as Mr. McElroy was departing early on the morning 
of the 9th for the NATO Ministerial Meeting and that Mr. Stans was 
insisting that the budget had to go to print before Mr. McElroy’s return. 
The President then expressed his irritation of the frequent absence of 
Cabinet Ministers.
The President then said that if he were in charge he felt that 
he could take $5 billion out of the Defense budget but that Defense 
seemed not to be yielding at all. I observed to the President that if he 
were talking large amounts of money there couldn’t be any significant 
reduction by further squeezing and that the only way to accomplish it 
was by the elimination of programs. He said he fully understood this. 
He said that if Defense, after all of the meetings and conversations on 
the subject, still maintained that the programs presented in the NSC 
meeting were essential to the national security, he had little choice but 
to approve them.
I repeated to the President that I felt that clarification was needed 
as to the result of the December 6 meeting.
