3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
909
registration question is concerned. We hope that it will be possible to
reach a solution satisfactory to all of the parties. We continue to feel and
state that the Poles should be allowed to work out their problems
without outside interference. End text.
6. Re reftel we agree with your analysis and have been in close
touch with the British, French and Germans concerning approaches to
the Soviets and other contingencies.
Muskie
308.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, November 3, 1980, 1524Z
17440. Subject: Protest to MFA on Poland. Ref: State 291234.2
1. (S-entire text)
2. The Soviet response to my demarche on Poland (reftel) was es-
sentially to reject that we have any right to raise the subject of Poland.
Deputy Minister Kovalev received me November 3 in place of Korni-
yenko who is said to be ill. After I had made the instructed points in
reftel, Kovalev, who seemed nervous throughout the meeting, made an
initial weak attempt to assert that Soviet radio was doubtless simply re-
peating something which had been said to Western or even American
media about US interference in Polish internal affairs. Then in consulta-
tions with his notetaker, Sokolov from the USA division, Kovalev hit
upon the argument that the statement made by the Department
spokesman contained a “sign” of interference because it tried to drive a
wedge between the people of Poland and their government. This could
be the basis for the Soviet radio broadcast.
3. Warming to this sophistry, Kovalev went on to say that the refer-
ence I had made to concern for Soviet intentions in Poland was irrele-
vant and had no connection with US-Soviet or Soviet-Polish relations.
He implied that I was out of order raising Poland and he noted that he
was replying to the strong terms of my reference with strong terms of
his own.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 84, USSR: 11/80–1/81. Secret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis.
2 See Document 307.
