International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 639 IX. Communique I attach a draft communique circulated by the Japanese after the last meeting of the Preparatory Group. It is not agreed, and I want to make it more specific. But since other heads of government may have seen it, you may wish to glance at it. (Tab A)11 (C) X. Other Briefing Materials Summit issues are described more fully in Book I; luncheon discussion issues are treated in Book II. This memo covers the ground sufficiently so that I believe you need only review these other briefing materials for background reading, as time permits. (U) 11 Attached but not printed is the June 18 “Draft Communique´ for Tokyo Summit.” 222. Minutes of the Tokyo Economic Summit Meeting1 Tokyo, June 28, 1979 Tokyo Summit First Session2 OHIRA: Now that the press has left let’s get to business. I extend greetings to all of you. I know many of you have come from afar. I am happy to welcome the new members of our group—Mrs. Thatcher and Prime Minister Clark. I am also a new member, and I hope I am welcome too. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects, Henry Owen, Box 31, Summit: Tokyo: 6/28–30/79. Secret; Nodis. Attached but not printed are a cover page and a list of participants. According to the list, the following people participated in the Summit: Clark, MacDonald, and Crosbie; Giscard, Franc¸ois- Poncet, Monory, Giraud; Schmidt, Genscher, Matthoefer, and Lambsdorff; Andreotti, Forlani, and Pandolifi; Ohira, Sonoda, Kaneko, and Esaki; Thatcher, Lord Carrington, and Howe; Carter, Vance, Blumenthal, and Schlesinger; and Jenkins. The list notes that Hormats drafted the minutes. The list of participants and the sections of the minutes of all four sessions concerning energy are printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980, Document 221. Carter’s handwritten notes on the Summit are in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 4, Summit Meetings, 7/78–6/80. 2 The first session of the Summit took place in the Conference Room at the Akasaka Palace and lasted from 9:40 a.m. until 12:18 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
