1956  713
peacefully oppose views my govt. All I have asked, and continue to 
ask, is that he accord same respect my views, and two of us assure 
world of determination our govts that mutual opposition our policies 
will not lead to war. I do not see how any proposition could be more 
simple or universally accepted as just, reasonable and in accord with 
accepted standards international conduct. Can we not again approach 
this matter from this standpoint?
28. Wang said I had just given a general outline and review of our 
talks from the start last August up to present. He would like point out 
he found himself unable accept some of my standpoints in relation past 
events and in relation problems encountered in our talks.
29. Wang said in particular they could not accept unfounded and 
unreasonable charges against his govt regarding its implementation of 
agreed announcement.
30. Wang said he would set aside for time being until later fuller 
discussion of return of civilians and other such matters referring to item 
one of agenda.
31. Wang said, in first place he would make some comments on my 
statements concerning our discussion second agenda item, that is, on 
matter of issuing statement renouncing use force. There are two points 
in approach this problem which must be set clear between two sides.
32. Wang said first point is in connection objective in making such 
declaration between us. Second point is what exactly is nature of differ­
ence between our two sides. If we could set these two essential points 
in proper light, then remaining matters in connection with them could 
be easily settled.
33. Wang said, now concerning first point: it been their consistent 
view and stand that any such declaration or statement should be aimed 
at relaxing existing tension between two sides in Taiwan area, and that 
any such statement or declaration must provide effective and peace­
ful measures by which disputes between China and US could be con­
cretely settled.
34. Wang said, hence it been their constant effort and attempt to 
incorporate in such declaration or statement, as much as they could, 
those points and views which acceptable by either side, while setting 
to one side matters on which we do not agree, so as to promote chance 
of peaceful settlement disputes between two of us. They have tried 
accomplish this purpose of peaceful settlement without involving any 
compulsion on other side.
35. Wang said, however US in its various proposals, including 
amendment it last put forward, there was always attempt include 
so-called right self-­defense in Taiwan area by US. This attitude of 
US amounts to compelling their side accept position which it finds
