Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
377
moral obligation to help alleviate poverty and promote more equitable
economic growth in the developing world.
We cannot be indifferent when half a billion people are hungry
and malnourished, when 700 million adults are illiterate, and when one
and a half billion people do not have minimal health care. As free
people who have achieved one of the highest standards of living in the
world, we cannot fail to respond to such staggering statistics and the in-
dividual lives they encompass. We can be proud that we are a people
who believe in the development of human potential.
The answer to the question of why we have foreign aid programs
also goes beyond our system of values and our concern for the less for-
tunate. Foreign aid is clearly in our national economic and political
interest.
The success or failure of developing countries to grow more food,
develop new energy supplies, sell their raw materials and products,
curb their birthrates, and defend themselves against aggression will
matter to Americans.
Our economic health and our security are more closely tied today
than ever before to the economic well-being and security of the devel-
oping world. Progress there means more jobs and more prosperity for
the United States.
• The non-oil-producing developing countries are a major market
for American goods, taking a quarter of our total exports last year.
About the same share of our total exports goes to Europe and the Com-
munist countries combined.
• Products from less developed countries—including raw mate-
rials such as tin, copper, bauxite, and lead—accounted for nearly a
quarter of our total imports last year.
• Our nation gained more than $7 billion from our direct private
investment in the developing world in 1975. And in 1976 developing
countries absorbed nearly $11 billion of our direct foreign investment.
• In the export of our agricultural abundance last year, developing
countries purchased half of our exports of cotton, 65% of our wheat,
and nearly 70% of our rice.
• Our economy benefits substantially as aid dollars are spent here
to buy commodities and services. For example, for every dollar we
have paid into such organizations as the World Bank and the regional
development banks for Latin America, Asia, and Africa, about $2 has
been spent in the U.S. economy.
The economic growth of the developing world is taking place pri-
marily as a result of massive efforts by the leaders and peoples of the
developing nations. For many, the most critical international factors in
their growth and development are our policies toward trade, invest-
