Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I their increasing awareness of the common challenge in the Persian Gulf. (7) There are also a series of specific military-defense initiatives that you could take, showing that there is bite to your emphasis on enhanced defense capabilities, both generally and in regard to the new Soviet strategic challenge in West Asia. These could include: (a) Altering our carrier deployments, reducing our presence in the Mediterranean and enhancing our presence in the Indian Ocean; (b) Creating a Middle East/Persian Gulf unified command, taking this territory out of the regional responsibilities of PACOM and EUCOM and underlining the seriousness of the Carter doctrine;27 (c) Announcing the production of ERWs, to be stored in the United States for rapid deployment to Europe when needed; (d) Adopting some of the Steadman study recommendations28 and streamlining and upgrading the JCS. This could move us toward the general (not joint) staff system, and could be justified by a need to streamline the JCS as an outgrowth of the Iranian raid experience; (e) Further, sustained exposition of our Southwest Asia strategy and the specific steps we are taking through a major strategic speech. None of the above are major steps, but cumulatively they could underline the seriousness of your commitment to enhance defense, without at the same time requiring major budgetary reprogramming. In general, I believe that the best posture in this area is assertiveness in expounding what we have done in the past three and a half years. It is a creditable record—in defense, arms control, peacemaking, peace itself, energy, human rights, and international economics. As I indicated above, our biggest problem is not with the charges the Republicans will level against us, but the need to get our story out more forcefully and effectively. For the past few years, there has been merit in a low-key approach in presenting our case—and it has worked, in terms of taking the nation beyond the phobias of Vietnam and Watergate, which so weakened our capacity to have an effective or assertive foreign policy. In my judgment, we can now move towards a greater highlighting of our purposes, achievements, and challenges to the nation for further action— and gain a good public response. The themes of strength and peace do not need to be elaborate; but only if we constantly pound them home, 27 See Document 138. 28 Reference is to John Steadman, The National Military Command Structure: Report of a Study Requested by the President and Conducted in the Department of Defense (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, July 1978). In the report, Steadman and his staff examined elements of the NMCS and evaluated their effectiveness.
