1068 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement a majority. The Christian Democrats generally shared his views and, while they had refused to join his government and might vote against him, probably would not cause him too much trouble. He expected all out opposition only from the Communists, Acción Popular and the Miro Quesadas, whose El Comercio5 has been following the Communist line increasingly strongly. He had accepted and would wage an offensive rather than defensive fight for his program. Principles A sound, free economy was fundamental to everything else. Next to that, economic and social progress were essential and urgent if a social revolution were to be avoided. Financial Program The first requisites were to stop inflation, restore confidence and stabilize the currency and prices. He was inheriting a billion-­sol deficit for 1959 and the prospect of a larger one in 1960 unless drastic measures were taken. He could not perform miracles but he would do everything humanly possible and as quickly as possible. He felt that the private sector had been squeezed hard enough and that the public belt must be tightened. The first essential step was to stop borrowing from the Central Bank. He had done so and would not resume. This in itself would do much to stop inflation and exchange depreciation. He could neither reduce this year’s budget nor reduce salaries but he would cut expenditures all he could. He had already found some expendable personnel and would get rid of them; more could be done through attrition by non-­filling of vacancies as they occurred. Military expenditures, particularly for new equipment, could and would be cut. The President and three military Ministers had promised to cooperate on this. He realized that difficulties would arise when it came to specific cuts but he was determined to make them and thought he could count on a reasonable measure of cooperation. He did not believe further tax increases at this time feasible either politically or economically. He was trying to speed up tax collection. (IPC’s new agreement with the Government provides paying the latter 50 per cent of its net profits. The Company already makes monthly estimates of its annual income and has agreed to make monthly anticipatory tax payments on the basis of such estimates. Beltran hopes to persuade other American and Peruvian companies to do the same.) He also expects to tighten tax enforcement. He had not been aware of the 5 Luis Miró Quesada Guerra was the Director of the conservative newspaper, El Commercio (Lima).
