Covert and Overt Operations
779
with Iranian authorities would demonstrate to them that their own
best interests dictated release of the hostages. The Secretary did not
know whether we will succeed or not. In any case, the failed effort
had bought us some time.6 This was an election year in the United
States and he did not know whether in the heat of the contest a policy
of patience can survive. Gromyko knew who the contestants were and
he could draw his own conclusions. Conservative opinion in the United
States is on the rise and it has had its effect on questions involving
détente, arms control, and defense spending. There are pressures on
the President who is running for reelection and he cannot ignore those
pressures.7 The Secretary suspected that he had been selected for the
office of Secretary of State precisely because he had a political constitu-
ency that would take pressure off the President.8 He was willing to do
that. In that spirit he had come to the present meeting in order to
explore possible solutions. He hoped that its result would be more
than simply he and Gromyko gaining confidence in each other. He
hoped that some ideas for solutions would emerge from this meeting,
enabling both sides to pick up the policy of détente, which in the
Secretary’s view was the only sensible and serious course to follow.
Both of them had said things to each other that were unpleasant, trying
to be frank. Perhaps they would be able to communicate some of these
sentiments to those they represented.
Iran
Gromyko first wanted to reply to the Secretary’s comments about
the Tudeh Party. This was an internal domestic political force in Iran,
and the Soviet Union had nothing to do with it. It seemed to be an old
habit of political leaders in Washington to refer to special relationships
between the Soviet Union and such forces as the Tudeh Party. He
could only say that these political leaders were victims of their own
inventions.
As for the Soviet radio broadcasts to Iran of which the Secretary
had spoken, Gromyko could only point out that these broadcasts stated
official Soviet policy, i.e., condemnation of the military means contem-
plated by the U.S., condemnation of the actions of the U.S. fleet of
contemplated blockade and mining. That was official Soviet policy and
it had been stated in the broadcasts. It was difficult for the Soviet Union
to understand why such military actions were being contemplated or
6 Carter underlined the phrase “the failed effort had bought us some time.”
7 Carter underlined most of the previous two sentences and wrote in the left margin:
“Election pressures on this subject not a factor.”
8 Carter underlined the last half of this sentence and placed a question mark in the
right margin.
