484
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
#2. He believes that if we follow the scenario, they should be out
in 2–3 weeks. More on this later.
#3. He went into great detail describing for me all the work that
he would have to do with Bani-Sadr, the Imam and the Revolutionary
Council to obtain their release.
#4. He has “complete faith” in our French contacts. They have his
“power of attorney” in this matter although they would dispute that
as overstating their influence.
#5. He claims that all 50 are alive. I questioned him specifically
about Mr. M.4 He claimed no knowledge of this particular person but
said that “All are alive.” More on this in person.
#6. We talked at length about the problem of obtaining release of
the hostages from the compound. He said that he and Bani-Sadr “had
a plan” which would work, but would probably have to involve the
Imam personally. I told him that we had heard very specific rumors
about suicide pacts among the militants which were of great concern
to us. I asked him was he aware of these rumors and plans, and he
laughed and said, “Mr. Jordan, don’t worry. We will get every one of
your people out safely—we have more friends in the compound than
you realize.”
I pressed him to explain, but he would not talk about it anymore.
I gave him the letter (which he asked me to entrust to Bourguet)
and pressed him on early release of the hostages. He told me that he
would “go back to Tehran, see the Imam and redouble his efforts” but
that he thought it was more realistic to expedite the agreed upon plan
than to hope to short-circuit it. He said that should they decide to
move early on the hostages, they were “equipped” with President
Carter’s written promise. He said, “tell President Carter that I will do
my best.”
Future Relations with United States
As directed, I raised the subject of our relationship beyond the
crisis. I told him that we would be anxious to try to build a new
relationship but that the evolution of that relationship would be largely
determined by Iran’s attitude. I told him after our hostages were
released, that we could move quickly to solve problems such as freezing
of assets, etc., but what kind of relationship did he envisage and at
what speed could it evolve?
He replied that he had personally persuaded the Imam not to break
diplomatic relations with the U.S. He said that it is easy to break
4 Presumably hostage Michael Metrinko.
