864
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—In response to a question, General Vujatovic explained that the
Yugoslav use of the term “military-economic” included production,
licensing, coproduction, technical training, etc. The working group was
tasked to ensure that the MOU language made this meaning clear and
precluded confusion with the broader meaning in English of the word
“economic.”
—Addressing another concern we voiced, Major General Popovic
confirmed that the Committee would not replace existing procedures
and channels for the handling of arms sales requests in either country.
(Comment: The final draft of the MOU said the Committee would
“review and follow-up development of the . . . cooperation between
the two countries and the requests and orders placed by the authorities
of one side to another . . . .”)
—General Vujatovic sought and received confirmation that the US
SECRET classification for the MOU meant that the material would not
be made available in the US to the public or the press. Mr. Siena
explained that it would be necessary to notify the Congress on a classi-
fied basis of the MOU and that proposed major weapons sales over
$7M must be reported to the Congress. That notice to Congress would
be public. General Vujatovic asked if it were possible simply to divide
the sale into, for example, ten contracts of $6M each; and Mr. Siena
told him that was not possible. General Vujatovic said that Yugoslav
law prohibited the publication of such information and that purchases
had been made from the UK, France and Sweden without publication
of the information. (Comment: The final draft MOU says that when
Congressional notification of a proposed sale is necessary that the two
governments “will agree how to proceed and will agree on the security
classification of the proposed sale.”)
—Mr. Siena noted that provisions in the US draft concerning the
transfer of technical data had been very carefully developed and were
words with which the USG was very comfortable. General Vujatovic
replied that the Yugoslav draft retained the essence and the working
group could agree on a text. (Comment: This is the section on which
we have recently approached the GOY, at ACDA’s insistence asking
that language be added to explicitly prohibit unauthorized third-coun-
try transfers of items produced from US-origin data and technical
information.
—General Vujatovic and Mr. Siena named the members of the
drafting working group. Yugoslavia: MG Popovic, Col. Ilic and Col.
Gabaj. US: MG Bowman, Mr. Violette and Mr. Pernick.
[Omitted here is discussion about specific weapons systems.]
