Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 1. Confidential—Entire text. 2. PM Director Bartholomew called in Soviet Embassy Political Counselor Bessmertnykh on September 3 to discuss developments at NPT Review Conference. After referring to past record of US/Soviet cooperation on NPT issues in general and particularly on key arms control issues which come within purview of Article VI, Bartholomew conveyed substance of following points: —We have been following very closely the state of play at the NPT Review Conference and want to share our views with you. —Nuclear disarmament issues in Article VI,4 and particularly CTB, are major questions which go to the very heart of our respective national security interests. —Considerable progress in trilateral negotiations, has been made in CTB, and the basis has been created for building upon this to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion. —Unlike other CD issues, such as CW and RW, CTB matters should in the first instance be resolved by the three interested NWS, and not negotiated prematurely by states not possessing nuclear weapons. Such a situation would encourage states whose interests are not directly concerned to make extreme demands of the trilateral negotiating partners. —We therefore continue to believe that it would be inadvisable to have multilateral negotiations on CTB prior to completion of the trilaterals. We are concerned that such a development could set back prospects for the very progress which our countries and so many others desire in the talks. —On other CTB-related issues we do not feel that there should be either a deadline for completing trilateral negotiations or a testing moratorium pending completion of an agreement—even if such a moratorium is conditioned on participation by all NWS. —We hope you will look carefully at this situation and gauge the potential damage to our mutual interests in permitting multilateral negotiation of a CTB. We believe that, working together along with our respective allies, we can find ways to meet multilateral concerns on this and other major issues at the NPTRC, ways which protect the essential interests of all concerned. 3. In reply, Bessmertnykh said that he was unaware of developments reported Reftels since Soviet Embassy here is not regularly informed of events in Geneva. Bessmertnykh said that he personally agreed with Bartholomew’s points and agreed to transmit substance of de´marche to Moscow immediately.
