990
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. Confidential—Entire text.
2. PM Director Bartholomew called in Soviet Embassy Political
Counselor Bessmertnykh on September 3 to discuss developments at
NPT Review Conference. After referring to past record of US/Soviet
cooperation on NPT issues in general and particularly on key arms con-
trol issues which come within purview of Article VI, Bartholomew con-
veyed substance of following points:
—We have been following very closely the state of play at the NPT
Review Conference and want to share our views with you.
—Nuclear disarmament issues in Article VI,4 and particularly
CTB, are major questions which go to the very heart of our respective
national security interests.
—Considerable progress in trilateral negotiations, has been made
in CTB, and the basis has been created for building upon this to bring
the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
—Unlike other CD issues, such as CW and RW, CTB matters
should in the first instance be resolved by the three interested NWS,
and not negotiated prematurely by states not possessing nuclear
weapons. Such a situation would encourage states whose interests are
not directly concerned to make extreme demands of the trilateral nego-
tiating partners.
—We therefore continue to believe that it would be inadvisable to
have multilateral negotiations on CTB prior to completion of the trilat-
erals. We are concerned that such a development could set back pros-
pects for the very progress which our countries and so many others de-
sire in the talks.
—On other CTB-related issues we do not feel that there should be
either a deadline for completing trilateral negotiations or a testing mor-
atorium pending completion of an agreement—even if such a morato-
rium is conditioned on participation by all NWS.
—We hope you will look carefully at this situation and gauge the
potential damage to our mutual interests in permitting multilateral ne-
gotiation of a CTB. We believe that, working together along with our
respective allies, we can find ways to meet multilateral concerns on this
and other major issues at the NPTRC, ways which protect the essential
interests of all concerned.
3. In reply, Bessmertnykh said that he was unaware of develop-
ments reported Reftels since Soviet Embassy here is not regularly in-
formed of events in Geneva. Bessmertnykh said that he personally
agreed with Bartholomew’s points and agreed to transmit substance of
de´marche to Moscow immediately.
4 See footnote 5, Document 211.
