3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
877
trol, the Soviets may yet have to step in militarily. [handling restriction not
declassified]
Current Soviet Attitudes
The Soviets behaved cautiously during the Polish labor crisis. Only
after the settlement of the strikes on the Baltic coast—that is, when the
immediate danger of an explosion had lessened—did they openly
begin to express their anxieties. Subsequent critical commentary re-
flected Moscow’s recognition that the negotiated settlement with the
strikers may have set in motion a process of political liberalization of
the Polish system, which could at some point prove to be beyond the
control of the Polish Communist Party and could spread elsewhere in
Eastern Europe. It also was a sign of Soviet dissatisfaction with Gierek’s
handling of the crisis. Whether or not Moscow had a hand in Gierek’s
ouster, the Soviet leadership is openly pleased with the choice of Kania
as first secretary and consider him to be the best possible replacement
at this juncture. [handling restriction not declassified]
It remains to be seen whether Kania will live up to his image as an
orthodox, hardline apparatchik, who will strictly limit the gains made
by the strikers. At the very least, the Polish party has bought time as far
as Soviet military intervention is concerned. But if Kania proves unable
or unwilling to curtail the new unions, the Soviets would step up first
the political, then the military, pressure tactics on him to reverse the
erosion of party control in Poland. If these pressures failed, Moscow
would intervene militarily. [handling restriction not declassified]
Fundamental Threat to Party Control
The agreement reached between the strikers and the Polish regime
at the end of August, if implemented liberally, would threaten the very
foundations of the Communist system in Poland. The theoretical justifi-
cation of the Communist party’s control is its claim to rule as the van-
guard of the working class. But with the overwhelming majority of the
workers rejecting the party-run unions for unions that will truly repre-
sent their interests, that justification would be undermined. [handling
restriction not declassified]
The Soviet Union, quite clearly, would not stand by idly if this oc-
curred. The case could even be made that Moscow has already decided
that its military intervention is necessary—that the threat is so dan-
gerous that it should be stamped out before it has a chance to spread.
[handling restriction not declassified]
The Soviets may have already decided that the Polish leadership
has given up too much of its authority in agreeing to the unprecedented
establishment of free trade unions and the partial lifting of censorship.
The Politburo may have reasoned that, as in Czechoslovakia in 1968,
the political and social conditions for continued dissipation of the
