1196 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement going over familiar ground renewing charge US attempting obtain PRC abandonment territory and sovereignty and as result US intransigence “talks have become deadlocked,” “US purposefully procrastinating meetings.” It is up to US stop using force and threat of force against PRC. Charge of September 24 statement PRC holding Americans political hos­ tages is “slander.” PRC list of 55, 52 Chinese not yet returned, and of US list of 103, 26 not yet returned. US still holding Chinese in prison and should “adopt measures on own initiative in same manner as PRC enable them exercise right to return.” US using charges on civilians as pretext to cover up procrastination in meetings. In order break deadlock PRC had made embargo and cultural exchange proposals. Failure make progress on main issue renunciation should not stop effort make prog­ ress on minor issues. In view President Eisenhower’s Geneva proposal on cultural exchange and contacts, no reason for US refuse PRC proposal this field. I made long extemporaneous statement in reply incorporat­ ing first three paras Deptel 374 (as I had previously sent him copy September 24 statement and he referred to it in opening statement, I did not read out full text at meeting but wove in substantive lan­ guage at appropriate points). Charged them with procrastinating on renunciation pointing out that whenever agreement seemed near they retreated to pleas of internal affairs sovereignty, etc. Made long charge on mistreatment Americans in China including num­ bers of those imprisoned, numbers those who died, etc., leading up to charge that PRC is one who had cut off cultural and human con­ tacts, and coming back to fundamental importance implementation September 10 announcement. During course this statement I made it entirely clear no discussion trade or cultural exchange until renunci­ ation force and release of Americans achieved. In reply Wang charged me with trying to “poison” our negotiations and during course rebuttal referred to three groups Americans in China: those who continue reside freely; those who opposed Chinese people; and those “dropped from air carrying poison, pistols and bombs.” Did I expect them treat latter as distinguished guests? Cited long list alleged US wrongs against “Chinese people” bombings, occupation territory etc., etc., and for first time in talks mentioned UN membership, alleg­ ing US pressure on others deny PRC legitimate rights in international affairs including representation UN. PRC attempting by every means improve relations. If US intends use talks poison relations “what is good of continuing such talks.” PRC efforts shown by successive draft pro­ posals. With respect cultural relations Americans are protesting against own government’s denial permission journalists visit China and appears American Government has lost confidence in own people as well as sys­ tem. PRC made cultural exchange proposal “in friendly spirit.” Failure
