other countries almost equal in value to the total imports of Germany and
greatly exceeding the total imports of France. We have admitted a greater
volume of free imports than any other country except England.
We are, therefore, levying duties on about $1,550,000,000 of imports.
Nearly half of this, or $700,000,000, is subject to duties for the protection
of agriculture and have their origin in countries other than Europe. They
substantially increased the prices received by our farmers for their produce.
About $300,000,000 more is represented by luxuries such as costly rugs,
furs, precious stones, etc. This leaves only about $550,000,000 of our
imports under a schedule of duties which is in general under consideration
when there is discussion of lowering the tariff. While the duties on this
small portion, representing only about 12 per cent of our imports,
undoubtedly represent the difference between a fair degree of prosperity or
marked depression to many of our industries and the difference between
good pay and steady work or wide unemployment to many of our wage
earners, it is impossible to conceive how other countries or our own
importers could be greatly benefited if these duties are reduced. Those who
are starting an agitation for a reduction of tariff duties, partly at least for the
benefit of those to whom money has been lent abroad, ought to know that
there does not seem to be a very large field within the area of our imports in
which probable reductions would be advantageous to foreign goods. Those
who wish to benefit foreign producers are much more likely to secure that
result by continuing the present enormous purchasing power which comes
from our prosperity that has increased our imports over 71 per cent in four
years than from any advantages that are likely to accrue from a general
tariff reduction.
AGRICULTURE
The important place which agriculture holds in the economic and social life
of the Nation can not be overestimated. The National Government is
justified in putting forth every effort to make the open country a desirable
place to live. No condition meets this requirement which fails to supply a
fair return on labor expended and capital invested. While some localities
and some particular crops furnish exceptions, in general agriculture is
continuing to make progress in recovering from the depression of 1921 and
