Yugoslavia 943 that this Administration will not tolerate illegal actions directed against Yugoslav establishments and officials in the United States;13 —We understand the depth of your concern about emigre activities at this time. We will do what we can to tamp this down and we have expressed our opinion to the Governments of those countries with large emigre populations; you must understand, however, that we can do nothing which would interfere with emigre activities which do not violate any U.S. law; —I am aware of Secretary Kostic’s (KOS-TICH) discussion with Secretary Miller regarding medium term balance of payments assistance for Yugoslavia.14 We are well aware that Yugoslavia’s political independence rests to an important degree on the strength of the economy. We are giving your request for assistance our close attention; and —There is much that we can do together. We would like to keep up the pace of high level political visits, and to consult frequently on global and bilateral issues which concern us. We will do what we can to encourage the further development of trade and economic relations. In the important area of military cooperation, we remain ready to respond to Yugoslav needs and desires.15 B. U.S.-Soviet Relations 1. Suggested Points —Short to mid-term prospects for improvement in our relations remain poor. We have seen no indication the Soviets are ready to 13 The “Terrorism Against Yugoslavia” briefing paper, prepared by the Department of State on April 21 and included in Mondale’s briefing book, described the extent of anti-Yugoslav terrorism in the United States and noted that “no other foreign government represented in the United States has been the target of as many actual terrorist incidents as the Yugoslav Government.” (Ibid.) 14 The Department prepared two briefing papers on the Yugoslav economy for Mondale’s trip. In “The Yugoslav Economy in the Post-Tito Period,” the Department noted that the period of rapid economic growth Yugoslavia experienced had overheated the economy, pushed inflation to above 20 percent, and created a large trade deficit. The paper also noted the “extreme regional disparity in living standards” between Yugoslav regions. (Ibid.) In “The Bilateral Economic Relationship,” the Department noted the U.S. Government had made “an intensive effort to promote economic relations” and that the Yugoslavs had “come to view the United States as an economic partner which can lessen the commercial risks of economic dependence on Western Europe and the political risks of dependence on the Soviet Union.” (Ibid.) See also footnotes 4, 5, and 6 above. 15 The “Military Relationship” paper in Mondale’s briefing materials noted that following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the United States “adopted a more forthcoming arms transfer policy.” While the United States would not release the Harpoon anti-ship missile to the Yugoslav military, the MK–46 anti-submarine missile sale was being positively considered, as was the sale of F–5E aircraft. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 87, Yugoslavia: Briefing Book for Tito Funeral, 5/80)
