824 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Cooperation among the larger groups is inhibited by the difficulties of communication and travel in a rugged country, by suspicion of outsiders—even men from the next valley—and by the reluctance of most Afghans to take orders from anyone, especially another local leader with no greater claims to leadership. There have nevertheless been some operations involving more than one insurgent band, sometimes even bands from different ethnic groups. On occasion, the failure of such operations has led to fighting between the bands, each blaming the other for defeat. Since the Soviet invasion, there has been growing cooperation both among insurgents in Afghanistan and between Afghan insurgents and exile groups in Pakistan. Some of the insurgents engaged in the fighting outside Kabul in June reportedly came from provinces near the Pakistani border. The fighting probably would not have extended over as large an area had a number of insurgent groups not coordinated their activities. Predominant Pathan exile organizations and the Hazaras of central Afghanistan are establishing contact with each other. New weapons and tactics seem to pass quickly to tribes in the interior. In general, however, each insurgent group continues to operate with little reference to others fighting in the same cause. The degree of cooperation also seems to vary by ethnic group. It may be least among the fiercely independent Pathans along the Pakistani border. Among the Nuristanis of Konarha province, however, there was considerable cooperation even before the Soviet invasion. The Hazaras of central Afghanistan may even have a rudimentary overall organization, comprising two umbrella groups over several smaller insurgent organizations. The best known—but perhaps the least important—of the insurgent groups are the exile organizations. There are six main groups (five of them united in the Islamic Alliance for the Liberation of Afghanistan) and a number of smaller groups, most of them based in Pakistan. The exiles have served as a channel for aid to those fighting in Afghanistan, their propaganda has probably encouraged the resistance, and some of them have men actually engaged in fighting. There is however, little basis for their claims that they have large followings in Afghanistan, that they speak for the insurgents, or that they have much control over insurgent activities. (See Annex C for a fuller treatment of the exiles.) Insurgent Strength There is no reliable information on which to base an estimate of insurgent strength. Our guess is that it lies somewhere between 50,000 and 100,000. Most of the country’s 15 million people resent the Soviet occupation, but only a small percentage is actively engaged in the fighting.
