International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
179
financial conditions; that we intervene in exchange markets only to
counter disorderly exchange market conditions. I reiterated our view
that a strong dollar is of major importance to the United States and the
rest of the world; that the way to maintain a strong dollar is through a
strong and non-inflationary economy; and that recent indicators show
progress toward that objective.
Minister Apel agreed with everything I said, stressed that Germany fully
supported the floating exchange rate system, and expressed regret for the
German press comment. (The Germans also told us privately that they are
now convinced they should take additional stimulus measures to in-
crease their real growth rate, which is running at a very disappointing
level. They will be telephoning us this week to tell us what the specific
measures will be.)
Apel and I held a joint press conference to make clear that we under-
stood and were in full agreement on these matters.3 I believe this will lay
to rest the uncertainties and press speculation.
Witteveen Facility
We also succeeded in reaching agreement among the major industrial and
OPEC countries on the main issues relating to establishing the “Witteveen Fa-
cility”, to supplement the resources of the IMF for the next two years or so.
This reflects the successful culmination of follow-up to one of the most
important items at the London Summit. The usable resources of the
IMF are extremely low at present, and—given the large payments im-
balances in a number of countries associated with increased oil costs
and other factors—there is a need to supplement these resources and
provide the needed assurance that official financing will be available in
adequate amounts to assist countries while they implement needed ad-
justment programs and eliminate the need for financing.
While no one can be certain exactly how much is needed for the
new facility, it has been our view that about $10 billion or more is required to
assure the necessary credibility and confidence. The Paris meeting was de-
signed to raise that amount, and to set financial terms and conditions.
While a couple of participants were unable to say precisely how
much they might pledge until they return to their capitals, it looks as
though the $10 billion or an amount very close to it will be raised. In Paris
seven industrial countries pledged about $5.2 billion. Five OPEC countries
pledged about $4.2 billion, and two others (Kuwait and Nigeria) are expected
to add to that amount, so that the OPEC total would rise to about $4.4–4.9 bil-
lion. If the total falls slightly below $10 billion, there are other possibil-
ities for “topping-up” the total.
3 A report on the joint press conference appeared in the The New York Times on
August 7. (“U.S. and Bonn Call Strong Dollar Economically Vital,” The New York Times,
August 7, 1977, p. 3)
