Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President: That is the text that Israel wanted, and now Egypt has accepted it. The Prime Minister: It says nothing about a review in five years. First I will deal with Article 6. The delegation of Israel was presented with the following proposal by the American delegation at Camp David. This refers to the second paragraph of Article 6. (The Prime Minister reads paragraph two of the text). The note concerning the fifth paragraph of Article 6 provides for the unique priority of the United Nations Charter and does not acknowledge “any other priority”. Now for the analysis. (The Prime Minister reads Article 6, paragraph 2 in its entirety). If we were to accept this note, I would say that we would be interpreting away the content of Article 6 paragraph 2. The words which say that the treaty is concluded “in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement” would mean that peace must be achieved between Israel and Syria, Israel and Jordan, Israel and Lebanon, and autonomy must be established in Judea, Samaria, and Gaza. Israel wants this comprehensive peace; it does not want a separate peace. If there is a separate peace, then there is still hostility on the northeastern front. They have 5,600 tanks there, and 1,000 combat planes. Israel does want a comprehensive peace settlement, but it is not up to Israel or Egypt alone to reach this. Sadat cannot persuade Assad. He cannot bring Jordan to the table. These are beyond his control to do. So what may happen? Israel will sign a treaty, and we will withdraw. But these words would allow Sadat or to his successor to say legitimately that if there is no comprehensive peace, Egypt can take back its ambassador, or can declare that parts of the treaty are null and void. It is absolutely clear that this would be the meaning of this interpretive note. The second sentence of the interpretive note is even more serious and dangerous, although the first is bad enough. Article 1039 of the U.N. Charter is referred to and this establishes a unique priority, but the note goes on to say that there is “no other priority”. If we were to accept this, then this would automatically give priority to Egypt’s obligations to the Arabs over its commitments in the treaty. Egypt has agreed with all of the Arab states in 1950, through the Arab League, that implacable enemy of Israel, to enter a defense relationship. Egypt has an alliance with Iraq and Syria, dating from 1962. The aim of that treaty is the liberation of Palestine, which means the destruction of Israel. Most important is the defense treaty with Syria of November 1966, which was invoked in 1967 and again in 1973 against us.
