1096 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement against the interests of the Peruvian Navy. Since the Peruvian Navy had much of its strength in submarines, it resented the fact that we were training navies of neighboring countries in anti-­submarine warfare. Peru had, in fact, bought the submarines on U.S. advice. Peru now considers itself menaced by an “adventure”—not a war but a surprise raid—on the part of the much more powerful Ecuadoran Navy. For this reason, the purchase of the cruiser was desired by the entire nation. Admiral Llosa continued that Peru had not necessarily asked to be considered among those countries unable to pay rehabilitation costs of the vessels offered under the U.S. ship loan act. Peru had first offered to pay these costs in installments over a period of five years. When it appeared that it might be difficult for us to arrange five-­year credit, the Embassy had sent a formal note asking for the two destroyers and offering to pay the rehabilitation costs within three years.3 Since then, Peru had been happy to learn that the U.S. would be able to rehabilitate at least one destroyer under grant military aid,4 but the Admiral wished to remind us that even in the ship loan program Peru was the subject of discrimination. Peru had originally asked for three destroyers but had been limited to two. Chile had first asked for two submarines and then for two destroyers and had received approval for all four vessels. Chile’s acquisition of the submarines in particular was very dangerous as far as Peru was concerned. Admiral Llosa said he wished to make the further point that Peru’s economic progress would depend largely on the establishment and maintenance of a climate of political stability and that the restoration of the strength of the Peruvian Navy would make a very significant contribution in this direction. Thus the purchase of the cruiser should be considered as economically justified. Mr. Grau said it was very important that any attitude which might be taken by the U.S. with regard to the cruiser purchase not be one that could be interpreted in Peru as a “reprisal” against the Peruvian Government. Mr. Rubottom assured Mr. Grau that the question of reprisals would never be considered. 3 The note under reference was not further identified. In telegram 138 from Lima, September 12, 1958, the Embassy informed the Department of State that Peruvian Navy Minister Tirado instructed Rear Admiral Llosa, the Peruvian Naval Attaché in Washington, to inform the Department that Peru would accept two destroyers on three years credit and that it would pay rehabilitation costs of $2.8 million each. (723.5621/9–1258) 4 In a memorandum of conversation of October 19, Ambassador Achilles reported that he informed Minister Tirado that the Departments of State and Defense had approved rehabilitation of one destroyer plus the carryover of $850,000 in fiscal year 1959 funds for rehabilitation of other vessels. (723.5621/10–2159)
