First Responses
159
61.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Iran: What Next?
I enclose today’s SCC minutes.2 As you will see from them, we
appear to make useful current decisions, but it is extremely difficult
to get the group to focus on any strategic goals or steps. I again tried
to push the participants to reflect on the needed steps if our current
“litigational” approaches fail. I asked, what will we do if the Security
Council’s resolution is defied? What will we do if the World Court’s
ruling is also defied? There simply was no predisposition to answer
these questions.
As a result, we are locking ourselves into a litigational approach,
which is fine if our strategy is to transform the crisis into a prolonged
malaise. But we need to ask more directly whether that is what we
want. More specifically, Iran poses for us three interrelated dilemmas:
1. How to get the hostages out;
2. How to get rid of Khomeini—or, in other words, how to save
Iran for the West;
3. How to get on with the Moslem world.
What are the implications of the above and what are some of the
contradictions between them?
Patience and Litigation
The easiest way might seem to be by peaceful means. We are trying
that now. But it may not succeed. In the meantime, however, we might
lock ourselves into a pattern which increasingly excludes the use of
force. I can see us sliding already into the usual litigational mode to
which there is no end and from which there is no easy extrication
(because a peaceful solution is always around the corner). Meanwhile,
our domestic support will gradually fragment—with some howling
for military action and others engaging in a do-it-yourself diplomacy.
Our international support is also likely to be dissipated in the context
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box
17, SCC Meeting #211 held 11/27/79. Top Secret. Carter initialed the memorandum in
the upper right corner.
2 Attached but not printed. For Carter’s handwritten comments on the SCC Sum-
mary of Conclusions, see Document 62.
