World Hunger and Food Policy
895
The reprogramming authority for $30 million may or may not
become a matter for Congressional action, depending on the deter-
mination within the Administration as to whether funds can be made
available from the general Foreign Assistance appropriation. If such
funds cannot be made available from the general appropriation,
then the issue of additional money must be considered along with
other aspects of the long-term Kampuchean relief effort discussed
earlier.
Time is of the essence in dealing with these Congressional con-
cerns, and yet, from the Congress’ point of view, this may not seem a
good time for action. Committee chairmen are reluctant to report any
more supplemental appropriation bills until they examine the Presi-
dent’s budget proposal for 1981. Although sufficient borrowing au-
thority exists to permit the Kampuchean effort to proceed through Jan-
uary, each day’s delay in authorizing funds specifically for Kampuchea
limits the programs from which borrowings must be made.
Finally it should be noted that the international pledging confer-
ence for Kampuchean aid was based on eight months’ funding for
UNHCR and one year for ICRC/UNICEF. There is now considerable
question as to whether the $311 million in pledged funds, even if fully
subscribed, will last that long. The present U.S. arrangements for Kam-
puchean food relief were based only on six months of operation, or
through April 1980. The time for planning, funding, and implementing
programs to be needed after April is becoming short.
Political and Diplomatic Actions
The crux of the solution to the famine in Kampuchea appears to be
Vietnam, in both the short and long-term perspective. It seems unlikely
that the Kampuchean issue can be resolved satisfactorily until Vietnam
is accepted into the community of nations and persuaded to act as a re-
sponsible member of the world community. Given the history of South-
east Asia and the fact that a war is in progress, this may be difficult to
achieve in time to avert starvation for hundreds of thousands of
Kampucheans.
Increased U.S. unilateral arrangements with the Vietnamese
should be explored as one method to reach a solution to the famine. If
better understanding could develop, a short-term benefit would be to
facilitate the entire Kampuchean relief effort. In the long term, a return
to formal diplomatic relations could allow the United States to exert
more influence in Indochina, and would provide the United States with
a better listening post for local conditions.
For these reasons, the Commission recommends that the President ac-
tively explore improved official relationships with the Vietnamese Govern-
ment, particularly through those countries which now have a more effective re-
