Chapter 6, June–December 1990 945 181. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, December 24, 1990, 1453Z 13894. Subject: Soviet Views on Houston START Package: Burt/ Nazarkin Meeting, December 24, 1990 1. This is NST/START Memcon XIV-­number to be assigned later. Secret—Entire Text. 2. Nazarkin was in a nervous and pessimistic mood as he returned from Moscow from consultations on the Houston package. He told me that while the START portion of his visit was productive, in overall terms the visit was very discouraging. He only heard of Shevardnadze’s resignation from the Foreign Ministry driver on his arrival to Moscow last week. 3. Nazarkin said that the thinking in the Foreign Ministry was that Shevardnadze would continue to perform his duties and stay thru the February summit. Nazarkin said that Gorbachev was pressuring Shevardnadze to stay on in some capacity in the government and that Shevardnadze had not yet made a final decision. 4. On START, Nazarkin said that he had brought “not bad news.” After an extensive meeting in Moscow it was agreed that the Houston package would be approved as “it was agreed in Houston”: — The Soviet side would RPT would agree to the 40% rule on RV counting for future types. — On telemetry, the Soviet side only confirmed what had been agreed in Houston—­a three year period of transition from current to common practices. However, progress had been made on other elements of data denial here in Geneva, and Nazarkin in Moscow had been instructed to reach overall agreement on the subject to assist, Khromov would arrive in Geneva next Saturday, December 2. — On the new types definition, Nazarkin’s presentation was somewhat confusing. Nazarkin said that the Soviets insisted on including throw-­weight in the new types definition. I said that the Soviets had dropped this in Washington following the Houston meetings, thus this seemed inconsistent with the Houston package. Nazarkin said that this was true but the Soviets had a new idea—­perhaps they could agree to our position on 10% increase in length if we could agree to 10% increase in throw-­weight as a “new’’ new-­type criteria. (Comment: We 1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Lot 02D360, Edward M. Ifft Files, Houston Ministerial Dec., 1990. Secret; Niact; Nodis. Sent via the Blackbird channel. Drafted by Heitkotter; cleared by Jones; approved by Burt.
