1130  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Mr. Ambassador:
Today we are completing preparation of the START treaty and its 
related documents. A day from now the Presidents of the U.S.A. and 
the USSR will finalize this historic agreement with their signatures. For 
the first time in history the two countries possessing the world’s great-
est arsenals of strategic offensive arms will begin the process of reduc-
ing them. Movement will begin toward reducing the level of military 
confrontation in the field of armaments that pose the greatest threat to 
all mankind.
The START treaty is without precedent. There is nothing compa-
rable to its detailed and practicable verification system in any other 
agreement of its kind. The sides are exchanging an enormous amount 
of information about their strategic offensive arms and the accuracy of 
that information will be subject to verification. This will undoubtedly 
redound to further confidence-building between the sides.
The treaty will become a solid foundation for the development of 
the U.S.-Soviet relationship. Concluding the treaty will be a tremen-
dous contribution to the U.S.-Soviet relationship on the military level 
matching the growing improvement in the U.S.-Soviet relationship. 
This treaty is at the same time a weighty contribution toward creat-
ing an atmosphere of constructive cooperation between states that is in 
the interests of all of those states. It will expand upon and strengthen 
the  positive change in international relations which has been taking 
place in the world in recent years thanks to the “new thinking” which 
has been making ever-increasing headway in the international arena.
And, finally, I cannot fail to mention the economic side of things. 
The treaty will, obviously, require great resources—to build and imple-
ment the verification system and to implement START elimination pro-
cedures. But ultimately, resources that now are used for these strategic 
offensive arms will be freed up to make available additional possibili-
ties—not insubstantial at that—to convert military industry to civilian 
purposes. It will be possible to put these resources to use for purposes 
of development. I think there is no need to explain how much our coun-
try needs, especially now during this transitional period of its history, 
such additional economic resources.
Mr. Ambassador, I cannot ignore the fact that the treaty will have 
many critics. They are already in evidence. Long before today, without 
having seen the treaty and without knowing what it would contain, 
they had already begun to sharply criticize the treaty.
Mr. Ambassador, I am firmly convinced that it is possible to eval-
uate the treaty properly and objectively only if it is viewed as a whole 
which balances the interests of the sides and which have been weighed 
ever so scrupulously on the scales of political realities. This treaty serves 
the interests of both sides equally. I am certain that at this moment as 
the treaty leaves our hands, we are still immersed in the details that we
