Consolidation, Constructive and Administrative Purposes. He received affirmative answers to all these questions. A further discussion took place with reference to the amount required for the compensation of the provinces and a doubt was expressed whether China would be able actually to abolish likin. The chairman said, however, that the Chinese Government did not want to minimize the difficult undertaking but that it was the firm determination of China to abolish likin and that the public would be duly notified when that had been accomplished. Mr. MacMurray raised the question as to what would be the alternative if, for any reason, it should, at the end of three years, be found impossible to effectuate the abolition of likin. The chairman replied that such a possibility had not been considered by the Chinese, as they were really determined to abolish likin within the stated time. Mr. Strawn then inquired whether there had been given any concrete definition of the word “likin” and to this the chairman replied that the Chinese Delegation had always understood likin to be a tax on goods in transit or a transit duty. Mr. Strawn inquired whether that covered all taxes at points of origin and destination as well as in transit and the reply was simply that it covered all taxes on goods in transit. Mr. Strawn thereupon referred to the provision in the treaty of 1903 between China and the United States98 which authorized the collection of surtaxes on imported goods which would free such goods from all further taxation. He considered this to mean that this provision covered the abolition not only of likin but of all other taxes on foreign goods. To guarantee that such additional taxes would not be levied the American Plan contemplated that if such taxes were collected in violation of the new treaty, the taxpayer from whom the taxes had been collected would have recourse to the Customs for a refund. It was his thought therefore, that likin should be clearly defined and his idea of likin was that it should mean that any foreign articles imported into China upon which the authorized Chinese Maritime Customs Duty should have been paid should not be subject to any further taxation,—neither likin, or destination tax, or consumption tax, or protection fee or any tax of whatever nature, levied indirectly or directly upon the conveyance or handling of any such article. He had no complaint to make about just taxation because he felt that his nationals were perfectly willing to pay any taxes that they should pay, but he did not want to see the taxes so high that trade would be
