956 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 7. In this connection, I should like to call to your attention a report by GAO on the supposed failings of the Air Force in the over-­all man­ agement of the missile program. This report appears to be an extreme and unwise invasion of the Executive Branch of the Government. GAO, under the guise of managerial criticism, condemns the Air Force and the Defense Department for failure to take certain technical decisions and for use of inadequate scientific talent on the program. The report contends that objectives of the program have not been met. The Air Force is taking vigorous actions to counter the report, urging its revi­ sion and also preparing a rebuttal, but I am very much afraid that when and if this report is made public, it will provide ammunition to those who choose to attack your Administration irresponsibly. G.B. Kistiakowsky 232. National Intelligence Estimate1 NIE 100–60 Washington, January 19, 1960 ESTIMATE OF THE WORLD SITUATION2 FOREWORD Although we have tried in this estimate to take as long a view as possible, we have necessarily left out of account some elements that could drastically alter the course of events. Thus, we have not attempted to assess the likelihood or consequences of revolutionary scientific advances of either military or civilian application. Moreover, we have assessed the East-­West struggle on the assumption that no major war takes place, and on the other hand, that there is no agree­ ment for large-­scale reduction of military capabilities by the major powers. 1 Source: “Estimate of the World Situation.” Secret; Noforn. 20 pp. DOS, INR–NIE Files. 2 While this estimate summarizes our views on the USSR, a fuller treatment of Soviet trends and developments will be contained in NIE 11–4–59, “MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES AND POLICIES, 1959–1964.” Soviet strategic capabilities, including ICBM buildup, will be covered in NIE 11–8–59, “SOVIET CAPABILTES FOR STRATEGIC ATTACK THROUGH MID-­1964.” Both these estimates will be published in the near future. [Footnote is in the original.]
