Guatemala 709 Air Force on December 31, 1958, of a number of Mexican shrimp-­fishing boats that had ignored orders to leave Guatemalan waters. As a result of this particular incident, we were asked by the Mexican Government to withhold delivery of a number of surplus demilitarized B-26 bombers that we had agreed on December 5, 1958, to sell to the Government of Guatemala. Although we had already notified the Government of Guatemala orally that it could send a team to inspect the planes, we acceded to the Mexican request, predicating suspension of sale arrangements, in our conversations with the Guatemalans, on the then notable increase in Caribbean tensions. Although Mexico and Guatemala patched up their differences in September, 1959, we were forced to continue to ignore Guatemala pleas to effect sale of the B-26 bombers in the interest of securing British cooperation in restricting arms shipments to the Caribbean area. The Guatemalan Government has continued to press for delivery of the planes in question. These circumstance have served to irritate our relations with Guatemala and to weaken the influence of our armed forces with the Guatemalan military. One of the basic reasons for wanting to sell the B-26 planes to the Government of Guatemala is to prevent it from shopping elsewhere for armaments that it needs to replace depleted equipment. The maintenance of Guatemalan reliance on American equipment in essential to our retention of influence over its military. President Ydígoras, in January, let it be known that, should he have to shop elsewhere for planes, he would probably have to entrust training of his air force to other than a United States mission. Such a move would dissipate years-­ long efforts to establish close and friendly ties with the Guatemalan military, whose influence in local politics is traditional. The Department of Defense feels very strongly in this connection, and a communication to that effect was addressed to the Under Secretary of State by the Second
