Guatemala  709
Air Force on December 31, 1958, of a number of Mexican shrimp-­fishing 
boats that had ignored orders to leave Guatemalan waters. As a result 
of this particular incident, we were asked by the Mexican Government 
to withhold delivery of a number of surplus demilitarized B-26 bomb-
ers that we had agreed on December 5, 1958, to sell to the Government 
of Guatemala. Although we had already notified the Government of 
Guatemala orally that it could send a team to inspect the planes, we 
acceded to the Mexican request, predicating suspension of sale arrange-
ments, in our conversations with the Guatemalans, on the then nota-
ble increase in Caribbean tensions. Although Mexico and Guatemala 
patched up their differences in September, 1959, we were forced to con-
tinue to ignore Guatemala pleas to effect sale of the B-26 bombers in the 
interest of securing British cooperation in restricting arms shipments 
to the Caribbean area. The Guatemalan Government has continued to 
press for delivery of the planes in question. These circumstance have 
served to irritate our relations with Guatemala and to weaken the influ-
ence of our armed forces with the Guatemalan military.
One of the basic reasons for wanting to sell the B-26 planes to the 
Government of Guatemala is to prevent it from shopping elsewhere 
for armaments that it needs to replace depleted equipment. The main-
tenance of Guatemalan reliance on American equipment in essential 
to our retention of influence over its military. President Ydígoras, in 
January, let it be known that, should he have to shop elsewhere for 
planes, he would probably have to entrust training of his air force to 
other than a United States mission. Such a move would dissipate years-­
long efforts to establish close and friendly ties with the Guatemalan mil-
itary, whose influence in local politics is traditional. The Department of 
Defense feels very strongly in this connection, and a communication to 
that effect was addressed to the Under Secretary of State by the Second 
Assistant Secretary of Defense on February 20, 1960. (TAB A).2
[text not declassified] The sale would involve six demilitarized stan-
dard B–26’s (three of which would be dismantled for spare parts), one 
B–26 equipped for photo reconnaissance, and one B–26 equipped as a 
VIP plane.
Recommendations:3
1. That ARA be authorized to release the B–26’s for sale to 
Guatemala [text not declassified]4
2 Not filed with the source text, but printed as Document GT–26.
3 The source text contains no indication of the Under Secretary’s action on these 
recommendations.
4 The British Embassy in Washington, having been informed of the decision in favor 
of the sale, requested the Department of State to limit delivery to two B–26s. (Letter from 
G. G. Brown to Edwin S. Vallon, Deputy Director, Office of Caribbean Affairs, April 15; 
714.5622/4–1560).
