Chapter 2, January–June 1989  127
154/1540 limit, the current U.S. position imposes additional constraints 
designed to prevent any modernization or replacement of heavy ICBMs 
or their silos. Over time, these constraints—­including bans on flight 
testing, on production or deployment of additional SS–18s, and on pro-
duction/testing/deployment of new or modernized heavy ICBMs—­
would degrade the assessed reliability of Soviet heavy ICBMs. The 
ultimate result would be equality as the SS–18s age and are eliminated.
The current Soviet position provides a formal right to have heavy 
ICBMs only to the Soviet side. The Soviets have said in both Moscow 
and Geneva that they are ready to agree to a ban on development, pro-
duction and deployment of “new types” of heavy ICBMs and to a ban 
on mobile heavy ICBMs and heavy SLBMs, assuming we can agree on 
what a “type” is. The Soviets also state they will accept (unspecified) 
constraints on modernization of existing heavy missiles. The Soviet 
position would, however, allow flight testing.
The previous administration provided contingency guidance 
which specified certain rights the United States should seek in return 
for allowing heavy ICBM flight testing and modernization. No deci-
sion to table this guidance was made. The intent of insisting on for-
mal rights was to meet the strictures of the Jackson amendment; if the 
Soviets were allowed to retain heavy ICBMs indefinitely, the United 
States must have comparable rights.
The Soviets are increasing the capability of their SS–18 force by 
deploying the SS–18 Mod 5. Some believe that if we allow retention of 
this missile, the existing threat will grow considerably and the bene-
fits of the 50 percent reduction in the Soviet heavy ICBM force will be 
reduced significantly. The throwweight of the SS–18 Mod 5 is 10–20 
percent greater than the SS–18 Mod 4; [7 lines not declassified]
If START were to ban modernization and completely phase out 
the SS–18, some believe the threat to the U.S. would be reduced sig-
nificantly. The Soviet SS–24 Mod 2 now being deployed in silos does 
not have counterforce potential comparable to that of even the SS–18 
Mod 4. The earliest projection of a SS–24 follow-on with significant 
hard target kill capability is for a 1995–1996 IOC. Others note that 
1995–1996 is before the end of the START drawdown period; thus the 
SS–18 counterforce threat would be replaced, not eliminated. In addi-
tion, Soviet SSBNs may also acquire a counterforce capability by the 
mid to late 1990s.
A complete ban on SS–18s would also reduce Soviet breakout 
potential. [4 lines not declassified]
Options—Issue 3. No agency favors immediately modifying the 
U.S. position and allowing testing and modernization of heavy ICBMs 
in return for comparable formal U.S. rights. Four options for dealing 
with heavy ICBMs should be considered:
