172  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
aggression, to reduce Communist influence and control, and to further U.S. 
objectives.
REASON: U.S. policies should be designed to mount a psychologi­
cal, economic, and political offensive against the Bloc as well as to shore 
up the defenses of the Free World against a comparable Bloc offensive.
3. Page 4, paragraph 8, last sentence—Change to read: “Hence the 
Communist rulers must be convinced by obvious U.S. ability and willing­
ness to meet a wide range of military contingencies with means appropriate to 
the objective at stake that aggression will not serve their interest; that it 
will not pay.”
REASON: To meet the flexible Communist strategy, the U.S. deter­
rent must include both a nuclear retaliatory force to deter total war and 
flexible ready forces to deter or deal with limited aggression; and above 
all, must be made credible to Communist leaders and our Allies by an 
unmistakable U.S. willingness to employ military force of a quality and 
degree appropriate to the situation.
4. Page 4, paragraph 9—Change to read:
“9. The higher purpose of military strategy must be to affect the will of 
the enemy, not merely to destroy him. The U.S. recognizes the increasing prob­
ability of long term mutual deterrence with respect to general war and the 
reduced political usefulness of massive retaliation as a means of insuring the 
security of the Free World. In this era of mutual deterrence to general war, 
massive retaliation can only be used as a threat, and in the event of general 
war, in reprisal. To deter the Communists from the use of their military power, 
the If this purpose is to be achieved U.S. and its allies in the aggregate 
will have to have, for an indefinite period, military forces with suffi­
cient strength, flexibility and mobility to enable them to deal swiftly 
and effectively severely with Communist overt aggression in any possible 
its various form, including general war. and to prevail in general war 
should one develop. In addition the. This deterrent is much more likely 
to be effective if the U.S. and its major allies show that they are united 
in their determination to use military force when necessary against such 
any aggression.”
REASON: As set forth in Section A of NSC 5810 the United States 
must recognize the existence of a mutual deterrence to general war and 
the reduced political usefulness of massive retaliation as the principal 
means of insuring the security of the Free World.
5. Page 4, subparagraph 10a—Change to read:
“10. a. It is the policy of the United States to place main, but not 
sole, reliance on nuclear weapons to integrate nuclear weapons with 
other weapons in the arsenal of the United States; and to place main, 
but not sole, reliance on nuclear weapons in general war, remaining prepared 
to fight limited war with or without such weapons. to consider them as 
conventional weapons from a military point of view, and to Nuclear
