September 18–December 16, 1978
549
6. Almost as troubling to the Israelis was our proposed treatment
of Article VI (2) and (5). Most of their comments focused on the Egyp-
tian interpretive note on Article IV (2) which they saw as fundamen-
tally altering the meaning of paragraph 2. I pointed out that the Egyp-
tians thought the present wording in the article could be interpreted to
negate the preambular language, but the Israelis insisted that the effect
of this note would enable the Egyptians to delay implementation of the
treaty provision because of anything that was not congenial to them on
the West Bank/Gaza.
7. On the West Bank/Gaza side letter Begin said, several times that
the Israelis could not accept a target date, emphasizing that this concept
had been rejected by the Cabinet by unanimous vote. He said if a Cab-
inet date could be avoided, there were several possibilities along the
lines of more general language such as “as soon as possible,” etc. In
general, however, the Israelis seemed somewhat less upset by the West
Bank/Gaza letter than by the linkage and Article VI questions. Dayan
at one point said that if we could resolve the question of interpretive
note and of linkage between this treaty and West Bank/Gaza steps, he
thought a solution could be found for the question of a side letter on the
West Bank and Gaza, suggesting that in these circumstances even a
target date might be acceptable. We had the feeling that on this issue
we were beginning to get into an area which the Israelis even at this
point saw as negotiable.
8. They also did not like the proposed Egyptian note on the review
clause in Article IV, but this I think should prove to be solvable. The Is-
raelis were sympathetic to strengthening the present language in the
article to make review obligatory if requested by either side but they
are opposed to the second paragraph which called for both sides to
make a review five years after signing.
9. I should report that in the small meeting held earlier this
morning, Begin criticized us for having sprung these proposals on him
without adequate consultations as provided for in our undertaking to
them. I told him that I did not think this charge was even remotely justi-
fiable. We had been in the closest consultations with the Israelis
throughout this treaty process and I told him that what we were
bringing from Cairo were Egyptian proposals which the Egyptians
themselves asked us to present to the Israelis.
10. We also provided the Israelis with the text of our legal memo-
randum on the subject of Article VI (5) but they made no extended com-
ment on this subject in today’s meetings.
11. After dinner tonight I met privately with Yadin, Dayan and
Weizman and told them very bluntly just where things stand with us
