1979  723
David Aaron noted that proceeding with construction of a CW 
plant will create political problems in Europe. He noted the upcoming 
FRG elections, and said that while he was not questioning the need 
for this plant on its merits, we don’t need to open up another political 
debate right now. He also noted the possibility that such a debate could 
create problems on the Hill, particularly given the possibility that the 
TNF and CW modernization issues might get aggregated. Reggie Bar-
tholomew said that it was important to get past the long range theater 
forces modernization issue before opening up the CW question, and 
that it might be appropriate to consider the binary CW plant early next 
year, perhaps with a supplemental appropriation. (TS)
Harold Brown noted the importance of having a CW capability 
that would deter Soviet use of CW, and the enormous disadvantage 
that results if the Soviets can force us to try to fight in CW protective 
gear, while our lack of an offensive CW capability lets the Soviets fight 
without being similarly encumbered. He asked however, how we could 
answer the strong political questions that had been raised about the 
wisdom of going forward with the CW plant now? (S)
George Seignious remarked that the idea of building a new CW pro-
duction plant had been around as long as he could remember and that 
he had never heard a really good case for it. He said that if the deterrent 
argument is a good one, we should build a good case for the plant that 
develops that argument. He also noted that we should have a better 
understanding of the potential effect of starting with a new plant on the 
CW negotiations. He suggested that we carry out a study of these two 
questions and go forward only after a strong case had been developed. 
All agreed. (S)
Secretary Brown opened discussion of the last question: Is develop-
ment of a ballistic missile defense system for MX justified as a hedge 
against loss of the SALT fractionation limits? (S)
Randy Jayne remarked that the Army appeared to be planning a 
major $1B deployment program for this purpose. Reggie Bartholomew 
noted that critics of the MX might take the program as an indication 
that the MX system “needed a crutch.” (S)
Jasper Welch noted that the Congress has had this idea explained to 
it before, in the course of consultations on the MX. Harold Brown said 
that it had been presented as an alternative to building additional shel-
ters. He also noted that if this system is ever really needed, it will only 
be one among many things that we will have to do to improve our 
strategic posture. (S)
Reggie Bartholomew said that the proposal might play in a reason-
able way, but that was not certain, and in light of the risk, is it really
