December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 595 commitment to assist on air base relocation is ill defined. The President must discuss this with the Israelis, but he could lead the way. Mr. McIntyre said that opposition [our position?] should be that we will make no cash commitments, but after a settlement is reached we will assess the request and make recommendations. That is the line he has been taking on the hill—it implies some additional funding, but that is all. How would we rationalize that position if we now go forward with new commitments as a result of this visit? Secretary Brown said he was only talking about 1981. Obviously, this would not apply before that budget year. Mr. McIntyre said that there are general totals that we are operating on with regard to 1981, and that we have to tread very carefully on that. Mr. Christopher said that the air base and other issues of that sort should be discussed under the general context of the peace process. Mr. McGiffert noted that the $1B figure in the paper is new. We have never given that to Israel before, although that is in the air base study. Secretary Brown said we have never talked about $3B in total aid, even if that is understood to include air bases and other factors. Mr. Christopher said it would not be desirable now to make a commitment for $1B for air base relocation. There are already big numbers there as far as the Israelis are concerned. Secretary Brown said he had not intended to make a commitment on this, rather he intended to discuss the study and the estimated costs that came out of it. It would be a mistake to say that we would provide loans or grants of money to Israel for that purpose. Mr. Christopher said that the words of the Secretary of Defense are heard as a commitment whether it is 81, 82 or any other time. Any discussion of the study should be prefaced with a clear statement that this would involve no commitment as to when or how we would provide funds. Mr. McIntyre said he would want to [talk?] to the President to see how he would deal with the question of budget levels. Secretary Brown said that he had told Weizman on several occasions that there would be $1B in FMS credits and $750M in SSA, and not more than that on an annual basis. Mr. McIntyre said that we should not leave the impression that that level will continue in perpetuity; however, that is a subject that is probably left unsaid at this point. Secretary Brown said he was worried about talking security with these countries without something to offer his own.
