It will be observed that the Telegraph Convention provides that the “Tariffs and
Regulations” shall be revised at the administrative conferences, whereas the
International Radiotelegraph Convention provides for the revision of the “Convention
and the Regulations”. It is, therefore, evident that it was intended that the periodic
conferences to revise the Radiotelegraph Convention and Regulations annexed to it
might add to the subjects which are dealt with in the present Convention.
The limitations upon the work of the Telegraph Conference were recognized by the
International Telegraph Bureau at Berne when it issued its circular telegram No. 99/12
dated July 12, 1924, requesting Governments to submit their proposals. This telegram
reads as follows:
“French Service reports that as unanimity could not be secured for meeting of
mixed conference about which the offices were told in Circular No. 744, of
June 12, 1922, the French Government invites countries in the Telegraphic
Union to an International Telegraphic Conference at Paris in the spring of
1925. The exact date of opening will be given later. The International Bureau,
therefore, begs the several services to kindly forward to it within four months
their propositions for that conference based exclusively on the telegraph
regulations now in force. Circular letter follows.” (Underscoring added.)
 
Also the Bureau’s Circular Letter No. 766, dated July 15, 1924, reads in part as
follows:
“… It now appears from a communication of the French Service, of the
eighth instant, that the French Government which had sought the consent of
the Governments interested, concerning the expediency of calling the earliest
possible Conference of electric communications, which was to revise the
telegraph and radio Conventions and Regulations now in force in Paris, was
unable, although the proposition was well received, to secure unanimous
consent.
“Under the circumstances it (The French Government) thought it best to
adhere to the decisions arrived at in the Telegraphic Conference of Lisbon in
1908, and to call the International Telegraphic Conference which should have
taken place in 1915 to a meeting in Paris in the spring of 1925.
“Therefore, the French Government instructed its diplomatic officers abroad
to invite the countries in the Telegraphic Union to send representatives to the
said Conference, the date of the opening of which will be later announced.
