3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1980 881 —intervention would probably entail a substantial long-term occupation that would complicate Soviet security planning in both Europe and Asia. [handling restriction not declassified] In the final analysis, however, the Soviet leaders would decide to bear these enormous costs rather than lose control of Poland: —Poland lies astride the traditional invasion routes to and from Russia and is thus a vital corridor, essential to Soviet military planning. —A less politically reliable Poland would leave East Germany in an exposed position. —A Soviet failure to act forcefully could encourage similar unrest elsewhere in Eastern Europe and, possibly, in the Baltic republics of the USSR as well. [handling restriction not declassified] 301. Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President Carter1 Moscow, September 15, 1980 Esteemed Mr. President, I avail myself of this opportunity—the meeting between the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the USSR, A.A. Gromyko, and the United States Secretary of State, E. Muskie2—to convey a reply to your letter of September 23 on questions of limiting nuclear arms in Europe. Your interpretation of the reasons for a delay in starting negotiations on these questions and your considerations as to the motives for the NATO decision to develop and deploy new American missiles in Western Europe certainly cannot be accepted. Neither can we accept the interpretation of the events in Afghanistan contained in your letter, or an attempt to link these events with issues that have no relation to them whatsoever. In taking note of the readiness expressed in your letter to begin an exchange of views on nuclear arms in Europe, I must say that this time, too, you have failed to respond to the substance of our proposal to the 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 5, USSR (General): 9/77–12/80. No classification marking. Printed from the U.S.-edited translation. Carter wrote in the upper-right hand corner, “Zbig J.” Original letter in Russian was attached. 2 Muskie met with Gromyko during his trip to the United States for the United Nations General Assembly meeting. See Document 302. 3 See Document 299.
