Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II We have explored with Director General Saouma of the UN Food and Agriculture Organization and other food aid donors the idea of Saouma’s calling an emergency conference to start organizing a coordinated aid program. Their responses encourage us to proceed. The emergency conference would also help to broaden international participation in relief for Eastern African refugees next year. International aid pledges have met their minimum food needs this calendar year, but continuing drought will strain both local and global resources for refugee feeding next year. Your announcement that the US is asking Saouma to call this conference would serve to give it wide public notice and would foreclose possible domestic criticism of indifference to a serious humanitarian problem.3 Recommendation That you announce that the US Government is asking the FAO to convene an emergency meeting of countries and international agencies interested in jointly providing food and other relief to millions of Africans facing famine in drought-afflicted countries, and authorize necessary follow-up action by the appropriate State Department staff. (State, Agriculture, IDCA, AID, OMB and NSC concur.)4 3 In his August 7 briefing memorandum to Christopher, Lake suggested that Christopher inform Owen that the regional bureaus, S/P, IDCA, and USDA “have recommended that the Secretary announce this US initiative in his speech to the UNGA Special Session, on August 25.” Lake added, “This initiative fits nicely with the general speech theme of mutual responsibility and the special emphasis on increasing food and energy production in the LDCs (which Tom [Ehrlich] strongly favors).” 4 Muskie did not approve or disapprove the recommendation. In his August 25 speech to the 11th Special Session of the UN General Assembly, he made the following announcement: “Our most urgent task is to confront the specter of imminent famine haunting Africa. This summer alone the United States has provided an additional 235,000 tons for emergency Africa food relief. We strongly urge that all nations able to contribute foodstuffs or funds join under the leadership of the Food and Agriculture Organization to coordinate relief to drought-afflicted regions. I am happy to note that the Director General will convene a meeting of concerned governments and international organizations in the coming weeks.” (Department of State Bulletin, October 1980, p. 77) At a meeting of donor countries and international organizations in Rome on September 20, Saouma announced that the United States, Denmark, Norway, the Netherlands, Australia, West Germany, Switzerland, France, and Algeria had made cash or food aid contributions. (Sari Gilbert, “U.S., 8 Others Pledge Emergency Food Aid to Africa, The Washington Post,
