December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
771
collective responsibility of the Saudi leadership. They had met in ad-
vance and decided. I am encouraged. Their attitude was warmer
toward you and toward us than I had feared.
General Jones said that he had talked with the Saudis about the
Yemen situation, noting that ammunition had moved in only a few
hours and that the F–5s were arriving in Dhahran today. The carrier
task force was now in the Gulf of Aden, with the carrier Constellation, a
cruiser, three destroyers and three frigates. It had very good fire power
on board. It could take out the South Yemeni Air Force in a matter of
hours. The AWACS was performing command and control training,
and surveillance and other actions were underway. We want to shore
up the situation in Yemen and develop closer and warmer relations
with the Saudis. A planning team is going to be coming soon to Saudi
Arabia. We hope the ceasefire will hold since other nations have now
come to Saudi and Yemen’s aid.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the Saudis realized that if they take any ac-
tions it will have an effect on their relations with us. We were quite
reassured. They indicated that we may face unpredictable acts, but they
felt that we gave more assurances on the strategic side and on the rela-
tions between you and ourselves. They know where we stand.
Jordan is more difficult to describe. The discussion6 did not focus
on tangible things. For one thing, there was less chance to talk. The
King was in a very somber mood. He had a tone of sadness and disap-
pointment about the future and about relations between us and you. I
cannot precisely summarize exactly where he stands. We did make
clear that any obstruction of the peace process would affect them and
us. (President Sadat interjected, “This is Hussein. This is Hussein.”) We
suggested that although it might be difficult for him to join in, he could
possibly encourage the Palestinians to join in. He did not rule this out,
but gave us no positive indication. He talked at great length, but all in
very dark, somber tones.
Mr. Christopher said that the King feels events have moved away
from the direction he had hoped. We urged him to keep doors open,
but we cannot honestly report any encouraging result.
Dr. Brzezinski said the best we can say is that it was not negative.
All we can express, all we can expect from him is a wavery course. I be-
lieve that covers the essence. Then Dr. Brzezinski said he wanted to
mention the question of the signing ceremony.
6 See Document 219.
