26  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
9.	
Briefing Note for the 353d NSC Meeting by Cutler1
Washington, January 30, 1958
ITEM 1—BALLISTIC MISSILES PROGRAM
1. In September, 1955, the President first gave highest priority to 
the ICBM program. At that time, the Secretary of Defense was asked 
to give a special briefing once a year on the status of ICBM progress; 
this request being later broadened to include highest priority IRBM 
progress and anti-­ballistic missile defense programs. Additionally, the 
Defense Department has for some time been reporting monthly to the 
President on ICBM and IRBM programs.
2. The last annual briefing was given in January, 1957. You will 
remember that last July the Council heard an over-­all presentation by 
the Defense Department, dealing with 41 different ballistic and non-­
ballistic missiles, with cost estimates projected through FY 1963.
3. The most recent Presidential action on missiles was, of course, 
last week, when the ICBM (ATLAS and TITAN), the IRBM (THOR-­
JUPITER, POLARIS) and the anti-­missile missile were all placed in the 
highest priority both for research and development and for achieving 
operational capability.
4. This morning we will hear the third annual briefing by Defense. 
Because of the amount of consideration the Council has recently given 
to the subject in connection with the 1958 budget augmentations, the 
1959 budget, and the “Gaither Report,” today’s briefing will be shorter 
than usual. It will not deal with defense against ballistic missiles, but 
will cover only the ICBM and IRBM programs.
5. At next week’s Council meeting the Department of Defense 
will report its recommendations on certain additional “Gaither Panel” 
resources the production of and initial operational capability dates for 
ICBM weapon systems, IRBM weapon systems, and POLARIS subma­
rine weapon systems; the installation of interim defenses against ballis­
tic missile attack at SAC bases by using modified available anti-­aircraft 
missiles; and the hardening of SAC bases.
Secretary McElroy—
R.C.
cc:  Dearborn
Lay
Gleason
Hawkins
1 Source: Introduction to Holaday’s briefing. Top Secret. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, 
Whitman File.
