94 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement I think all these points are sound and I passed them on to Achilles3 and Rubottom and Mallory. Rubottom goes along with Mann and believes that the IADB should be the chosen instrument. He thinks the fund might be utilized to spur the Bank into opening sooner. All of us agree that the above points can be woven into the President’s special message to Congress and, thereafter, can be amplified by Mr. Dillon at Bogotá. 3 In a memorandum to Smith, dated July 5, Theodore C. Achilles, Counselor of the Department of State, had expressed his “hearty agreement” with the basic idea of the new initiative. We also stated his belief that the program should be described in “human terms of benefit to the individual,” that it should serve as a pump-­priming operation for local capital and a stimulus to Latin American governments to undertake their own programs, and that it should focus on raising living standards. “In public presentation,” he said, “maximum emphasis should be placed on the program being good in itself and absolute minimum on its negative anti-Communist and anti-Castro aspects.” (PPS Files, Lot 67 D 548, “American Republics 1960–1961”) ETA–35. Memorandum from the Deputy Coordinator for Mutual Security (Bell) to the Acting Secretary of State1  Washington, July 6, 1960. SUBJECT S/P Memorandum on New Initiatives At the risk of heresy I want to express opposition to the S/P proposal. I am opposed because I think it exaggerates a need for “refurbishing U.S. leadership”, provides an oversimplified and probably inadequate answer to the problems of U.S. policy towards Latin American development, underrates the difficulties of Congressional approval, ignores the danger of failure, and assumes a global effect which would be probably confined in its beneficial aspects to Latin America and would risk adverse repercussions elsewhere. I do think our policy towards Latin America needs revision. My staff has prepared a study on this subject which was recently transmitted to ARA, S/P and C, and which attempts to address the problem in a somewhat more thoughtful manner.2 I have very serious doubt that 1 Source: Department of State, PPS Files, Lot 67 D 548, “American Republics 1960– 1961.” Confidential. Drafted by Bell; copies were sent to Smith and Achilles. 2 For information on the referenced study, see Document ETA–32.
