1979  747
Fourth, the last three years have been characterized by a willing-
ness on the part of your Administration to take on the responsibility of 
actually managing the Department of Defense—­a willingness to sug-
gest innovative solutions to old problems and to make tough decisions 
about defense priorities. The result has been not only stronger defense 
programs, but also a renewed sense of purpose and confidence within 
the Department.
II
A Program for Strategic Security
When this Administration took office, our Nation’s ability to main-
tain the unambiguous strength of its strategic deterrent was being 
eroded by two alarming trends: the first was the massive buildup of 
Soviet strategic forces over the past fifteen years, and the second was 
the progressive obsolescense of our own strategic forces, most of which 
had been deployed in the 1960s.
Ratification of the SALT II Treaty will represent a major step for-
ward in restraining the continued growth of Soviet strategic forces. 
Because SALT II reduces superpower competition in its most danger-
ous manifestation, this Treaty is the single most important bilateral 
accord of the decade.
To guarantee our strategic deterrent further, this Administration is 
implementing a comprehensive program to modernize all three legs of 
our strategic triad. Three years ago, we took a hard look at our major 
strategic programs, and found serious problems: the B–1 bomber was 
vulnerable to the new Soviet air defense systems already under test; 
the TRIDENT submarine program was bogged down in schedule and 
contract litigation problems; and the proposed design for basing the 
M–X missile system in closed trenches was found to be too vulnerable 
to single nuclear explosions. We have taken decisive action to correct 
these problems.
Our first major action was to substitute the air-­launched cruise 
missile for the B–1. Not only is the cruise missile less expensive, but 
because of its small size and large numbers, it renders the Soviets’ new 
air defense system obsolete even before that system is deployed. We 
put the cruise missile under accelerated development, are now well 
into the competitive flight test program, and will begin serial produc-
tion in 1980.
Our second major action was to institute management control of 
the TRIDENT program. We settled the contract dispute, and the pro-
gram is now back on track. The first submarine was launched this year, 
and six more are under construction. The TRIDENT I missile is on 
schedule and is now being backfitted on POSEIDON submarines.
