1956  1245
view his representations here on that subject, we proposed take action on 
this question and that aide memoire very specifically set forth that “all 
Chinese alien criminals now serving sentences in federal or state peniten­
tiaries in US are free to apply at once for parole or commutation sentence 
for purpose immediate voluntary return to” Wang’s country. In spite his 
govt’s inexplicable attitude toward proposal made in that aide memoire 
I was in position inform him that there not now in any of US prisons any 
alien Chinese who desire return to his country.
12. I continued, with respect Fr. McCarthy Wang had said if request 
were in accordance with prescribed regulations they would be granted. 
I utterly rejected concept that request must be in accordance with what­
ever regulations prison authorities might set forth when those regula­
tions in conflict with clear provisions international commitment entered 
into by Wang’s govt. Only test is whether they in accordance provisions 
our agreed announcement. Requests of McCarthy and UK Charge have 
been in strict accordance with that agreement. Rejection those requests 
by Wang’s authorities in violation that announcement. I rejected con­
cept release what he called “great majority” those Americans in his 
prisons was fulfillment terms agreed announcement. Detention any 
American who desired return was violation that announcement.
13. Wang replied, statement he made this morning had given very 
clear explanation this regard. He could not accept my allegation that 
his side violated agreement and considered it distortion of fact. During 
period in which serving prison term, American prisoners cannot claim 
right to return. This exactly in conformity with our agreement and not 
in violation of our agreement. It precisely Chinese side which taken 
effective measures in accordance with policy leniency. I repeatedly 
made arbitrary allegations Chinese Govt not carrying out agreement 
but it precisely as result Chinese Govt carrying out policy leniency 
that greater part American prisoners been able to exercise their right 
return. On US side so far not single Chinese imprisoned in US prison 
has returned. Under circumstances in which Chinese imprisoned in US 
not regained freedom, he rejected statement not single one among them 
desires return.
14. I replied I didnt see how on one hand he made statement that, 
fact that what he called “great majority” of prisoners in his country had 
returned showed his authorities had carried out the agreement, and 
on other hand he said they had no rights under agreement. Agreement 
did not speak of “great majority” of prisoners. Agreement spoke of all 
Americans who desired return.
15. Wang replied fact great majority American prisoners returned to 
US means Chinese Govt taken measures on own initiative in accordance 
with lenient policy and enabled them return. Chinese Govt not sus­
pended such a policy with regard American prisoners. However, before
