128 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the nationwide fall­ out shelter program as acted upon by the National Security Council at its meeting of 16 January 1958 and the report, NSC 5807, of the Interdepartmental Committee established to propose measures to carry out the concept of shelter. As a result of this review, the Joint Chiefs of Staff reaffirm their comments with respect to Item III–B–3 of the Security Panel Report, as contained in their memorandum for you, dated 4 December 1957. 3. With respect to a military fallout shelter program, the current J.C.S. Policy for Protective Construction provides adequate guidance for use of available funds. 4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the programs proposed by the Interdepartmental Committee of research, education, and construc­ tion of prototype shelters are desirable measures for carrying out the new national shelter policy. However, the following specific comments are offered for consideration: a. As proposed by the Committee the general programs of research, education and construction of prototype shelters are considered desir­ able measures for carrying out the new national concept of fallout shel­ ters. However, it appears that with the extensive knowledge already available on weapons’ effects and shelter design that decreased sup­ port should be given to this phase with increased emphasis on actual construction of prototype shelter. Further, that this preliminary testing-­ educational program, if accelerated, would be more responsive to that period which the Security Resources Panel of the ODM Science Advi­ sory Committee considered the critical period, namely, the next two years. b. Although it may be desirable to construct shelter in military facilities in such a manner as to provide effective examples to the gen­ eral public, first level of importance should be given to military opera­ tional needs. For the Joint Chiefs of Staff: N.F. Twining, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff.
