258 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement CH–19. Memorandum from the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Siracusa) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1  Washington, March 6, 1959. SUBJECT Chilean Request for Financial Assistance Although Sr. Eduardo Figueroa’s discussions with the IMF and with the Eximbank-Treasury-State team2 are still continuing, we thought you might like to have an interim report. The IMF and U.S. representatives engaged in these discussions seem to be generally in agreement that Figueroa has presented Chile’s case in a frank and persuasive manner. He will probably be able to go back with a reasonably attractive package. We understand that the IMF and Figueroa, with the approval of Finance Minster Vergara, have reached agreement in principle on all points involved in a proposed new stand-­by agreement. The agreement has been drafted by the IMF in the form of a letter to IMF Managing Director Jacobsson to be signed by Vergara and Central Bank Chairman Maschke, and the draft letter will be handed to Figueroa today for forwarding to Santiago. Assuming that the agreement is signed (Maschke may find it hard to swallow), it should be possible to develop a stand-­by package totaling $53.8 million. Practically none of this would be new money; $6 million would come from the still unutilized first-quarter 1959 drawings (DLF, Eximbank/ICA and private banks), $20 million from Treasury, IMF and private bank credits available but not scheduled for drawing under the stand-­by expiring this month, $2.5 million as the remaining balance of Chile’s IMF quota (the only new money), and $25.3 as a roll-­over of previous private bank stand-­by credits already utilized and due to be repaid in 1959 (if Figueroa can negotiate this with the banks concerned). Under the proposed stand-by with the IMF, Chile would not make regular monthly drawings as in the past but would draw only as needed by the Central Bank to prevent excessive fluctuations in the exchange rate. The IMF has informed Figueroa that it sees no objection to the proposed negotiation of a $50 million loan from the New York banks. The IMF has also informed Figueroa that it would have no objection to Chile’s acceptance of additional foreign financial assistance for 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 398.13/3–659. Confidential. Drafted by Phillips. 2 The team consisted of Ralph Korp of the Treasury Department; Silberstein, Phillips, Post, and Eaton representing the Department of State; and Pollack, Williams, and R. Henry Rowntree from the Export-Import Bank. Memoranda of their conversations are filed under 825.10/2–2759 and 825.10/3–359.
