3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
445
The Secretary stated that we had three different sets of trials in the
USSR to be concerned about. These were: 1) the trials of Soviet dissi-
dents, 2) the slander charges against two American journalists, Piper
and Whitney (of the Baltimore Sun and New York Times, respectively),4
and 3) the upcoming trial of a US businessman (Francis J. Crawford) of
International Harvester Corporation.5 As to why these cases were all
occurring right now, Ambassador Shulman added to his remarks about
the dissident trials and noted that the Soviet Government seemed to
have miscalculated that the negative impact in the West would soon
dissipate, based on their experience with the invasion of Czechoslo-
vakia ten years ago.6 Communists in Western Europe and elsewhere
outside of the USSR and Eastern Europe had also reacted negatively to
the dissident trials just as they had over Soviet actions in Czechoslo-
vakia. The trials merely helped to feed the line about the dictatorial as-
pects of Soviet communism. This, in the Ambassador’s view, would be
a continuing problem for the Soviets. Our problem, however, was how
to move along in our relations with them by providing a balance of in-
centives and disincentives so as to influence their behavior. With re-
spect to the dissidents, we hoped to be able to manipulate the situation
so that other elements of the Soviet Government would begin to hurt
and eventually move to restrain the KGB.
The Secretary added that it was apparent from the charges against
Whitney and Piper that the Soviets hoped to cut off the access of
Western journalists to the dissident community, but it clearly hadn’t
worked.
Gold asked about the Helsinki Final Act and the review session in
Belgrade. Did these not have a role to play in our efforts to bring pres-
sure on the Soviets? Ambassador Shulman responded that in the case
of Belgrade the Soviets saw it as an unmitigated disaster from the
outset and refused to go along with most of the major initiatives there.
Gold wondered about the rest of the “baskets” (apparently in addition
to Basket III) and whether there was not more utility in talking about
the Final Act as a whole when discussing it with the Soviets.
The Secretary said that in Belgrade we gave more emphasis to
Basket III, while the Soviets concentrated their attention on Baskets I
and II. We held throughout the Belgrade session that all Baskets should
be included in the discussion as a connected whole. Views, even among
4 See footnote 2, Document 129.
5 See footnote 5, Document 133. For more information on Crawford’s arrest and
trial, see E. Barrett Prettyman, Jr., “An Arrest in Moscow: What’s at Stake for U.S.
Business,” The Washington Post, August 9, 1978, p. A23; and Kevin Klose, “Soviets Asking
Suspended Term for Crawford,” The Washington Post, September 7, 1978, p. A1.
6 Reference is to the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968. See Foreign
Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XVII, Eastern Europe, Document 85.
