It should be noted that in all cases in the local tribunals attended by the Dragoman of the Consulate General, the judgment must be signed by the Dragoman to make it effective. If the Dragoman refuses to sign the judgment a new case may be commenced. If the native Judge insists upon the execution of the judgment, even though the Dragoman refused to sign it, the case must be settled administratively between the French High Commission and the Consulate General. All services in connection with cases in any of the above mentioned courts should be made upon American citizens through the intermediary of the American Consulate General. It is my opinion that the case between Mr. Zoghzoghy and Mr. Abraham, being, as it is, an alleged breach of contract not involving real estate, should come properly in the Mixed Commercial Tribunal, and service could only be made upon Mr. Abraham through this Consulate General, irrespective of whether he resides in Syria or the United States. Mr. Abraham has given a power-of-attorney to Mr. Kaleel Muallem to act for him and defend his interests before the local tribunal. The case has been set for hearing on February 11, 1924. It appears that the plaintiff in his action has caused the defendant’s property in Syria to be attached. Inasmuch as an attachment in a case of this kind constitutes more or less an act of execution of a judgment, which can only be effected against American citizens by the Consulate General, and inasmuch as the Consulate General was not notified by the Court in this regard, Mr. Abraham’s lawyer and the Dragoman of this Consulate General will protest against the judgment at the next hearing of the case. If their protest is unsuccessful, the matter will be taken up administratively between the Consulate General and the French High Commission. There is one more point in connection with this case and any similar cases which will be of interest to the Department. By despatch No. 1120 of August 18, 1923,28 this office transmitted to the Department a summons for service upon Salim Ibrahim Nihra, the name by which Mr. Joe Abraham is known in Syria. In its reply of September 24, 1923 (File No. 084.90d/orig.)29 the Department stated:
