3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
178
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
but not later than the early 1980s before declining. To stave off or slow
the expected production decline, the Soviets will need substantial
amounts of Western oil field technology and equipment. Because of its
superior technology, the United States is the most logical source of
much of this equipment and know-how. Without assistance in the form
of Western technology and equipment—especially high capacity lifting
equipment involving US technology—gas lift and electric submersible
pumps—Soviet oil production will fall sooner and more sharply than
would otherwise be the case.
Although the USSR and some West European countries produce
low capacity oil well pumps, the only pumps adequate to deal with the
Soviet lifting problem are produced in the United States. The USSR has
been buying several hundred annually in the US and recently sought a
turnkey plant for their manufacture. Thus far neither of the two US pro-
ducers has been interested in supplying the production technology.
The US is the preferred source of other equipment and technology
such as drill pipe, rock bits and rotary drilling rigs, none of which is
under export control restrictions, as well as certain COCOM-controlled
items, e.g., seismic and gravimetric measuring and recording instru-
ments. There are close substitutes for these in other Western countries,
however.
Credit
The Soviet hard currency debt increased from only $5 billion at the
end of 1974 to $14 billion at the end of 1976, and it will probably grow to
about $17 billion by the end of this year. What pushed up the debt was
mainly the Western economic recession, which nearly halted the
growth of Soviet hard currency exports and the massive Soviet grain
imports in 1975 and 1976 following the disastrous 1975 harvest.
The USSR’s hard currency trade deficit reached a record $6.3 bil-
lion in 1975 and $5 billion in 1976. The traditional means of financing
deficits—Western government-backed credits and gold—were no
longer adequate, and the Soviets had to borrow heavily on the Euro-
dollar market at higher interest rates including a substantial amount on
short term.
As a result of heavy Soviet borrowing, many major banks reached
or at least approached their legal or self-imposed ceilings on credit to
the USSR. Moreover, the international banking community has grown
concerned about the growth of the Soviet debt and the persistence of
large trade deficits. Although bankers remain confident about the
USSR ability to repay its debt, they feel that additional credits require
higher interest rates.
Moscow’s stubborn stance on terms is hampering progress in ne-
gotiations for government-backed export credit lines. The “gentlemen’s
