Comprehensive Test Ban
545
CTB
The President said he would like to see us move rapidly to conclu-
sion of a complete test ban treaty.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
CTB
Gromyko noted that the CTB negotiations were indeed moving
forward, but rather slowly. The main thing he would want to point out
was that whenever the situation at these negotiations appeared to im-
prove, US representatives would introduce new proposals that threw
cold water on the whole process. There was a time when the United
States had argued in favor of a five-year term for a CTB treaty. At that
time the Soviet Union was more in favor of a three-year term, although
it did not oppose five-years. It simply thought that it was easier to work
out a three-year treaty. Then, quite suddenly, in the United States
various officials began to assert that five years was too long, that such
duration would interfere with certain national plans for testing nuclear
weapons, while a three-year term would not. That position was hardly
convincing. The Soviet Union had finally expressed agreement to the
five-year term, but then the United States changed to three. All these
zigzags were most perplexing and difficult to understand. The Soviet
Union would take this into account in the future. For their part, the So-
viets could also talk about national plans, but they stand on a different
position. Things would be very difficult indeed were they to reply in
kind. Nevertheless, since the United States had changed its position,
obviously the Soviets would have to take this into account, because
there were two other parties to the negotiations. Basically, they would
like to see this agreement completed. It would be a limited agreement,
of course, because apart from the three particular powers, other nuclear
powers would not be signatories to the agreement. Nevertheless, it
would have a positive impact on the international situation.
In conclusion, Gromyko said that these were the specific consider-
ations he had wanted to convey to the President, and in general wanted
to tell the President on behalf of the Soviet leadership and L.I. Brezhnev
personally that the Soviet Union’s policy was aimed at good relations
with the United States and remained as set out and formulated in
Brezhnev’s message to the President.2 The Soviet Union would do all
2 Just before this meeting, Gromyko handed Carter a message from Brezhnev.
Carter “said that he found this letter to be interesting and constructive,” and asked if he
could “respond to it more directly in writing.” (Memorandum of Conversation, Sep-
tember 30, 9:30–9:45 a.m.; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office,
Presidential Advisory Board, Box 81, Sensitive XX: 9–20–25/78) The text of the message is
ibid.
