December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
699
Arab leader has done anything to restore the rights of the Palestinians,
except for you. I need your advice on how to open negotiations with the
Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank. I know that some of you, such
as the Vice President and Mr. el-Baz, have contacts. We’ll do what we
can to bring them in in a constructive way. Israel will be reluctant to
carry out Camp David with enthusiasm. When they have a choice,
they’ll go for a narrow interpretation. We’ll have to urge them to be
more forthcoming. This plays into the hands of the Israelis when the
Palestinians don’t cooperate. We need some mechanism through which
Vance can give me advice on this. Secretary Vance or the Vice President
could return. We’ll try to choose a top-level negotiator to work on this
problem. We want to try to make this permanent and to prove by
events that it is a step toward comprehensive peace. Next would be
Gaza, and possibly the West Bank, and then Jordan, and last Syria. I am
available to meet with you. This is the greatest thing that I have ever
worked on. You have taken the bold steps.
President Sadat: You instigated it. You remember your letter.6
President Carter: Secretary Brown will talk about our military rela-
tionship. We are revising our aid programs. We have planned a reor-
ganization. You can help by having Ambassador Ghorbal advise us on
private investment opportunities. We have some bureaucratic prob-
lems in carrying out projects. We need to show that things can move
rapidly. I’ll try to change the bad situation in the United States and
hope that you will look at your Cabinet to see if obstacles can be re-
moved. Our business relations could improve.
Secretary Vance: We’ll do all that we can to help.
President Carter: Secretary Vance went over with me his talks with
Prime Minister Khalil. I’ll do my best. I can’t shuttle, but we’ll commu-
nicate through Ambassador Eilts. My intention is to bring the talks to a
successful conclusion.
President Sadat: This is a very encouraging development. A few
moments ago the Mayor of Gaza sent me a letter. He is taking a positive
attitude. He is saying that he is waiting and is sure that the efforts that
we are making will reach agreement for the comprehensive peace in
the area. He knows that you have helped the Palestinian people in their
self-determination. He wants you to continue your blessed efforts.
President Carter: Once the treaty is an accomplished fact, I hope this
attitude will develop.
President Sadat: Gaza I am sure of. In the West Bank, because of
King Hussein and the PLO, there is a question. There are the interests of
the mayors. They are businessmen. On the economic interests, I suggest
6 Not further identified.
