Non-Proliferation
873
Owen: All of us will have to tighten up on safeguards. There is a
need for a wider group. Some countries want nuclear energy. The
danger is in delay. We support the fuel cycle evaluation program and
also agree on the preliminary study. But this could take a year. We
should make progress in the London Suppliers Group and perhaps
widen the membership. We who are deeply involved should lead the
way. If we did nothing in the Suppliers Group, it would be dangerous.
Our scientists question whether you can store waste from such re-
actors very well. The UK Magnox is a case in point. There we have got
to reprocess. But there is a great deal to be said about the exchange of
information.
President Carter: The crux of the question is whether we are going
to insist that reprocessing be under strict safeguards to allow countries
access to fuel in a prudent and acceptable way. If the safeguards are not
adequate, it will be difficult to provide nuclear fuel. This is true for
Canada and Australia as well, although I cannot speak for them. I have
no objections if nations wish to reprocess or have the breeder. But there
is no reason for us to permit countries who are not signatories to the
NPT to develop nuclear weapons capabilities. I am not trying to stop
the breeder. Our reprocessing plants did not work, but I hope that you
who are building a breeder will be more successful. The crux of the sit-
uation is to devise some way to develop adequate safeguards so that
we can provide fuel to those who need it.
Callaghan: The difficulty you have is to persuade other countries
that your position is based on the reality of the problem of proliferation
rather than to serve your advantage as an energy rich country. You
cannot give people the impression that you are trying to shut other
countries out. I accept that your view is based on concerns about prolif-
eration and the need for proper safeguards but it is important that you
not give the impression of depriving countries of the benefits of nuclear
fuel.
I believe President Carter’s suggestions offer an opportunity of
moving forward. If you in the US go forward in the absence of a study,
it presents difficulties for all of us. The issue that we must study is that
we have got to see that safeguards can be erected so that what you want
can be achieved. What is said here has indicated that without agree-
ment on this matter countries without coal, oil or natural gas will have
problems. We need a technical study so that we can really work out the
issues that can be solved in this manner.
MacDonald: Canada’s policy is to refuse the supply of raw ura-
nium. We will control supply in the first instance. We would have to
reach an understanding on what the safeguards are going to be. The ar-
guments in the US situation are the same as in Canada. If we were
forced to take unilateral action we would be hit from both sides by not
