798 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV under these No-SALT circumstances. However, the Soviets probably would expect the United States to increase the number of MX shelters substantially. In this case, Soviet RVs remaining after a Soviet silo/shelter attack would be significantly reduced. 38. We believe the Soviets are now considering some form of advanced guidance system for their future SLBMs, but it is unlikely that MIRVed SLBMs with hard-­target capabilities could be deployed before the 1990s. To acquire such capabilities, the Soviets would have to develop guidance techniques employing global positioning satellites or terminal RV homing. This would involve more technical risk and vulnerability to countermeasures than the Soviets have been willing to accept in their SLBM systems to date. We cannot, however, exclude the possibility that the MX/MPS system might motivate the Soviets to develop such techniques and that, with a high level of effort, they might be able to start deploying SLBMs capable of attacking MX shelters in the late 1980s. 39. The Soviets have ample capabilities to destroy all US SSBN bases as well as the bases of the US bomber force. We have no present evidence that the Soviets are trying to minimize the flight time of SLBMs in order to pose a greater threat to US alert bombers. In view of the dispersal and other measures the United States could exercise, it is unlikely that the Soviets would be able to destroy more than a few of the bombers the United States keeps on alert. Prelaunch Survivability 40. The overall survivability of Soviet intercontinental offensive forces in the 1980s will remain heavily dependent on the survivability of their fixed ICBMs. Deployment of more SLBM RVs and mobile ICBMs would increase the relatively survivable portion of Soviet forces, but present trends do not suggest a radical shift away from silo-­based ICBMs. Figure 3 depicts the threat to Soviet ICBMs posed by current and programmed US SALT-­limited forces, assuming that the United States targeted two ICBM RVs against each Soviet silo and that Soviet silo-­based ICBMs rode out an attack. The figure shows: —In the top two charts, if the Soviets elected to deploy a new ICBM with a single RV, some 3,000 Soviet RVs on silo-­based ICBMs could be expected to survive an attack by US ICBMs through the middle 1980s. In the late 1980s, however, the number of silo-­based RVs expected to survive would be reduced to about 500 because of the increased counterforce capability of the MX. —In the bottom two charts, if the Soviets elected to deploy a 10-RV new ICBM, the number of silo-­based RVs expected to survive in the late 1980s would be only slightly higher. —In both cases, a two-­on-­one attack on all Soviet silos would leave the United States with virtually no ICBM RVs remaining until the late
