Arms Control and Disarmament 1457 suggestions. Also attached is a copy of the Memorandum of Conversa­ tion with Dr. Bradbury. Gordon Gray Enclosure Memorandum of Conversation October 9, 1958 MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION WITH DR. EDWARD TELLER (in the company of General Goodpaster and Captain Morse) In accordance with a request made of me by Chairman McCone on Friday morning, October 3, in connection with the NSC-­OCB visit to the Nevada Test Site, I arranged for General Goodpaster and me to spend some time with Dr. Teller. This was primarily accomplished by driving with Dr. Teller from Las Vegas to the NTS on Saturday morn­ ing, October 4, and by sharing a car with Dr. Teller throughout the day’s activities. Captain Morse was in almost constant attendance. I indicated to Dr. Teller that I was particularly interested, in con­ nection with the question of nuclear test suspension or moratorium, in loopholes, both from the point of view of the “threshold concept” and from the point of view of the reservation of testing for peaceful uses. There follows a summary of various points made by Dr. Teller: 1. Dr. Teller indicated that there was no disagreement as to the facts and that the difference came in interpretations, which he felt in individ­ ual cases were largely based on motivation. 2. Atmospheric tests. Dr. Teller pointed out that at Geneva there had been no attempt to work out a system of policing these tests under 1 KT. Down to 5 KT the system proposed would present good chances of detection of atmospheric tests, but not down to 1 KT. Atmospheric tests are not essential for development of weapons, but are important for weapons effects. 3. Underground Tests. The chances are not good of detecting an underground shot of the magnitude of 5 KT, and it is virtually impossi­ ble to detect an underground shot of 1 KT. Originally in the Geneva conference we asked for 650 stations (even this number in Dr. Teller’s opinion might not be enough to give a high degree of assurance against evasion). We finally agreed upon 160 to 170 stations with the statement that these could detect underground shots down to 5 KT, with some small chance below 5 KT, but not down to 1 KT.
