208  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
Joe Nagoski is working full time on the assembling of informa­
tion on Chinese in this country who have been assisted, who have left, 
and who are about to leave. A wealth of information is available and it 
will be sent to you as it seems needful. Herman Phleger thinks there is 
enough grist to keep the mill going for sometime if needed.
WSR is to return to the Department on Tuesday the 6th. Carl 
McCardle is on leave and Bob McIlvaine will help us handle the press 
and public relations aspects which will undoubtedly involve some 
problems. The Secretary said yesterday that probably we should have 
some sort of backgrounder for the press when the Agreed Announce­
ment comes out making it particularly clear just what the limitations 
are and what the announcement does not signify.
We are getting out a circular to all our Chiefs of Mission from the 
Secretary right after the announcement is released, spelling out for them 
that the Agreement does not signify any relaxation to our opposition 
to recognition of UN seating of Communist China, and that there is no 
change in our policy of support of the GRC. The circular will also point 
out that the continued Chinese Communist military build-up in the 
South China coastal area and their direct and indirect support of threat 
of force and subversion against the Governments of Korea, Vietnam and 
Laos are serious unsettling factors in the general Far Eastern situation.
Bill and I were particularly happy to see the Secretary’s personal 
telegram of commendation to you. It is well deserved and it means a 
lot. Congratulations and regards,
Sincerely,
Walter P. McConaughy
160.	 Telegram 672 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 3, 1955, 6 p.m.
672. From Johnson. Re: Deptel 677.
Following are my preliminary thoughts on timing announcement:
Had assumed Department continued desire release “agreed 
announcement” by Wang and me here accordance paragraph 6, ­Deptel 
391. “Agreed announcement” drafted in this form. Simultaneous release 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–355. Secret; Priority.
