3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
241
66.
Central Intelligence Agency Information Cable1
December 14, 1977
[cable number not declassified] Country: USSR/Cuba/Ethiopia.
DOI: Late November through early December 1977.
Subject: Increased Support for Ethiopia by the USSR and Cuba; Ar-
rival by Air of Additional Soviet and Cuban Military Personnel and
Military Supplies.
ACQ: [less than 2 lines not declassified]
Source: [2½ lines not declassified]
1. The Soviet airlift of men and material to Ethiopia that has been
underway since late November 1977 is a direct result of the very strong
recommendations made by Soviet General V.I. Petrov who has himself
remained in Ethiopia to direct the massive speed-up of Soviet assist-
ance. The earlier arrival of Petrov and his Soviet Military Study Group
was in turn a direct result of the plea for increased assistance made
by Provisional Military Administrative Council (PMAC) Chairman
Lt Col Mengistu Haile-Mariam during his visit to Cuba, the German
Democratic Republic and the Soviet Union in late October. [3 lines not
declassified]
2. The Soviet airlift, operating both from the Soviet Union and An-
gola and within Ethiopia, has as its main purpose the early delivery
and distribution of weapons, military vehicles, ammunition, and other
supplies that the USSR had agreed to sell Ethiopia under the December
1976 and May 1977 sales agreements; however, more than 400 addi-
tional Cuban military advisor/instructor personnel and about 250 new
Soviet military advisor personnel have also arrived on the airlift since
the end of November. The total number of Cuban military personnel in
Ethiopia is now more than 1,000 plus about 150–200 medical personnel
and there are now slightly more than 500 Soviet military advisor per-
sonnel in country. (Source comment: Additional Cubans and Soviets
are expected to arrive in the next months, raising the totals to as many
as 2,000 Cubans and 1,000 Soviet military personnel.)
3. Based on the recommendations of General Petrov and the
findings of his study group and those of the PMAC defense committee
the PMAC Chairman has agreed to the need for an increased Cuban
military role in Ethiopia. Planning therefore is now underway for the
employment of Cuban troops in a combat role, operating both artillery,
rocket and conventional and anti-aircraft weapons and piloting combat
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special,
Box 5, Evening Reports File: 11/77–1/78. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
