Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI I recommend that we make a counterproposal designed to shift the burden of proof from the requesting party (where it is placed under the Soviet proposal) to the suspected party as well as to raise the political costs that the suspected party would incur if it refused a reasonable OSI request without giving justifiable grounds for doing so. The formulation I recommend, which would be incorporated in the separate verification agreement that will be concluded with the Soviets to supplement the multilateral CTB treaty, would contain the following elements: —Each party would have the right to request an OSI at any time (i.e., there would not be a ceiling on the number of requests that could be made). —Any type of evidence, seismic or otherwise, could justify an OSI request. There would be no technical criteria for screening out events as not eligible to invoke an OSI request. —As in the Soviet proposal, the party on whose territory the event took place would have the right to turn down the request. However, if it decided to do so, it would be obligated to provide a detailed justification for its decision, including any seismic, photographic, or other evidence that it believed demonstrated that no violation had been committed. —If the requesting side were not satisfied by the explanation, it could call for further information. If it remained unsatisfied by such additional information, it would be entitled to bring the matter to the U.N. Security Council. —The parties would issue an agreed interpretative statement to the effect that arbitrary refusals to grant OSI requests could undermine confidence in the treaty and could create a situation in which a party whose requests had been arbitrarily denied might consider that its supreme national interests were being jeopardized. The clear implication would be that a party could legitimately withdraw from the treaty if it felt that its requests for OSI were being turned down on insufficient grounds. The principal distinction between a mandatory OSI system and a purely voluntary one is that a refusal to grant an inspection under the former type would constitute a treaty violation and would thus justify withdrawal from the treaty by a party whose interests are threatened. The agreed interpretative statement described above would provide the functional equivalent of that advantage, and would serve as a significant disincentive against arbitrary rejections of OSI requests. The recommended approach, by requiring suitable justification for any OSI refusal and by eliminating Soviet-proposed barriers to making an OSI request, would tend to create the presumption that the state which is asked to accept an inspection visit will either grant that request or provide a convincing explanation why the visit is unnecessary.
