Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I herent and consistent: (1) we will seek to coordinate more closely with our principal allies in order to provide the foundation for a more stable international system; (2) we will engage in a North-South dialogue in order to deal with wider human needs; (3) we will seek accommodation on the East-West front in order to avoid war and to widen transideological cooperation. In addition, we will seek to halt the spread of arms, both conventional and nuclear. The record is more mixed, in my judgment, when we look at more specific aspects of this broad policy: The Soviet Union and Eastern Europe Here I think we have done very well. Our commitment to human rights has put the Soviet leadership on the defensive in an area where it had a free ride for at least the last eight years, and perhaps even for the last fifteen—if we count from the start of the Vietnamese War. The reason that Brezhnev et al are reacting so strongly to your insistence on human rights is not because they fear that we will make human rights a condition for our relations with them; they fear this insistence because they know that human rights is a compelling idea, and that associating America with this idea not only strengthens us, but it also generates pressures from within their own system. Ideologically they are thus on the defensive. Moreover, with regards to SALT, by committing ourselves to reductions, we have made the Soviets seem opposed to genuine arms limitations. In the past, they have often made the United States look as if it was opposed to arms limitations. The tables have now been turned, though the chance for a comprehensive agreement this summer are very uncertain. The next step should be this: we should ask the Soviets to explain what specifically they did not like about the package, thus drawing them into a discussion of it. The Middle East Your basic statement has created a flexible framework for dealing with hitherto intractable issues.2 By combining the need for a compre- 2 Presumable reference to a statement the President made regarding a possible Middle East settlement during the question-and-answer segment of the Clinton, Massa-
