52
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
14.
Summary of Conclusions of a Presidential Review
Committee Meeting1
Washington, August 23, 1977, 4:15–4:50 p.m.
SUBJECT
Policy toward Eastern Europe
PARTICIPANTS
State
Defense
Warren Christopher
Harold Brown
Matthew Nimetz
Walter Slocombe
Richard Vine
General George Brown (JCS)
CIA
NSC
Stansfield Turner
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Robert Bowie
David Aaron
Robert Hunter
Gregory F. Treverton
1. Christopher indicated the purpose of the meeting was to refine
the choice between the two options discussed at the previous PRC
meeting on Europe:2 Option 3—giving preference to those Eastern
European countries that are either relatively liberal internally or rela-
tively independent internationally; and Option 4—abandoning any
implicit rank ordering and seeking to expand contacts and relations
across the board to the extent feasible.
2. Brzezinski emphasized U.S. objectives, arguing that Option 3
would not cause Eastern European states to become more independent
or liberal but that overt support for countries that have achieved a meas-
ure of one or the other would shore up their positions. By contrast,
Option 4 would conduce merely to attempt to promote good relations
and might diminish the special stake that Romania, Poland and Hun-
gary have in their relations with the United States. Secretary Brown
noted that pursuit of U.S. objectives should be limited by the need not
to provoke something like the Hungarian uprising of 1956. Brzezinski
agreed that our objectives should be pursued by working through
existing governments.
3. Nimetz noted that the previous NSDM on Eastern Europe had
established such a firm rank order and time-table that it prevented
taking advantage of opportunities that arose. Christopher suggested
that there might be times when the U.S. would want to move forward
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 16, PD–
21. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 6.
