460 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III U.S. and the EC. Our scheme that we have been discussing is to bring about monetary stability in the EC. We cannot influence basic trends of currency outside of the EC. We cannot and we will not. We hope to reduce very volatile movements in the short term, but in the long run currencies cannot be stabilized by monetary devices. Stability in exchange rates requires discipline. If not, exchange rates will go up or down. Letting the DM go up reduces inflation. But this has caused too much trouble with our neighbors. We will inform our friends in North America and Japan and keep you fully informed of developments. Trudeau: One point of information. We don’t have a Common Market in North America. We try to have stability and would like to have stability but the Canadian dollar has gone from U.S. $1.03 to $.89. Thus we do not really have stable exchange rates. Schmidt: We will meet again at 10:30 tomorrow. 147. Minutes of the Bonn Economic Summit Meeting1 Bonn, July 17, 1978 BONN SUMMIT Session 3 Schmidt: This morning we have agreed to discuss trade and relations with developing countries. First we might spend a minute or two on the hijacking statement. [Omitted here is discussion of a joint statement on hijacking.] TRADE Jenkins: The document worked out in Geneva last week2 was an attempt to resolve the question as to whether there was a reasonable 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 9, Vance NODIS Memcons 1978. Secret. Drafted on August 8. For more information on the drafting of these minutes and a list of Summit participants, see footnote 1, Document 145. This third session of the Summit, which took place in the Palais Schaumberg, began at 10:30 a.m. and ended at 1:01 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) 2 Reference is to the Framework of Understanding on the Tokyo Round, agreed to by the U.S., EC, Japanese, Canadian, Nordic, Swiss, New Zealand, and Austrian MTN delegations in Geneva on July 13. See Document 144.
