Colombia 385 in its efforts to solve the problem. Refugees from bandit-­infested rural areas have flocked to the cities where they create a serious social problem. They are easy prey for Communist and pro-Castro agitators. Lleras Camargo is of the opinion, which is supported by United States Government representatives in Colombia, that his government’s efforts to resolve some of Colombia’s basic social and economic problems within a democratic framework are doomed to failure unless the bandit problem is resolved. The Colombian military establishment has excellent personal. Its professionals have excellent training in military theory but limited practical training in field operations, particularly counter-­guerrilla activities. It lacks field equipment, both individual and organization, and it is short of transportation and communication equipment. In June 1959 President Lleras Camargo asked the United States to consider assisting him in attacking the bandit and guerrilla problem. In November-December 1959 this government sent to Colombia a team of anti-­guerrilla warfare experts to survey the problem. The team’s recommendations were mainly for steps the Colombians themselves could take, with United States technical assistance, e.g., to develop specially trained anti-­guerrilla forces, to establish effective intelligence and information services, and to undertake a program to install confidence in the armed forces. The team also recommended that special material be provided to enable the Colombian armed forces to combat the guerrillas in the field. The team’s recommendations have been accepted in principle by the responsible United States Government representatives in Colombia. Upon receipt of assurance from the Colombian Government that it is in agreement with certain courses of action which are to be submitted to it for consideration by the United States Government, and on receipt of a formal request for United States assistance, the Department of State and the Department of Defense recommend that United States be prepared to offer grant military assistance in the form of equipment, materials, related services, and training. It is considered to be in the United States interest to provide Colombia with the military equipment, materials, and services described above using up to $1,500,000 of funds available for military assistance in fiscal year 1961. The furnishing of military assistance on a grant basis to any Latin American nation is subject to several conditions. First, under Section 105(a) and 143 of the Act, the President must determine that the increased ability of the nation to defend itself is important to the security of the United States, and that the furnishing of such assistance will strengthen the security of the United States and promote world peace. Second, Section 105(b)(4) of the Act provides that military equipment and materials may be furnished to a Latin American nation only in furtherance of missions directly relating to the common defense of the western hemisphere and that, unless the President determines
