292  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
CAPABILITIES AND POLICIES, 1957–1962, 12 November 1957. The new 
estimate, like its predecessors, is made in the light of our previous judg­
ments that the USSR does not now intend to initiate general war delib­
erately and is not now preparing for general war as of any particular 
future date. It also assumes that through 1966 there will be no interna­
tional agreements on the control of armaments or of outer space.
The estimate is intended primarily to reassess and update our 
estimates of probable Soviet missile development programs, missile 
characteristics, and first operational capability dates. Some discussion 
is provided on factors likely to affect Soviet acquisition of substantial 
operational capabilities with missile systems, and Soviet capabilities 
to place various arbitrarily-­selected quantities of ICBMs in operational 
use are estimated. The reader is cautioned that Annex A of NIE 11–5–57 
is no longer applicable.
For the most part, changes in estimated missile characteristics and 
first operational capability dates result from the accumulation over the 
past year of a considerable body of new evidence. Of the 13 missile 
systems estimated as probably available for operational use in 1958 or 
earlier, we now have direct evidence on the existence of nine; we also 
have direct evidence on Soviet development of an ICBM. For some of 
these systems the evidence is extensive, while for others we have only 
limited information relative to characteristics and components. Serious 
intelligence gaps remain, particularly with respect to the operational 
status of various systems. Furthermore, we do not have sufficient evi­
dence available on which to base an estimate of the vulnerability of 
Soviet systems to specific electronic countermeasures.
In making this estimate in a field where positive intelligence 
remains limited, we have considered the available evidence in the light 
of estimated Soviet military requirements, known and estimated Soviet 
capabilities in related fields, and US guided missile experience. The 
entire study rests upon our belief, now well-­supported by evidence, 
that a concerted and continuous Soviet research and development 
effort in guided missiles was underway by 1948.
For guided missiles, except where noted otherwise, the operational 
capability dates given are the earliest years during which we believe 
missiles could probably have been placed in the hands of trained per­
sonnel in one operational unit, thus constituting a limited capability for 
operational employment. We estimate that when they first become 
operational, the missile systems discussed herein will have a system 
reliability of 40–60 percent, and that improvement will occur thereaf­
ter.4 For space flight activities, the dates given are the earliest possible 
4 The term “system reliability” is here defined as the percentage of missiles which 
function according to specifications from missile launching to detonation in the target 
area, excluding malfunctions prior to launching. [Footnote is in the original.]
