Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 281. Memorandum From the Deputy Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Bremer) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, February 14, 1980 SUBJECT Your Breakfast with the President Friday, February 15, 1980 1. Yugoslavia. A. Current State of Play. Tito’s condition remains “very grave,” according to the latest Yugoslav medical bulletin. While Tito could die at any moment, [less than 1 line not declassified] he could last another day or two. A proposed public statement by the President and condolence messages for the President and Vice President are at the White House. You also will issue a brief statement and send a condolence message to the Yugoslav Foreign Secretary. We will brief key members of Congress, stressing our confidence in Yugoslavia’s ability to manage its own affairs successfully during the coming months. Although we have no indication as yet from the Yugoslavs, we expect there will be a State funeral or memorial service approximately six days after Tito’s death. Ambassador Eagleburger has been informed by the U.K. in Belgrade that a “firm” decision has already been made that Prince Phillip, Thatcher and Carrington will attend. We expect heavy, high-level attendance by Third World, Western and at least some Eastern leaders. Embassy Belgrade’s tentative list of participants includes Presidents Ceausescu and Pertini, Schmidt, Genscher and Brandt, and Clark of Canada. A proposed funeral delegation list has been sent to the White House by Ben Read’s office (Tab 1).2 Ambassador Eagleburger has asked us to bear in mind, especially regarding accompanying staff, that there will be a flood of delegations and that Belgrade is a small city with severely limited hotel space. Briefing materials are being prepared for use with the Yugoslavs and for anticipated bilaterals. We can expect the Soviets to field a high-level delegation and will inevitably have to deal with the question of a possible bilateral. We would not expect much of substantive value from such a meeting and 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
