Chapter 6, June–December 1990 865 throw-­weight by 50 percent. This objective of a “50 percent throw-­ weight reduction” has been one of the most popular and easily understood features of START. The Soviets agreed in 1987 to reduce their throw-­weight by approximately 50 percent, but insisted that it be measured by the weight actually tested on missiles, not the full capability of missiles. Now the Soviets accept the U.S. proposal to measure the full capability of missiles, but want a 45 percent reduction rather than a 50 percent reduction. This is largely a political issue. Accepting the Soviet proposal would be criticized as abandoning a longstanding position, to which the Soviets have agreed in principle, for 50 percent reductions (although the Soviets have been careful to accept only a commitment to reduce throw-­weight by “approximately” 50 percent). From a political perspective, the fact that the U.S. has settled for anything less than a 50 percent reduction may be as much or more important than the particular percentage reduction that is agreed (e.g., 45 vs 47 percent). Militarily, under the Soviet proposal, their post-START force could be 10 percent larger in terms of weight than a 50 percent throw-­weight reduction, the equivalent throw-­weight of the SS–25 force. In principle, this additional throw-­weight could be exploited to deploy larger warheads or penetration aids. In practice, however, the military significance of this additional throw-­weight would be mitigated by the numerical limit of 4900 warheads, which would remain unchanged. Finally, in order to make clear what limit will actually apply to Soviet throw-­weight, we need to establish an agreed numerical baseline from which the reductions will be taken. We need to make clear that any proposal to resolve the throw-­weight reduction is contingent upon the Soviets tabling (and our acceptance of) throw-­weight data for their existing missiles. Attachment Paper Prepared in the National Security Council9 Washington, September 17, 1990 START/ABM Issues START Preamble The Soviets have pushed to relink START to the ABM Treaty by proposing that the START Treaty Preamble state that the sides are 9 Secret.
