770 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI longer forcing these missiles to wither away. We are saying OK to the concept of the Mod 5 and 6 that are already developed. We don’t like these improved versions, but we accept them and look to fit them into START. We want a level of flight testing that would assure us no Mod 7, 8, or 9 would further erode the reductions. If we can reach agreement on this concept, we could look at other arrangements. If the problem is the number, we can get experts together to look at the number. I have no flexibility on the number, but we could have experts meet and argue the number. There may be different ways to fit the concept. If we can agree on the concept, we could get people together to see how it could be achieved. Karpov: I told you already this approach singles out Soviet heavy ICBMs, the SS–18, I told you quite clearly. Let us talk about maintaining the readiness and reliability of all missiles—ICBMs, SLBMs, and cruise missiles. How many tests are required to maintain their reliability and readiness? Bartholomew: Each of us has had occasion to single out particular concerns, we can add up the score if you want. Do one thing for me, make that two. First, don’t complicate the problem we are trying to resolve by generalizing. And second, please review what I have had to say on my own authority, and consider further the concept I have outlined. Let me remind you that Gorbachev said the problem of heavy ICBMs could be addressed in future negotiations. Karpov: I am prepared to say that. Bartholomew: The two go together—­the ban on more than 2 flights per year and the specific problem for future negotiations. 2 flight tests is an interim step that holds the force at a certain level of capability while we try to solve the problem in future negotiations. You are saying nyet to 2 flight tests and proposing a reference to heavy ICBMs that sets no objective for future negotiations. Karpov: We have made a major step, reductions of one-­half, no other constraints are necessary. Bartholomew: The mobile ICBM warhead number gap needs to be filled in the START joint statement. Let us tell our ministers we did one thing—­we split the difference on 1000. Then we could tell Masterkov to leave the room with Brooks to make the change in the text. Karpov: Let me recall, we don’t only have the warhead limit, there are other verification issues. I proposed three different options for resolving the issue of notification. In this context we could establish a mobile ICBM limit as part of a comprehensive package you are trying to tear apart. We have already moved from 1600 to 1200. Bartholomew: We have moved from 0 to 800, and are ready to go 200 more to 1000. We should be solving what we can. Your verification
