March 1952–February 1953
389
will in some manner provide political support and economic assistance
which will enable Iran cope with its internal problems.
Henderson
137.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, October 30, 1952.
1771. 1. At Mosadeq’s request Warne and I called on him this
morning. He opened conversation by expressing deepest appreciation
of work which Point IV under Warne’s direction was accomplishing in
Iran. He said his various ministers who were cooperating with Point IV
had unanimously expressed to him their appreciation of what Point IV
was doing and admiration and affection for Warne. They were con-
vinced that Warne and Point IV personnel were really friends of Iran
and doing all they could to assist Iran and Iranian people. Warne
thanked PriMin, pointing out that he had always received full coopera-
tion from ministers in Mosadeq’s Cabinet and from other Iranian offi-
cials. He described certain recent activities of Point IV and assured
PriMin that spirit of cooperation between Point IV and members Ira-
nian Govt and Iranian officials could not be better.
2. PriMin said there were two matters in particular which he
would like to discuss. He hoped that we would understand that he was
raising them because of his earnest desire that work of Point IV be suc-
cessful in Iran. Point IV was so closely interwoven with present Iranian
Govt that its failure wld not only damage Iran but it wld damage
present Govt and its success wld be of benefit both to Iran and to Ira-
nian Govt.
3. Mosadeq referred to salaries being paid Iranians employed by
Point IV. According to his info scale salaries was higher than that of Ira-
nian Governmental employees. This difference was giving rise to cer-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 469, Records of U.S. Foreign Assistance Agencies
1948–1961, Mission to Iran, Executive Office Subject Files (Central Files) 1951–1961, Box 4,
Folder 4, Point IV—General—1952. Secret; Security Information; Priority. Drafted by
Henderson. This telegram is the Embassy copy as approved and has no time of transmis-
sion. Warne’s account of this same meeting, October 30, was sent to the Department in
despatch 347, November 2. (Ibid.)
