considerations were made. He promised us that he would telegraph to his Government the arguments we urged upon him; namely, in effect, that if our treaty situation is to be saved, no bargaining is possible. However, he did not give us much hope of reconsideration. 3. I was convinced, as was O’Malley, that these are the objects which the Japanese have in view: (1) to postpone the imposition of the Washington surtaxes as long as possible, and (2) to keep their assent to such surtaxes in reserve as the price they will pay to secure a treaty which will establish upon Japanese products satisfactorily low rates. We considered it to be certain, therefore, that unless the Japanese Government is forced by the unanimous concurrence of the remaining powers interested in granting the surtaxes to come into the open, it will not reconsider its position. With this in view, the fact that the British Government is determined upon the policy of proceeding along this line was put forward to Yoshizawa very explicitly by O’Malley. The British Chargé stated that he would consult with all other interested colleagues to secure their concurrence; and that he would ask after waiting a reasonable time for instructions to be received that a meeting of representatives be held, and there he would call for a show of hands. With that done, O’Malley continued, his Government would consider that its duty to consult under the Washington treaties with the other parties to them had been fulfilled, and it would regard itself as free to undertake whatever course of action it then chose, singly or by cooperating with the other powers who might adopt a position the same as the British adopted. Since I did not believe my instructions warranted my going so far as to declare that I would, even in the face of Japanese dissent, join with the British, I for my part declared that in the eventuality contemplated by the British Chargé I would be obliged to secure further instructions from my Government, but that I inclined to the belief that in regard to the Washington surtaxes the United States would be anxious to fulfill its obligations as best it might under existing circumstances. 4. During the morning of the next day, the 16th, O’Malley and I went together to the Dutch Minister and then went to the Italian Minister. We found that they were prepared to give their Governments a strong recommendation of the proposal. O’Malley had already been informed by the Dutch Minister, who later also informed me, that he favored the plan
