1186 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX maybe other issues can be in the Continuing Committee. It could in a few months determine water rights. It will give flexibility for progress during the next 40 days, to determine the division of powers. Minister Burg said that Prime Minister Begin had not seen this paper. Prime Minister Begin said that he will study it. Minister Burg asked if the understanding is that the question here has to be talked over with the Egyptians. The President said that he guesses it will be all right. He has not seen the language. Minister Burg asked if they could talk more about it. The President agreed. Minister Burg said “primo” and then “excuse me.” Prime Minister Begin said Minister Burg should skip that and just say “second.” Minister Burg said that residual categories are not mentioned (in the paper)! Where are they? There are three categories: those to be transferred—in principle; those to be shared and coordinated—here it says shared; and residual—where are they? He asked to be allowed to get this out of his system. What about the residual categories? He personally likes not to postpone deciding on economic cooperation. It is a legal question, and should be discussed now—not delayed. This is a small country, and we should do this before (the agreement). The idea of a veto is no good. Eighteenth-century Polish governments fell because of the veto, under Prime Minister Bishinsky (?).5 Prime Minister Begin said that one man disagreed, and the whole parliament went home. Professor Brzezinski remembers! Dr. Brzezinski said that is why the Prime Minister and he are both here! (laughter) Minister Burg said that there were three partitions of Poland. Therefore, what if there is too much of a veto? The President asked: a what? Minister Burg said: a veto. It needs to be clarified. In between, what happens if the military goes out before the civilians are ready. It should be there on the same date, if a vacuum is to be avoided. If the veto is added, there will be a stronger problem. 5 Reference is to Wladyslaw Sicinski, a seventeenth century Polish-Lithuanian noble popularly credited with introducing to the Polish legislature the use of the liberum veto, a parliamentary device in which a single veto could block legislation already passed.
