288 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 substantive. If that doesn’t work, we can always close the harbors. The Secretary of State then outlined the scenario whereby we will wait until Friday4 before going for sanctions, and if Salim goes to Tehran we would wait for next week. The President noted that other countries are more likely to go along with us if they see the entire enterprise as a UN effort and not as a U.S. effort. Admiral Turner pointed out that Iran is Khomeini and that we are in for a protracted process. What alternatives do we have once the present plans have been exhausted? The Secretary of State said we could go for partial sanctions, then make them stronger, then blockade. The Secretary of Defense noted that a series of military steps have been developed if the process spins out for a longer period of time. We will need to replace the Kitty Hawk with the Nimitz. We could fly some B–52s over the carrier group; we could fly the aircraft from the carriers up the Straits of Hormuz or the Gulf; we could overfly Iran with an SR–71; we could deploy a marine amphibian unit; we could deploy F–111s into Egypt; we could also take some direct steps such as electrical disruption or blockade. Brzezinski noted that in the initial phase we mixed peaceful steps with military actions. This gave us credibility. Now the impression exists that military action is out. We need to keep the military option and diplomacy in tandem. But what military actions would suffice later on? We may need sufficient force to push Khomeini out of power in order to get a solution. The Secretary of State noted that steady action may be more effective than flashy action. In response the Secretary of Defense cited our Vietnamese experience as “inoculating” the other side. Jordan noted the possibility of waning public support. The President said that we have to bring the issue to a head. It involves not the U.S. vs. Iran but the world community vs. Iran. Accordingly, we should —let Waldheim5 know today that we will seek sanctions; —announce that action on Friday and make a strong presentation of our case to the effect that we are seeking to carry out the mandate of the Security Council, and maybe the Secretary of State himself should make the presentation; 4 December 21. 5 After “Waldheim,” Carter inserted: “and the members of the Security Council (heads of government).”
