562
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
on Afghanistan while offering to drop our opposition to the Moscow
Olympics, we should do so quickly.
G. I frankly doubt, however, that it will be successful. It is for that
reason, and with an eye to the long-range prospects and dangers, that
I think we should begin exploring possibilities for getting back to the
arms control table. Some say that it will be impossible to have any
serious talks, even on arms control, while contacts are frozen in other
areas. But I think we have to give it a try.
Watson
197.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Summary Report and Recommendations Pakistan/Saudi Arabia
The talks with the Saudis were better than a year ago: franker,
more specific and more constructive. There is no doubt that your State
of the Union message has had a fundamental impact. They now take us
seriously. In Pakistan I believe we convinced the Pakistani leaders that
you stand foursquare behind the reaffirmation of the 1959 Agreement.
As a result, we neither had to up the ante on the $400 million nor
promise a formal treaty.
Subject to your guidance, I believe we should now pursue the
following items:
1. Since the Pakistanis have basically decided to stand up to the
Soviets, we may need to increase our military assistance, but primarily
in anti-tank and other defensive-type weaponry. In addition to what-
ever we can raise from others (and the Saudis promised to make a
substantial contribution), we may then eventually have to go beyond
the $200 million if we want them to be effective in responding to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 41, Brzezinski, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia: 2/1–5/80: Briefing Book III. Secret. In
the upper right corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig—J.” Attached but not
printed is a covering note from Brzezinski to Carter, February 6, in which Brzezinski
offered to give an oral report of his trip in addition to the “action-oriented” items he
provided in the memorandum.
