Negotiating Channels 403 was only a high, political-level decision which would have any real effect. Dr. Brzezinski observed that, on the basis of some talks he had yesterday, the one thing which seems to get their attention is the risk of U.S. unilateral action. We can also publicize instances in which U.S. companies and perhaps other countries are evading or circumventing our policy. He noted that the President had concurred with the SCC recommendation to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to publicize offenders, noting that we should “block other sources if possible” on grain transfers. Mr. Cutler noted that Luther Hodges was conducting a survey of major U.S. companies to see what their overseas operations were likely to be and to make our policy position clear. Secretary Miller felt that we would find most American companies already in compliance with the policy and prepared to be cooperative. Secretary Vance cautioned that we should be very careful about publicizing unhelpful actions by other countries since we could create the impression that our policy is not working. (S) 5. Implementation Group. Dr. Brzezinski noted that much of the effort of the SCC recently had been occupied with questions of implementation of economic policies. It was essential to have close coordination on these issues, but in the meantime we should also be thinking about our longer term strategy and next steps. He proposed that a separate Implementation Coordination Group be formed which would meet in parallel with the SCC. This group could look at public posture, the nature of the sanctions, and how to put teeth into our efforts. The group should include State (Warren Christopher), Defense (Graham Claytor), Treasury, CIA, and NSC (Henry Owen). Secretary Miller offered to host the meetings at Treasury. (It was subsequently decided that the first meeting should be held at the White House.)10 (C) [Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran.] 10 At their first meeting, the group discussed their mandate, whether the SCC would take economic decisions without the guidance of the Implementation/Coordination Group, and economic issues related to Iran and Pakistan. (Minutes of SCC Implementation/Coordination Group meeting, January 18; Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 108)
