National Security Policy  149
“(ii) The design of various prototype shelters, the development 
of shelter programs, and development and laboratory testing of struc­
tures, facilities, equipment and materials not requiring nuclear field 
tests.
-----$1.0 Million
“(iii) Studies dealing with psychological, emotional, educational 
and morale problems and determinations of tolerance limits under 
emergency conditions; medical, food, and water requirements in shel­
ter habitation; and sanitary controls to permit tolerable occupation.
-----$1.5 Millions
“(iv) Development of architectural designs and specifications for 
new types of multiple-­use shelters which will be attractive as well as 
practical. The Committee believes that attention should be given to the 
use of grants to schools of architecture and engineering which would 
stimulate curriculum development, training of new students, and new 
concepts of shelter design.
-----$2.0 Millions
“While the above program will be of highest importance in improv­
ing our capabilities to develop a comprehensive shelter system, there 
are serious unsolved problems relating to effects of nuclear attack on 
humans, including the immediate and long-­range effects of radiation, 
and to the development of measures to provide protection against or 
mitigate those effects. The Committee feels that a special assessment 
is required to determine whether present research efforts in this field 
by the several agencies of Government are reasonably adequate or 
whether further coordination or acceleration is indicated. It is therefore 
recommended that a suitable group be designated to evaluate the pres­
ent efforts and to report on their adequacy, including recommendations 
for improvement of the total national effort, if such is warranted.”
b. A research and development program along the lines of the rec­
ommendations by the NSC Planning Board, as follows:
(1) The Special Assistant to the President for Science and 
Technology to recommend a qualified group to make a special assess­
ment as to (a) the adequacy of present research efforts by the several 
agencies of Government on the design and testing of shelters and on 
the effects of nuclear attack on humans, including the immediate and 
long-­range effects of radiation and measures to mitigate such effects; 
and (b) whether such research efforts should be better coordinated, 
integrated, or accelerated. (Paragraph 1, page 1, of the enclosure to the 
reference memorandum of March 24, 1958.)
(2) The Atomic Energy Commission, in consultation with the 
Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, to
