1234 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Enclosure Memorandum From Twining to McElroy Washington, December 31, 1957 SUBJECT U.S. Policy on Control of Armaments (U) 1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed Mr. Stassen’s latest dis­ armament proposal, which is to be submitted for preliminary consid­ eration by the National Security Council on 6 January 1958. They feel that from a military point of view, and also from a political viewpoint, the position they have taken on the Four Power Joint Proposals of 29 August 1957 is still sound. However, they are aware that the political climate has changed to some extent since the submission of those pro­ posals. The best evidence of this change lies in the feelings expressed by several countries at the last meeting of the Heads of Government in Paris that we must continue, especially with our NATO neighbors, to attempt to reach an understanding with the Soviet Union on disarma­ ment, and must not evince an intransigent position. 2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff understand that the most recent disar­ mament proposal is an effort on the part of Mr. Stassen to meet these aims, and to advance a U.S. position which will lead to the reopening of fruitful discussions on disarmament with the USSR. However, there are three points in the proposal which the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe to be dangerous to the United States. a. The major change that Mr. Stassen has made to the Four Power Joint Proposals of 29 August 1957 is the abandonment of the provision for inseparability of the individual items of the proposals. From a secu­ rity viewpoint, there has been no improvement in the international sit­ uation since 29 August 1957 to warrant such a critical departure from the joint western position rejected by the Soviets. On the contrary, the apparent advances in Soviet missile technology disclosed since that date, coupled with the boastful and belligerent attitude of the Soviet Union with respect to these events, have aggravated the international situation. In addition, the Soviets have withdrawn from the present UN Disarma­ ment Commission. The inseparability provision of the 29 August Pro­ posals made these proposals barely acceptable to the United States in meeting the minimum requirements for the security of the United States and the other NATO powers. Abandoning this essential provision would present the Soviets with the opportunity of accepting only those propos­ als compatible with their national interests—for example, the suspension of nuclear testing—to the detriment of the U.S. and NATO interests. b. The former provision for the control of fissionable material, both for peaceful and weapon purposes, which goes to the heart of the dis­ armament problem, is no longer a prerequisite. It has been included only for discussion and possible agreement at some future date. It has
