1955  531
calls into question desire of my government seek just and peaceful set­
tlements of disputes between us, including those in Taiwan area and 
therefore I do not believe arguments which you gave as alleged basis 
for rejecting my November 10 draft have a basis in fact.
E. At our last meeting you also again spoke of meeting of our For­
eign Ministers, as if that was only means of peacefully settling disputes. 
You appear continue confuse basic difference between fundamental 
principle of unconditionally agreeing peacefully settle disputes and 
procedural question of what form of negotiation shall be used imple­
ment that principle. My government proposed these talks as normal 
and natural way of discussing and settling our differences. We are both 
Ambassadors fully authorized speak for our respective governments to 
extent that our governments are willing enable us do so. That is why 
my government proposed that these talks be at Ambassadorial level. 
If your government is as desirous of peaceful settlement of disputes 
betwen us as is my government, it will enable you to make full and 
honest efforts negotiate and discuss our differences here before raising 
question of terminating these talks and substituting another method of 
negotiation. When we have succeeded in resolving questions which we 
are called upon deal with here, then our governments will naturally be 
in better position consider what further steps might be taken.
[F.] At our last meeting you also particularly spoke of inclusion in 
my draft of phrase concerning right of individual and collective self-de­
fense. I am very surprised at your apparent rejection of inclusion of 
such phrase as I would have thought that you would have considered 
it very important. Your interpretation of phrase was very distorted and, 
read in context of my draft declaration as whole, I do not consider that 
your interpretation is correct. What phrase simply says is, while we 
will not initiate hostilities, each of us wish to make clear that, if there is 
an attack in Taiwan area or elsewhere, we will defend ourselves indi­
vidually or in concert with others. You have spoken much of princi­
ples of United Nations Charter. This principle of right of self-defense 
is certainly age old, natural principle which is again restated in United 
Nations Charter, and it is difficult for me see on what basis there can be 
objection thereto.
G. We have both agreed that our differences of view and disputes 
between us should not lead to war, and that it is intent of both of us that 
we will not permit this happen. Thus draft I have proposed simply says 
this in as straightforward and simple language as I am able contrive.
H. We both agree that region in which our differing policies and 
views confront each other most seriously is in area of Taiwan. This is 
also obvious to world. Therefore, in making such general statement it 
is important to make clear to world that neither of us has any hidden
