Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 427 The Soviets have sought constraints on heavy bomber weapons comparable to those on ballistic missiles. In response to stated Soviet concerns, we agreed in 1986 to count ALCMs and other bomber weapons under the 6,000 warhead limit, but only if they were heavily discounted. In establishing this position, the U.S. recognized that the Soviets would have an equal right to exploit the rules. We judged, however, that protecting our flexibility to deploy a large bomber force was more important than constraining similar Soviet capabilities. Following are significant features of the current U.S. and Soviet approaches: — Both sides have agreed (under the “Reykjavik counting rule”) to count bombers which carry only gravity bombs and SRAMs as “one” against both the 1600 SNDV and 6000 warhead limits; count ALCM-­ carrying heavy bombers as one unit against the 1600 SNDV limit; treat all existing long-­range air-­to-­surface cruise missiles as nuclear-­armed; provide geographically separate basing for the three classes of bombers (ALCM-­carrying heavy bombers, non-ALCM carrying heavy bombers, former heavy bombers). — U.S. proposes to count ALCM-­carrying heavy bombers as 10 warheads against the 6000 warhead limit regardless of actual load or capability. Soviets propose to count bombers as the number of ALCMs for which they are actually equipped, verified by on-­site inspections. — U.S. considers “ALCMs” to include only those air-­launched, nuclear-­armed cruise missiles with ranges in excess of 1500 kilometers, although we have expressed flexibility to include shorter-­range ALCMs if the Soviets agree to other parts of our ALCM proposal. Soviets propose a 600 km range threshold. — U.S. rejects any numerical limits on future long-­range conventionally-­armed cruise missiles and proposes to distinguish them from treaty accountable nuclear-­armed ALCMs through NTM. Soviets agree that future conventional and nuclear ALCMs can be distinguished, but they propose to do so on the basis of both observable and functionally-­related differences. It is not clear what differences would be required to meet these Soviet standards. — U.S. proposes to limit ALCMs indirectly through rules that attribute a certain number of ALCMs to each ALCM-­carrying heavy bomber. We reject any direct limits on deployed or nondeployed ALCMs, as well as any numerical sublimit on heavy bomber weapons under the 6000 aggregate. Soviets propose a limit of 1100 weapons on deployed heavy bombers and a numerical limit on the number of nondeployed ALCMs, to be verified by on-­site inspection and continuous monitoring of ALCM production facilities. They have recently informally proposed to eliminate all numerical limits on nondeployed systems (both ballistic and cruise missiles), but would apparently retain the ALCM verification measures and the 1100 bomber weapon sublimit. — U.S. approach would provide for 115 “former heavy bombers” (i.e. conventional bombers) which would not count against either the 1600 or 6000 limits; the absence of nuclear capability would be verified
