Afghanistan 73 2. We do not suggest there has been any lessening of anxiety about the future course of relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan among policy-makers and opinion molders on this side of the Durand Line. Most Pakistanis we meet expect the future of the relationship to be one of tension, even struggle. Concern over more recent events in Iran has done little to lessen the long-term Pakistani sense of foreboding about the Russian threat to this part of the world and the evident (to them) weakening of Western resolve to meet it. But no immediate crisis has come, and events suggest more of the same. 3. The evolution of Pakistani attitudes is perhaps best illustrated by General Zia-ul-Haq’s decision to stop off briefly in Kabul earlier this month enroute to Tehran to meet personally with DRA’s Taraki.4 As best we can determine, this was a typically spontaneous Zia move. Accepting that there would be little gain on substance, the General appears to have over-ruled [garble—his?] MFA advisers in order to have a chance to take the personal measure of the new Afghan leadership as well as perhaps get for himself a little breathing room in the relationship. On both fronts, he appears to have been successful. He came away from the visit—according to a senior member of his personal entourage—with a new appreciation for Taraki’s abilities and the regime’s toughminded deputy, Foreign Minister Amin; and he is exploiting the exchange of peaceful homilies to take a bit of the edge off the tensions in the state-to-state relationship. 4. We know, from the Foreign Secretary, for instance, that the visit reinforced Pakistan’s conclusions about the Communist character of the regime; we know also, however, that the Paks came away believing that Taraki and company have their hands full at present with the difficult job of sorting out their own leadership problems and of establishing their writ inside the country. GOP officials thus do not now anticipate an early crisis in their relations with the DRA. 5. This also suits General Zia’s political imperatives. Pakistan also has domestic preoccupations in the short term, foremost among them a resolution of the Bhutto situation.5 The new President must also cope with the pressures of a re-awakened political system, the byproduct of his gradual relaxation of martial law restrictions on press, assembly, 4 The meeting between Zia and Taraki was reported in telegram 7312 from Kabul, September 12, which characterized the meeting as a friendly first encounter between the two leaders that did not delve into pressing bilateral problems. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780371–0979) 5 A reference to the fate of former Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who was overthrown in a military coup by Zia on July 5, 1977. He was sentenced to execution on March 18, 1978, and was hanged April 4, 1979. Documentation on U.S. policy regarding Bhutto’s ouster and execution is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
