1956 1251 statement ready for use if a suspension does occur. With Chou’s good­ will trip through parts of Southeast Asia and the Middle East in full swing, with Nehru’s visit to the President in prospect, and with the Chinese Communists’ public agitation over the Egyptian issue taper­ ing off somewhat, an abrupt move of a defiant nature at this moment would not seem to be in the cards, notwithstanding the fact that they have lost the UN membership battle for this session of the GA. We have delivered your message to EUR. There was considerable apprehension at absences of any of our chiefs of mission in curtain countries following the political criticism of Jacobs and Wailles for not being at their post when the trouble started, but this is less evident now. I agree with you that the EUR telegram authorizing your “visit” to Geneva was peculiarly worded. We did not see the text before it went out or we would have objected. They simply told us that they were okaying your travel to Geneva. I was at the American Assembly at Harriman, New York, November 15 through November 18. The final Report was pretty favorable to our basic far Eastern policy, although there was criticism of our policy on travel of newsmen. You get so many reports of the harm which the talks are doing to us in the Far East, I’m glad I can tell you that the fact of the talks made it much easier for me to defend our China policy before the Conference. They are all for “flexibility and a reasonable conciliatory and moderate approach.” They felt that the Geneva talks are a definite manifestation of such an attitude. I believe we would have been criti­ cized for a negative and rigid posture toward the Chinese Communist problem, had we not had the Geneva conversations to point to. I will send you a copy of the revised Final Report as soon as I receive it. You no doubt have seen the references to the speech of Ernie Gross on the night of November 17 in which he rather minimized the Geneva talks as being “behind the barn” in character and as not being at a sufficiently high level. I am enclosing a copy of an extremely confidential report made by [text not declassified] his recent trip to Communist China. I apologize that we have to send you a rather messy copy, but it is the only one we have. It is particularly sensitive and we had to get a special dispensa­ tion to send it to you. Walter Robertson got away on Thanksgiving Day. I am enclosing a copy of his itinerary in case you would like to write him before he gets back on December 22nd. I leave on Wednesday to make a speech in Mr. Robertson’s stead at the Naval War College on November 29 on “The Power Struggle in the Far East.” I’ll have something to say about the talks in the course of that speech.
