1008 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX only the Saudis.6 We should consider slightly more involvement, perhaps with talking points to selected Arab participants. This can be judged on the basis of the Foreign Ministers meeting. —Rejectionists: They will no doubt try to put together some rhetoric, if not some concrete action. They will set the tone of the meeting. Saudi Arabia, lacking a consensus among the moderates, is inclined to be passive. The pressure to move to consensus, however, is on the hardline side, not the moderate side (as was true at Baghdad I and II). We should make this point to Saudi Arabia and other moderates, in order to try shifting rhetoric, and also to give Lebanon a better chance of being a focus of attention instead. —Israel: A key factor in the Summit will be the impending deportation of Mayor Shaka.7 There is a consensus in Israel on this point, and not much give. But if it happens, the likelihood of stronger rhetoric out of the Summit, and coalescence around hardline positions, will increase considerably. The peace process will be damaged on the West Bank. Newsom is talking to Nehushtan; we should consider going to the Vance/ Strauss level immediately.8 Revelation of their settlement plan before the Summit will also have a serious effect.9 —Oil: Even with Iran, it is unlikely that any new steps will take place on oil at the Summit, although 1) Ghaddafi is almost certain to raise it; and 2) there is a good chance that there will be a declaration on 6 West met with Saud on November 11 to discuss the issue of Lebanon at the Summit. West summarized the Lebanese Government’s desire for a strengthened ceasefire in which “no armed elements” in Lebanon “would attack anyone else,” cooperation of all parties with UNIFIL, and the introduction of Lebanese Army units and civil authorities in southern Lebanon. Moreover, West emphasized the U.S. effort to give “strong support” to Lebanon. (Telegram 7789 from Jidda, November 12; National Archives, RG
