572 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement President Lemus expressed violent opposition to communism in any form, and the need for the free world nations to unite their forces against this threat to human liberty. The President expressed interest in the matter of controlling the moves of communist agents in Central America. He said that the Salvadorans had been very vigilant during the period of communist rule in Guatemala and that this vigilance was still required. The Commandant of the Military Academy, during the ceremonies at which Dr. Eisenhower presented a United States flag to the Academy, spoke words of praise for NATO and said that the nations of the hemisphere should stand with this organization in defense of world peace. President Lemus, speaking of President Luis Somoza of Nicaragua, said he believed that President Somoza was an honest man and that he intended to implement his announced decision to return the country to a more democratic way of life. However, he was faced with vested interests and duress that made it difficult for him to make radical changes in the policies of his father. President Lemus also stated his belief that President Somoza intended to pursue a more cooperative and friendly policy toward the other countries of Central America. He expressed his belief in President Somoza’s sincerity and said that it would be difficult for the Nicaraguan President to make changes quickly but he had no doubt that he would make these changes. He said that he would sum up his opinion of President Somoza by saying that he was a sincere, honest, and upright man. The President expressed great concern with the lot of rural workers in El Salvador, and expressed determination to do something for them under his Campesino Program. The President on a number of occasions spoke of how much he was looking forward to his visit to the United States early next year. The President also spoke with satisfaction of the recent agreement between the Central American countries which eliminated the need for visas. A group of non-­communist labor leaders also spoke to Dr. Eisenhower and Assistant Secretary Rubottom at some length. They spoke out sharply against the attitude of the big landowners whose greed in their opinion fed grist to the communist mill. They said that if the big plantation owners and landowners would only be a little more human now they might save themselves trouble in the future. They spoke feelingly of the low wages paid the workers on the land, and the great disparity of wealth and poverty in the country. They seemed to feel that in some way the United States might bring some sort of pressure to bear on the landowners to pursue a more liberal policy.
