1394  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
be able act quickly in presenting U.S. and Western views on test sus­
pension shortly after conclusion Geneva Conference. British position 
remains that last communicated by Lloyd to Secretary: i.e. that they 
would wish await results Geneva Conference before deciding on next 
steps. Nevertheless, Embassy has strong impression that UK is seeking 
lead from U.S. and, indeed, would welcome this plus indication how 
to deal with French in most helpful yet firm fashion. Because of strong 
public opinion pressures in UK for progress on disarmament and also 
some form test suspension under adequate safeguards, HMG rpt HMG 
may well be pushed by its public opinion to act rapidly once Geneva 
Conference terminated. FonOff clearly believes next 10 days will 
demonstrate at Geneva how anxious Soviets are to obtain agreement 
on feasible control system, and to demonstrate this interest through 
accepting reasonable monitoring system consistent with West’s secu­
rity. Nevertheless, working level FonOff also appears believe there will 
be great pressures on UK arising both from final reports on Geneva 
Conference and from report of U.N. Radiation Committee.
Embassy would welcome any indications Department’s thinking.
Whitney
345.	 Memorandum of Conversation Between McCone and John 
Foster Dulles1
Washington, July 30, 1958, 12:50 p.m.
Mr. McCone handed me the attached memorandum on a limited 
test moratorium and asked my views regarding it. I said that I thought 
that there should be urgent thinking along the lines of a constructive 
proposal on suspension of testing as if there were a possible outcome 
of the Geneva talk of experts, some such action was imperative. I said 
I thought it would in any event be imperative for the next General 
Assembly, particularly having regard to certain aspects of the prospec­
tive UN report of experts.
1 Source: Dulles reacts negatively to a paper by Libby and Teller urging testing lim­
itations. Confidential; Personal and Private. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, 
General Memoranda of Conversation.
