534 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 190. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State1 New Delhi, January 31, 1980, 1117Z 2112. Subject: Clark Clifford’s January 30 Meeting With Indian Foreign Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao. 1. S—Entire text. 2. Summary Mr. Clifford conveyed to FonMin Rao President Carter’s view of the world situation after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.2 Mr. Clifford emphasized the need to take measures that would effectively deter the Soviets from further aggression in the sensitive Persian Gulf area. Projected U.S. arms deliveries to Pakistan would be defensive in character to meet Pakistan’s needs arising from the new Soviet military presence on its border. There was nothing threatening to India in this renewed U.S. interest in Pakistan’s security, or the further development of Sino-American relations. FonMin Rao focused his remarks on the resumption of U.S. arms supplies to Pakistan, which he requested should not take place. End summary. 3. Mr. Clifford and FonMin Rao met for 20 minutes prior to the larger meeting with MEA officials. Foreign Secretary Sathe and Joint Secretary D’Souza (notetaker) were also present, as was Ambassador Goheen (notetaker). 4. Mr. Clifford opened by speaking of the President’s special interest in India. He also described his own close relationship with the President, which had led to the President’s asking him to come to India as his Special Emissary. The President, he said, very much wishes to achieve better understanding and closer relations with India, and hopes that the candid exchange of views now and in the future can help the two countries get past some of the misunderstandings of past periods. Mr. Clifford then described the seriousness we attach to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the necessity of not letting such aggression go unchallenged. The President wants India to understand clearly the considered reasons behind his decision to provide assistance to Pakistan, and he wants also, through Mr. Clifford, to have a full understand- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800054–0767. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Kuala Lumpur, Beijing, Colombo, Dacca, Islamabad, Kabul, Hong Kong, London, Moscow, Paris, Tokyo, USUN, Bonn, USNATO, Seoul, Ankara, Athens, and CINCPAC for POLAD. 2 Carter asked Clifford to go to India as his Special Emissary to explain U.S. policy in the region. Clifford recounted his trip in his memoirs, Counsel to the President, pp. 639–642.
