606
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
own. By establishing full diplomatic relations with the People’s Re-
public of China, for example, we are now in a better position to deal di-
rectly and forthrightly with a government that represents one-fourth of
the world’s people.
We have embarked on a deliberate effort to enhance the role of the
United Nations and regional institutions such as the Organization of
American States, the Association of South East Asian Nations, and the
Organization of African Unity. These institutions often can provide the
most effective setting for resolving international disputes and for
broadening the realm of international cooperation.
To secure the cooperation of other nations, we must deal with
them on a basis of mutual respect and independence. Our achievement
of a new Panama Canal treaty, which secures our use of the canal for
coming generations, has demonstrated that fair dealing with other na-
tions, whatever their size, can serve our interests as well as theirs. Our
relations throughout this hemisphere have benefited as a result.
A Changing World Economy
Let me turn finally to the change we are seeing in the international
economy—the growing stake every nation has in economic decisions
made beyond its borders.
America’s strength rests on the vitality of America’s economy. Our
economy continues to provide expanding opportunity for our people
and continues to fuel growth around the world. We must also recog-
nize the other side of this coin—the health of other economies around
the world increasingly affects the health of our economy.
Our exports provide Americans with jobs—in fact, one out of
every eight jobs in the manufacturing sector—and income for our firms
and farmers. Every third acre of our farmland produces for export. Im-
ports from abroad provide us with essential raw materials, they afford
our consumers greater choice, and they dampen our inflation.
This growing economic interdependence requires that our gov-
ernment work with others to help create international conditions in
which all nations can thrive. We cannot seek to build our own eco-
nomic future at the expense of others, nor will we allow others to com-
pete unfairly. For a new era of economic nationalism could have tragic
consequences, just as it did during the protectionist warfare of the
1930’s.
We are deeply involved in working with other nations to meet the
challenges of a changing world economic order.
We have been successful in strengthening economic cooperation
among the industrial nations. We have instituted regular economic
summits to coordinate our economic policies so that they reinforce
rather than undermine one another. And there has been far closer col-
