840
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
comments would be given as soon as possible, in first instance orally to
Secretary Vance when he visits Bonn March 314 however, Schmidt un-
derlined in serious tone that he felt time limit of April 1 for comments
on subject of such major significance to his country and to world as a
whole was quite inadequate. Somewhat bitterly, he questioned
whether this procedure reflected the nature of genuine consultations
which should take place between allies. End summary.
1. Chancellor Schmidt received me March 29 for what developed
into one and one-half conversation. Subject matters concerned forth-
coming presidential statement on nuclear policy, FRG-Brazil nuclear
deal, financial aid to Portugal and SOFO. (Latter three subjects will
be reported Septels).5 Chancellor was accompanied by Chancellery
Deputy Assistant Secretary Loeck; I was alone.
2. After listening to my presentation regarding presidential state-
ment on nuclear policy and carefully reading Non-Paper which I left
with him containing talking points, Chancellor commented that, at first
glance, he felt US position as outlined was “not free from in-built intel-
lectual conflict.” In this connection, he noted point (F) in talking points
where it is said that US is committed to encouraging widest possible
adherence to the NPT. He had no quarrel with this thought and indeed
supported it strongly; however, Chancellor felt it would be more accu-
rate if reference had been made to an “amended NPT,” since it seemed
clear that US was not satisfied with NPT as it presently exists. Indeed, if
NPT were to be re-negotiated, one could think of a number of changes
which should be made in it based on experience of last ten years. Chan-
cellor recalled his conversation in Bonn with Vice President Mondale in
which he had stressed that FRG will adhere to NPT and to any other
treaty to which it is a party;6 moreover, FRG will be ready to negotiate
additional agreements in field of non-proliferation which would con-
tribute to increased controls.
3. In present circumstances, however, Chancellor saw a discrep-
ancy between US calling for wider adherence to NPT and our stand
with regard to provision of nuclear technology to other states, as re-
flected in our attitude toward FRG-Brazil agreement. Here, he referred
to Article IV of NPT providing for non-discrimination. I remarked that
4 During their March 31 meeting, Schmidt handed Vance a Non-Paper detailing his
government’s comments. (Tosec 30162/71504; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Staff Material, Global Issues, Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 43, Proliferation: Foreign
Consultation, 3–4/77)
5 Telegram 5766 from Bonn, March 31, contains information on the Vance-Schmidt
discussions of the FRG-Brazil nuclear deal, aid to Portugal, and the U.S. Army’s Special
Operations Field Office (SOFO) in Berlin. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P850050–2334)
6 See footnote 2, Document 398.
