Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 We cannot impose solutions in southern Africa. We cannot dictate terms to any of the parties; our leverage is limited. But we are among the few governments in the world that can talk to both white and black Africans frankly and yet with a measure of trust. We would lose our ability to be helpful if we lost that trust. It is therefore essential that our policies of encouraging justice for people of all races in southern Africa be clear to all. After careful consideration, this Administration has decided to pursue actively solutions to all three southern African problems— Rhodesia, Namibia, and the situation within South Africa itself. These problems must be addressed together, for they are intertwined. Some have argued that apartheid in South Africa should be ignored for the time being, in order to concentrate on achieving progress on Rhodesia and Namibia. Such a policy would be wrong and would not work. —It would be blind to the reality that the beginning of progress must be made soon within South Africa, if there is to be a possibility of peaceful solutions in the longer run; —It could mislead the South Africans about our real concerns; —It would prejudice our relations with our African friends; —It would do a disservice to our own beliefs; and —It would discourage those of all races who are working for peaceful progress within South Africa. We believe that we can effectively influence South Africa on Rhodesia and Namibia while expressing our concerns about apartheid. Implicit in that belief is the judgment that progress in all three areas is strongly in the interest of the South African Government. We believe that whites as well as blacks must have a future in Namibia, Zimbabwe, and South Africa. We also believe that their security lies in progress. Intransigence will only lead to greater insecurity. We will welcome and recognize positive action by South Africa on each of these three issues. But the need is real for progress on all of them. Let me review briefly our approach to each. Rhodesia We are actively supporting a British initiative to achieve a negotiated settlement of the Rhodesian crisis. In coming weeks, we will be seeking agreement on a constitution that would allow free elections, open to all parties and in which all of voting age could participate equally. These elections would establish the government of an independent Zimbabwe. Our goal is that this be accomplished during 1978. This constitution should include a justiciable bill of rights and an independent judiciary, so that the rights of all citizens, of all races, are protected.
