1192  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
locational restrictions facilitate verification by national technical means, 
particularly for mobile ICBMs, by dividing the Parties’ territory into 
permitted and prohibited areas.
DEFINITIONS AND COUNTING RULES
The Definitions Annex of the Treaty is the Treaty glossary. It is 
designed to facilitate Treaty implementation by giving precise meaning 
to Treaty terms. Counting rules are closely related to definitions. They 
enable the Parties to know with precision whether and when an item 
is subject to the Treaty and how it is to be counted under the central or 
other limits of the Treaty. In addition to covering deployed and non-­
deployed items of the types discussed above, the counting rules also 
deal with, among other things, newly-constructed strategic offensive 
arms and ICBM launchers and SLBM launchers that are converted to 
launch different types of ICBMs or SLBMs. To further the objectives of 
these rules, the Treaty includes lists of existing types of systems, as of the 
date of Treaty signature, including ICBMs, SLBMs, ICBMs for mobile 
launchers of ICBMs, heavy bombers, and long-range nuclear ALCMs, 
as well as similar information for new types. In addition, Treaty rules 
provide for attributing numbers of warheads to new types of ballistic 
missiles and heavy bombers. As in the INF Treaty, ballistic missiles that 
are developed and tested solely to intercept and counter objects not 
located on the surface of the earth are not subject to the Treaty.
PROHIBITIONS
The Treaty sets forth numerous prohibitions pertaining to strategic 
offensive arms. For example, the Parties agree not to: produce, flight 
test, or deploy new types of heavy (defined to mean having a launch 
weight greater than 106,000 kilograms or a throw-weight greater than 
4350 kilograms) ICBMs, heavy SLBMs, mobile launchers of heavy 
ICBMs, additional silo launchers of heavy ICBMs; increase the launch 
weight or throw-weight of heavy ICBMs of an existing type; convert 
launchers into launchers of heavy ICBMs; or reduce the number of 
warheads attributed to a heavy ICBM of an existing type. Other pro-
hibitions include deploying ICBMs other than in silos, on road-mobile 
launchers, or on rail-mobile launchers. There are also prohibitions 
on converting SLBMs into ICBMs for mobile launchers, on locations 
for deployed silo launchers of ICBMs and soft-site launchers, and on 
converting silos used as launch control facilities into silo launchers of 
ICBMs.
The Parties agree not to produce, flight-test, or deploy an ICBM 
or SLBM with more than ten reentry vehicles. The Parties also agree 
not to produce, flight-test, or deploy an ICBM or SLBM with a number 
of re-entry vehicles greater than the number of warheads attributed to 
that type of missile. The Parties also agreed not to flight-test ICBMs 
or SLBMs equipped with reentry vehicles from space launch facilities.
