26 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I The world needs a strong America and a confident America. We cannot and should not avoid a role of world leadership. But our leadership should not be based just on military might or economic power or political pressure, but also on truth, justice, equality, and a true representation of the moral character of our people. From this leadership the world can derive mutual peace and progress. 5. Memorandum From the Director of the Trilateral Commission (Brzezinski) to the Members of the Trilateral Commission1 New York, May 21, 1976 SUBJECT The Commission: Its Past and Future Since the Ottawa and Washington meetings of the Commission2 complete the first three years of the Commission’s life span, I would like to share with you some personal impressions of what we have achieved in these three years and what we can hope to achieve in the future. I might also add that this is my final report to you as the Commission’s director. As I said in my address in Ottawa, the international context in which the Commission was established has changed significantly since its creation.3 While relations between the trilateral countries themselves are considerably freer of friction than they were in 1973, greater uncertainty clouds the East-West relationship and the salience of relations between the developed and the developing worlds to political and economic stability has been more clearly established. Throughout the period, I think it is fair to say that the Commission has been in the forefront of those who have sought to intensify cooperation between the 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Historical Material, Trilateral Commission Files, Box 6, Zbigniew Brzezinski Chron File: 5/1/76–12/31/76. No classification marking. 2 The Commission’s executive committee met in Washington in December 1975. The Commission met in plenary session in Ottawa, Ontario, in May 1976. 3 Brzezinski’s address is printed in Charles B. Heck, ed., Trialogue: Improper Corporate Payoffs Termed a “Cancer” Which Weakens Firms, Subverts Markets and Threatens Democratic Values, Canada, May 1976 (New York: The Trilateral Commission, 1976), pp. 15–16.
