26
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The world needs a strong America and a confident America. We
cannot and should not avoid a role of world leadership. But our leader-
ship should not be based just on military might or economic power or
political pressure, but also on truth, justice, equality, and a true repre-
sentation of the moral character of our people.
From this leadership the world can derive mutual peace and
progress.
5.
Memorandum From the Director of the Trilateral
Commission (Brzezinski) to the Members of the Trilateral
Commission1
New York, May 21, 1976
SUBJECT
The Commission: Its Past and Future
Since the Ottawa and Washington meetings of the Commission2
complete the first three years of the Commission’s life span, I would
like to share with you some personal impressions of what we have
achieved in these three years and what we can hope to achieve in the
future. I might also add that this is my final report to you as the Com-
mission’s director.
As I said in my address in Ottawa, the international context in
which the Commission was established has changed significantly since
its creation.3 While relations between the trilateral countries themselves
are considerably freer of friction than they were in 1973, greater uncer-
tainty clouds the East-West relationship and the salience of relations
between the developed and the developing worlds to political and eco-
nomic stability has been more clearly established. Throughout the pe-
riod, I think it is fair to say that the Commission has been in the fore-
front of those who have sought to intensify cooperation between the
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Historical Material, Trilateral Com-
mission Files, Box 6, Zbigniew Brzezinski Chron File: 5/1/76–12/31/76. No classification
marking.
2 The Commission’s executive committee met in Washington in December 1975.
The Commission met in plenary session in Ottawa, Ontario, in May 1976.
3 Brzezinski’s address is printed in Charles B. Heck, ed., Trialogue: Improper Corpo-
rate Payoffs Termed a “Cancer” Which Weakens Firms, Subverts Markets and Threatens Demo-
cratic Values, Canada, May 1976 (New York: The Trilateral Commission, 1976), pp. 15–16.
