National Security Policy 75 69. Evolution in the Communist World. One of the most important factors shaping the world will be the manner in which the Soviet bloc evolves. Despite some current tightening of controls, we foresee a con­ tinuation of the trend toward greater flexibility in bloc relations and toward greater recognition of individual differences among the bloc members. In the case of Communist China, this trend will be fortified by that country’s growing power, self-­sufficiency, and national pride. In Eastern Europe, it will probably be favored by the survival of a semi-­ independent Poland and an independent Yugoslavia. But we think that prolonged development in this direction would be necessary before serious differences arose within the bloc on questions of relations with the Western powers; here the cement of common interests and a com­ mon ideology among the various regimes is exceedingly strong. 70. Because the USSR will remain the keystone of the bloc struc­ ture, the most important changes will be those which will occur within its own borders. More widespread and better education, the growth of a professional and managerial class, greater personal freedom, expec­ tations of higher living standards, and more contact with other coun­ tries are indications of significant changes within Soviet society. These changes might in the long run alter profoundly the content and structure of Soviet political life, possibly through a dissipation of the Communist party’s unchecked monopoly of power, more likely through a change in the political climate within the ruling party. However, the party has lately reasserted its monopoly status against incipient challenges from several quarters and its near-­term position appears to be completely secure. 71. The liberalizing tendency within the USSR and in intra-­bloc rela­ tions could not be reversed without considerable difficulty, but the Soviet leadership has been generally successful in controlling its pace and course. We do not believe that such tendencies will significantly weaken the bloc during the next five years. 72. The Free World Problem. Assuming that the evolution in the Communist world is so gradual that its impact upon Soviet policy will not be significant for some years to come, the free world faces a pro­ longed period of cold war with intermittent upsurges and declines in intensity. Coincidental with these shifts in intensity, there seems likely to be a periodic rise and fall in the extent to which free world nations—­ both the committed and the uncommitted—­will alternately fear for their futures or hopefully try to arrive at settlements for co-­existence with the Soviet bloc. The combination of increasing Soviet military power with flexible Soviet diplomatic tactics will make it difficult for individual countries to determine the policies most consistent with their own long-­term interests. This uncertainty will probably induce additional nations to seek refuge in neutrality.
