24 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 craft could operate from Diego Garcia. In any event we would probably want the Midway in or near the Gulf in order to fly fighter protection for the B–52s. Another alternative would be to bring F–15s into Saudi bases. Dr. Brzezinski said we would make a decision on the Midway tomorrow. Stan Turner said that hitting the refineries would hurt us as well but others disagreed and said that partially supplied Iran’s needs, not our own. The President noted that if they should kill sixty American citizens we must punish Iran. One way to do that would be to cut off the supply of diesel fuel and kerosene. We might also declare an embargo. The Vice President recalled something that Secretary Duncan has said at the SCC in the morning9 that a very high proportion of ARAMCO and other American companies’ oil was going to Europe since it was more profitable there. He thought it was an excellent idea to call in these companies and tell them that we expect them to make up any shortfalls in our own production. We should see just how American they really are. Secretary Vance said that Ambassador West believes that the Saudis would be pleased to make up any difference in the event the Iranians should embargo us. Secretary Brown wondered if they would be still interested if we should take out a refinery in Iran. Dr. Brzezinski said we were having an SCC meeting at 8:30 in the morning and Secretary Duncan was to present a report on the energy situation and the implications. The President said that we need a way to punish Iran without punishing the rest of the world. Hamilton Jordan said that if the Iranians begin killing one American at a time the American people will expect us to try to rescue them even if the chances are only one in a hundred. Dr. Brzezinski noted that kidnappers normally don’t kill all of their hostages. They are not trained. This group particularly has no combat training. As the meeting broke up the President approved notifying the press that an NSC meeting had been held. The group agreed that it probably would be a good idea for the President to call Khomeini directly in the event the Iranians turn down our offer of emissaries. 9 See Document 6.
