3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
174
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
directly to its actions on human rights. And on April 9, TASS director
general Zamyatin and CPSU Central Committee International Depart-
ment head Zagladin11 described the Carter human rights position to TV
audiences as an “acute anti-Soviet campaign,” Zagladin charging that
support for dissidents was in effect the same as encouraging “appeals
for the overthrow of the existing system in the Soviet Union.”
The “First Hundred Days” served as the occasion for other unflat-
tering comments as well. One commentator May 18 claimed the Presi-
dent was still conducting an election campaign instead of solving
problems—this time with his eye on 1980—and sarcastically chided
him by name for delivering “moralistic homilies” to the American
people. Another equally negative assessment observed that in 15 weeks
the “administration” had not managed to accomplish anything
substantial.
The President’s report to the Congressional CSCE Commission in
June generated a torrent of criticism.12 TASS veteran Kornilov, in
perhaps the sharpest language to date, charged the President with
using the “most absurd and wild concoctions” from “reactionary bour-
geois propaganda” in the report and “openly” encouraging a “mali-
cious” publicity campaign over alleged Soviet violations of the Hel-
sinki agreements.
Brezhnev’s Le Monde interview of mid-June was evidently meant
in part to answer the President’s CSCE report, as well as to warn that
the then convening Belgrade preparatory meeting on CSCE would be
difficult if the US persisted in its human rights stand. Brezhnev did not
mention the President by name but left no doubt as to his target when
he said “the ideological struggle should not grow into psychological
war” and warned that if it did, the dispute might “develop into a catas-
trophe in which . . . along with millions of people their concepts will
perish as well.”
Perhaps in deference to private US complaints, and in any event
under cover of a shift of media emphasis to US military policy, the per-
sonal association of the President with critiques of US policy subse-
quently began to diminish gradually. Six-month assessments by such
veteran propagandists as Valentin Zorin and Yuriy Kornilov, while
critical of the administration, were more moderate in tone than earlier
pieces by these same critics, and not noticeably focused on the Presi-
dent personally. As on the occasion of the 100-day benchmark, how-
ever, their conclusions both in the domestic and foreign policy spheres
were largely negative.
11 Leonid Mitrofanovich Zamyatin and Vadim Zagladin.
12 Not found.
