864
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
tion with the communists, Dr. Baqai knows for a fact, because, through
reliable informants within the Tudeh, he received, in August 1952, a re-
port of the meeting Mosadeq held with four of the principal Tudeh
leaders. This meeting was alleged to have taken place on July 20, 1952.
At this meeting, the Tudeh leaders told Mosadeq that he now had the
opportunity of doing away with the Shah, the court, and the present
form of government, and of establishing a Republic with himself as
president. The Tudeh representatives argued that he had become a na-
tional symbol while they, on the other hand, represented a popular
party. They offered him, therefore, their collaboration to carry out this
plan. Mosadeq did not reject their offer outright but, on the contrary,
simply answered that the situation was not yet ripe for such a change.
Ever since that time, Dr. Baqai considers that Mosadeq has had an un-
derstanding with the communists.
In August 1952, after he had received the report of the meeting, Dr.
Baqai called on Mosadeq and argued with him at length about the
dangers of both the British and the Communists. Both, he told Mo-
sadeq, preyed on the weakness of Iran and therefore sought to perpet-
uate this weakness. If the British were to be expelled, he advised Mo-
sadeq, all Britishers should leave, not just those who carried British
passports, but also all their agents, even those who were Iranian na-
tionals. Otherwise, argued Baqai, the breaking of diplomatic relations
and the expulsion of the British would only delude the people. Mo-
sadeq did not take his advice and the result is that, even today, there
are British agents who are as active as ever in the country.
Now, continued Baqai, the question arises of the reestablishment
of diplomatic relations with Britain. He considers, and he has carried
out a long campaign in his newspaper on this subject, that if relations
are reestablished without some previous tangible evidence from the
British that they mean to change their attitude towards Iran, then this
reestablishment, taken together with the condemnation of Mosadeq’s
whole regime, will be interpreted in the popular mind as a condemna-
tion of the national movement. To Iranians, it will simply mean that
British colonial policy is reaping its revenge. The consequences of such
a disillusionment he foresees as most grave.
After this long preamble, he put the question to the Ambassador in
so many words: What reason is there against postponing the reestab-
lishment of diplomatic relations until the British have made some defi-
nite gesture (“a gesture of facts”), show their good faith, i.e. permitting
the sale of oil, delivering goods which had previously been paid for, or
other similar minor concessions?
The Ambassador answered that the British Government had taken
the position that diplomatic relations must be reestablished before any
conversations on the oil problem can be held. That Government be-
