International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
641
limit stocking of oil in times of tight supply, and cooperation in a multi-
lateral approach to new sources of coal, shale, tar sands, synthetics and
solar. We should pledge to meet our goals and to be sure that we do so
cooperatively and collectively. We should have the maximum consul-
tation and dialogue with OPEC. This has been lacking so far and has
caused grievous consequences. We should pledge to keep our oil im-
ports down and follow with strict conservation of total oil consumption
and increased efforts to come up with alternate supplies of energy.
On North/South issues we should address problems of food re-
search, storage, supplies and stable reserves. Individually and through
the World Bank we should help LDCs increase energy production, and
share energy technology with the LDCs.
I hope that the monetary system will be stabilized, and the IMF
should maintain its basic purposes. I understand the problems of each
nation in reaching a consensus on these issues. I am pleased with the re-
sults of the MTN and hope that Congress will approve them by August.
We should express our commitment to conclusion of agreements.
The refugee issue is being addressed by our Foreign Ministers and
there should be a report submitted for final inclusion in the Commu-
nique.3 We need a strong statement on refugees and strong support for
LDCs.
ANDREOTTI: This meeting should be mainly on energy. It should
provide an external image which conveys the political character of the
meeting. It should clarify what happened in Bonn and what was de-
cided there. It should note the difficulties arising from events since
Bonn. It should play a guiding role in shaping future events, bearing in
mind certain differences among our countries. For instance, on energy,
Canada is self sufficient, and Italy and Japan are in very large debtor
positions. It should stress the interdependence among the problems of
all countries. Our position vis-a-vis OPEC will be all the stronger if we
take into account our requirements as well as those of the LDCs, which
will be most harmed by OPEC prices if they are constantly raised.
On alternate energy sources, and nuclear energy, we are all faced
by serious psychological problems exploited by those who oppose it. If
we put in the Communique something on nuclear energy that is posi-
tive it will help our individual national programs. Perhaps from Japan
can come words to inspire us on the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
OHIRA: Regarding the point on peaceful nuclear energy, I feel that
the most reliable, realistic alternative to oil is nuclear energy. We have
3 On June 28, the seven nations at the Summit issued a special statement on the tens
of thousands of refugees then fleeing Indochina. For the text, see Public Papers of the Presi-
dents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book II, p. 1188.
