Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks 677 4. Agreements for coproduction of significant weapons, equipment, or major components, beyond assembly of subcomponents and the fabrication of high-turnover spare parts are prohibited, [except with NATO countries, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, or where the President determines that such agreement is justified by extraordinary circumstances.] Requests for any other items (e.g., major overhaul facilities) will be subject to guidelines applied globally, analyzing closely whether the proposed coproduction project would over time provide equipment in excess of local needs. In each approved agreement, terms under which third-country exports will be permitted, if at all, will be stipulated, emphasizing that coproduction is intended for the coproducer’s requirements and not for export. 5. [Unless otherwise specified, no significant weapons, equipment, or major components acquired from the United States will be transferred to third countries without US permission.] In addition to the requirements of law and existing policies concerning re-transfer assurances, the US, as a condition of sale for certain weapons, equipment, or major components, may stipulate that the US will not entertain any requests for re-transfers.9 6. Policy level approval by the Department of State will be required before authorizing 1) licensing for sales promotion or technical data transmission by private firms, and 2) US military or civilian briefings, site surveys, transmission of technical information, or any similar activity which might promote the sale of items of major defense equipment [defense articles and services]. Further, US embassies and military elements will not promote or assist in the promotion of arms sales without specific authorization. Finally, the Secretary of Defense will continue the review of government procedures which may promote the sale of arms, reporting the results of this review within 60 days. 9 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok.”
