86
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
U.S. Options: Strategy I
Khomeini is playing for time. He must get the constitution ratified
by referendum. After that, the usefulness of this ploy will no longer
be great and he may be willing to resolve the problem or try to make
it go away—as he did with the Kurds after a month or two.
In the meantime, we should work for limited objectives:
—Get additional hostages released on the grounds that they are
not spies. Khomeini may find an occasional release is a means of
keeping the international community off his back, while he determines
the pace of events. The PLO and UN channel could work on this.
—Get the hostages transferred from the students to the Revolution-
ary Guards. This might appeal to Khomeini since it would give him
better control over the day-to-day situation. At the same time, it would
increase the pressures within the Revolutionary Council and elsewhere
favoring release since it would require only a government decision
rather than a prolonged negotiation with the students. We could start
working on this objective now, even though it may not be doable until
after the referendum or some other later time.
In support of this strategy, we should continue the international
barrage, while pressing hard for regular contact with the hostages.
Strategy II
Khomeini is ultimately susceptible to domestic pressures. If there
is substantial evidence that this approach is working against him and
seriously eroding his power base, he will be inclined to find a way to
shift his approach. We can help speed up that realization:
—[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
Strategy III
We must recognize that neither of the above courses may succeed.
It may be preferable to seize the initiative by a rescue effort. I cannot
second guess the expert thinking on this, but I would offer the
following:
—[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
—November 29–30 is the obvious date.
Although preparations for such an effort are compatible with Strat-
egy I, Strategy II should be avoided to prevent growing suspicions of
an active U.S. intervention. Also, it would be useful to send some
lulling signals via covert channels (particularly the PLO) to the effect
that we might consider releasing the Shah in certain circumstances.
This would engage them in internal debate and reinforce their belief
that we were thinking of no direct action.
