Covert and Overt Operations
937
357.
Letter From the Family Liaison Action Group to President of
the Consultative Assembly of Iran Rafsanjani1
Washington, undated
Dear Mr. President:
We, the families of the American hostages, write to you, Mr. Rafsan-
jani, as the leader of the Islamic Consultative Assembly of Iran, the
body of representatives of the Iranian people. We understand that
you have been instructed by Iran’s supreme spiritual leader, Imam
Khomeini, to find a solution to the problem of our beloved relatives,
the fifty-two American hostages.
We are writing to you privately as parents, wives, children, and
brothers and sisters most directly and intimately affected by the
enforced separation we and our loved ones have endured during these
past long months. While we trust and pray that the hostages are being
treated well in the true spirit of Islam, the grief and hardship imposed
by such separation are barely manageable for us all. By saying that,
we are, at the same time, aware that you and the people of Iran, a
people with a profound sense of family ties, understand our anguish.
We hope that this letter conveys a sense of our own sincere desire to
communicate these family feelings common to us all.
We understand the people of Iran have suffered untold indignities
and wrongs in the past. We share your confidence and hope that the
new times in Iran soon will bring about a better life for all your people
and their families.
We are writing to you at this point in time because we realize that
you spearhead, in its vital beginnings, a new Parliament capable of
overcoming and righting the wrongs of the past. We wish you well
and pray that your efforts will achieve the goals you have set forth for
your people.
We are writing to you at this time, too, with the idea that there
might be some way in which the hostages’ families could participate
personally and directly in the solution of the problem which now
divides the Iranian and American people. Might we be the bridge that
brings the hostages home? Our families are prepared to come to any
location you and your colleagues deem suitable. We feel our mutual
concerns can best be discussed face to face, in an atmosphere of
human trust.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 33, Iran Update 9/80. No classification marking. Attached to a September 8
briefing memorandum from Saunders to Muskie, Christopher, and Newsom.
