723.2515/1685: Telegram
[Document 250]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Extract—Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, November 23, 1925—6 p.m.
For Pershing:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In view of attitude of Chilean Commissioner that decisions of Plebiscitary Commission
will be ignored until registration and election regulations have been enacted, I suggest
for consideration feasibility of taking them at their word and enact election rules and
regulations as early as you can, but give notification that compliance with decisions of
Commission is expected. … Plebiscitary Commission would not lose its power to insist
on noninterference with a fair election merely by its enactment of rules and regulations.
Object of above suggestion is that Chile seems to be basing her withdrawal on failure
of Commission to promulgate these rules and regulations, and is evidently trying to put
Commission in false position in view of award, wherein it is provided that Commission
shall proceed at once to formulate rules for its own procedure and regulations
governing plebiscite, etc.
I do not recognize Chile’s right to say she will not comply with your demands for
protection of the voters until you have promulgated election rules and regulations, but
if you do promulgate and Chile does not thereafter comply, you can, of course, change
dates, times, and places for holding registrations and election. If you should take this
course it might be well for you to give out Edwards’ communication that Chilean
authorities in Tacna and Arica have been instructed to ignore each and every decision
of Plebiscitary Commission until regulations have been enacted, and give out at same
time copy of your statement to Commission or reply which might be along these lines:
Plebiscitary Commission does not accept Chilean view that compliance with
rulings of the Commission cannot be required until rules and regulations have
been published, but interpreting communications of Chilean Commissioner to
mean that Chilean authorities in Tacna and Arica will be instructed to carry
out each and every one of decisions of Plebiscitary Commission when
registration and election regulations shall have been enacted and dates for
registration and holding of plebiscite shall have been fixed, the Plebiscitary
Commission will now take up this matter, and as soon as regulations shall
