Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
91
self spoke to this issue when it wrote in its own report last summer
that:2
. . . should we profane our ideals in the interest of short-term secu-
rity, we would cause the erosion of our greatest strength—that of a na-
tion guided by dictates of reason and moral principles.
But in that report the committee also noted that we can best
achieve our purpose through conscientious and systematic review of
assistance programs on a country-by-country basis. In each case we
must balance a political concern for human rights against economic or
security goals. No formula can resolve the larger conflict of commit-
ments, but prudent and dedicated attention to both the basic objectives
and the day-to-day operations of our programs can make specific prob-
lems tractable.
This committee and the Congress have advocated “new direc-
tions” in our bilateral foreign aid programs.3 These directions call for
increasing emphasis on the poor majority, increasing attention to
human rights, and adherence to the moral principles that give us pride
and dignity as a nation. The spirit of “new directions” underlies our
general approach to all our aid programs.
The Carter Administration accepts the challenge that Congress has
posed. We ask your cooperation in making “new directions” a reality—
and in helping us resolve the difficult policy choices we face.
The challenge of the “new directions” means that, in 1977, we
cannot talk simply in the dry terms of this or that funding level as if the
power to budget and spend were the power to wish ourselves into a
perfect world. We are interested in results in human as well as eco-
nomic terms.
[Omitted here is a description of the various development assist-
ance programs.]
2 S. Rept. 94–1009, June 29, 1976; report of the Senate Committee on Appropriations,
together with additional views, to accompany H.R. 14260, foreign assistance and related
programs appropriations bill, 1977. [Footnote in the original.]
3 Section 102 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1973 (S. 1443; P.L. 93–189) on Develop-
ment Assistance Policy contains the provisions of the “New Directions” mandate, which
set out functional categories—such as population planning and agricultural produc-
tion—as criteria for foreign assistance. (Congress and the Nation, vol. IV, 1973–1976, pp.
851–852) See also Implementation of “New Directions” in Development Assistance: Report to
the Committee on International Relations Prepared by AID. Committee Print, 94th Cong., 1st
Sess. 1975.
