Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
647
The Attorney General said that a situation deemed beyond the
control of local forces could justify a declaration of national emergency
and the sending of U.S. troops.
The President asked if the Attorney General anticipated problems
in the event of an announcement this afternoon.
The Attorney General said that he thought 3:00 p.m. was about
right to move. We should begin during normal business hours. After-
wards we would seal the Embassy. We would let people out, but let
no one in, and we would hope the numbers inside would be reduced
by attrition.
The Secretary of State wondered what would be the interaction
between this action and the Iranian students who planned to march
against the Shah. Where is this group likely to be between 2 and
4 o’clock?
The Attorney General said that they had a permit to march for the
next three days. Between 2:00 and 4:00 they were scheduled to be in
a prayer vigil. They proposed starting their parade at the Islamic
Mosque and march a double circuit, ending at Lafayette Park. They had
been negotiating yesterday with Police Chief Klutz, and an alternate
location for the final demonstration had been agreed. They were banned
from Lafayette Park. We can ban them from any location near the
Iranian Embassy—as far as ten blocks if we wish. The demonstration
was expected to be a group of about 200.
Dr. Brzezinski said in his view nothing would be worse than a
prolonged siege. We should employ surprise and clear them out of the
Embassy before they had a chance to react. Otherwise, if it drags out,
the situation will work to our disadvantage and the militants in Tehran
could threaten to kill the hostages.
The Secretary of State said that we could not surprise them. They
were already expecting this and had shipped some documents out of
the Embassy to the UN Mission.
Dr. Brzezinski said that perhaps there would be no resistance. If
so that was good. But we should gain control of the facilities right away.
The Secretary of State said that in his judgment there would be
no surprise.
Dr. Brzezinski said that they should not be allowed to barricade
themselves in the Embassy.
Mr. Aaron noted that we have reports that the Embassy will be
closed today.
Mr. Sick observed that a conversation between the Chargé, Ali
Agah, and an unidentified individual yesterday evening indicated that
the Embassy might be closed today and/or tomorrow in protest against
President Sadat’s arrival in Washington.
