3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
69
cept ballistic missiles on submarines. The Soviet Union was prepared to
consider the US proposal on mobile ICBM’s, but Gromyko would say
in advance that he would categorically object to discussing this ban in
the context of the missile complex which the US side called SS–20. The
SS–20 complex was not a strategic one. It had been developed and was
being deployed to carry out missions of medium range and to replace
other systems. A problem could arise in the view of the US side as to the
difference between the SS–16 ICBM launchers and the SS–20 MRBM
launchers. Gromyko would tell the Secretary at once that SS–16’s were
not being deployed, and that the Soviet Union did not intend to deploy
them provided, of course, that a new strategic arms limitation agree-
ment was achieved. Gromyko wanted to put the Secretary’s mind at
ease; the question of the difference between SS–16’s and SS–20’s should
not arise at all.
Gromyko said that he now wanted to turn to another issue which
was of exceptional importance. This was the requirement that the new
agreement include provisions on non-transfer of strategic arms to third
countries and non-circumvention of the agreement through third coun-
tries or in any other manner. Secretary Vance would certainly be well
aware that the Soviet side attached a great importance to inclusion in
the agreement of an obligation not to take any actions which would re-
sult in the provisions of the agreement being weakened or circum-
vented or reduced to zero through third states or in any other manner,
and also an obligation not to transfer strategic offensive arms to third
states.
Furthermore, the Soviet Union proceeded from the premise that
for the duration of the new agreement the US side would not only not
build up forward-based systems which, due to their geographic loca-
tion were capable of reaching the territory of the Soviet Union, but
would also take steps to reduce them. As far as Gromyko knew, and he
would wish that he was mistaken, every time that this issue had been
raised, US representatives would make no comment and would pro-
vide no indication of the possibility of solving the question in this way.
He had to tell the Secretary quite frankly that the question did arise in
the minds of the Soviet leadership, and that perhaps it should be re-
viewed in terms of including in the new SALT II agreement an obliga-
tion to that effect, that would be imposed on the US side. The Soviet
leadership was now asking itself whether in proposing that the United
States merely make a statement to the effect of not building up
forward-based systems the Soviet Union had not asked too low a price.
Gromyko now wanted to say a few words on the subject of reduc-
tion of strategic offensive arms. Secretary Vance had mentioned it in his
presentation. However, even if he had not mentioned it, the Soviet side
had intended to present its position. The Soviet position on the reduc-
