National Security Policy 821 On June 30 last year, the planning period for all stockpile objectives was reduced from 5 years to 3 years. This cutback followed an exten­ sive review by the Special Stockpile Advisory Committee (Pettibone Committee) and by the Executive Branch. 3. Basis of the Strategic Stockpile Objectives Strategic stockpile objectives generally represent estimated deficits of materials for an emergency period after taking account of the avail­ ability of materials from domestic production and imports under emer­ gency conditions. Requirements are computed to reflect military, defense supporting and essential civilian needs of the U.S. in emergencies. An allowance may be made for exports where the U.S. is the essential source of sup­ ply. For example, in molybdenum the U.S. produces most of the total world supply. Therefore, our allies would be dependent on the U.S. for this material. Estimates of supplies for the emergency period are based on the world-­wide availability of materials and the vulnerability of the sources of supply under emergency conditions. Discounts are applied to reflect the risks involved internally in supply countries, the risks of concentra­ tion of the source, the risks of overseas shipping and the vulnerability of domestic sources to destruction. The difference between the requirements estimate and supply esti­ mate is the deficit to be met by stockpiling, unless other measures pro­ vide a better solution. Stockpile objectives are computed at two levels: the basic objec­ tive level, which assumes partial dependence on areas beyond North America and comparably accessible areas, and the maximum objective level, which provides a higher degree of security by completely dis­ counting sources beyond North America and comparably accessible areas. Cash procurement for the strategic stockpile is generally limited to meeting the basic objectives. Only 3 relatively minor materials are now included in the procurement program. These are jewel bearings, diamond dies and amosite asbestos. 4. Requirements for Strategic Materials and Over-­all Status of Government Inventories The grand total requirements for strategic materials would amount to about $15 billion for a 3-year emergency, or about $5 billion per year, at December 31, 1958 prices. This requirement is somewhat below the over-­all industrial potential of the U.S. Domestic production would be relied upon to provide consider­ ably more than half the total supply of strategic materials required. This estimate allows for possible loss of the production base where there is
