3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
618
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Union had always been in favor of such relations. It will simply have to
wait and see what the Chinese position will be.
Brezhnev wanted to emphasize to the President that if Soviet rela-
tions with the Chinese People’s Republic improve, the United States
and other countries will have no grounds whatsoever for concern. The
Soviet Union has never given the Chinese any opportunity to drag the
Soviet state into any anti-American adventures, and will not do so in
the future. The President could rest assured on that score.
Human Rights
Brezhnev now wanted to turn briefly to the so-called question of
human rights. He did not consider this question appropriate for discus-
sion at the official meetings between them. However, so as to leave
nothing unclear, he wanted to tell the President the following: it would
go without saying that each of them had his own views on human
rights and freedom of the individual. The Soviet leadership did not ob-
ject to these and other questions becoming the subject of ideological ar-
gument. Indeed, that was inevitable due to the different development
of the social systems of each country. It was an entirely different matter,
however, when questions of that kind were elevated to the level of offi-
cial state policy and when attempts were made to exploit them in the
relations between states. Brezhnev was far from any wish to engage in
polemics, but he would trust that the President would agree that there
could be little progress in our bilateral relations if, for example, the So-
viet Union were to link trade and other ties with the United States to
such questions as unemployment in the United States, resolution of the
racial problem in the United States or equal rights for women. Natu-
rally, the Soviet leadership could easily draw up a whole list of com-
plaints of that kind, because there was a great deal they did not like in
the social system of the United States. However, what would that lead
to? It would be much better to leave questions of this kind outside of
the framework of state affairs and to concentrate the efforts of each
country on safeguarding the right of people throughout the world to
live without war, under conditions of peace. Both countries must make
every effort to safeguard that right. President Carter himself had said in
one of his recent speeches, and quite correctly, that the most funda-
mental human right is the right to life. He would therefore call on the
President to do all in his power to prevent the outbreak of another war.
Further Meetings and Contacts
Brezhnev now wanted to turn to the question of further meetings.
As he understood it, the President favored holding such meetings on a
regular basis. Brezhnev, too, believed that meetings between Heads of
State should be held on a regular basis, but thought that they should
not attempt now to set a rigid schedule. The important thing was to
