Afghanistan
453
seek a strong, united Western response, both in Southwest Asia and
in the context of East-West relations. If we fail to do so, the Soviets
may only be encouraged to take similar moves elsewhere.
—The President looks forward to staying in the closest possible
communication with you, as our two governments further develop
their positions, and he has asked me to be available to you and your
government to assist in any way possible.
4. Begin text of letter:
Dear Margaret:
As I know you will agree, the Soviet Union’s invasion and occupa-
tion of Afghanistan are matters of the gravest concern. In my view,
the Soviet action represents one of the most serious security challenges
which our countries have faced in the post-war era. This naked aggres-
sion has implications in Southwest Asia and the Middle East, as well
as globally, in the bilateral relationship between each of our countries
and the Soviet Union, and in the multilateral relationships which have
developed among the countries of the West and the Warsaw Pact
involving European matters in the past decade. A failure on our part
to respond adequately to the Soviet challenge in Afghanistan can only
encourage Moscow to move in the future even more aggressively.
Pakistan, Iran, the Gulf, Yugoslavia, and even Turkey come immedi-
ately to mind. By the same token, a strong united Western response
can correct Soviet perceptions, restrain Soviet behavior and ultimately
advance the cause of détente to which both our countries are dedicated
over the longer term. I know that you share my view that in these
circumstances, it is imperative that you and I and our representatives
in Washington and London maintain close and continuous consulta-
tions and coordination.2
You are already familiar with the measures which I announced on
January 4 involving our bilateral relations with the Soviet Union, and
I appreciate your support for these actions.3 I had previously
announced my decision that the SALT II Treaty not be called up for
2 An article in the President’s Daily Brief, January 10, noted that the British had
taken the most “aggressive stance” among the NATO Allies, who so far had been “unable
to agree on a strong response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.” The article also
noted that France opposed the British call for the Alliance to apply sanctions against the
Soviet Union, advocating instead that nations should respond to the invasion bilaterally.
Meanwhile, the PDB noted, the West Germans were caught in a “dilemma” because
“Schmidt realizes that a weak response would give his political opponents a good election
issue, but fears that a vigorous reaction would undermine Ostpolitik, the keystone of
12 years of Social Democratic foreign policy.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of
the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential
Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, PDBs)
3 See Document 109. For Carter’s January 4 address, see footnote 5, Document 145.
