Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I such devices as the Global Development Budget, the institutionalization of CIEC, the shaping of links between OECD and OPEC, etc.; 4. To push U.S.-Soviet strategic arms limitation talks into strategic arms reduction talks, using the foregoing as an entering wedge for a more stable U.S.-Soviet relationship. At the same time, we should seek to rebuff Soviet incursions, both by supporting our friends and by ameliorating the sources of conflict which the Soviets exploit. We should match Soviet ideological expansion by a more affirmative American posture on global human rights, while seeking consistently to make detente both more comprehensive and more reciprocal; 5. To normalize U.S.-Chinese relations in order to preserve the U.S.-Chinese relationship as a major stabilizing factor in the global power balance, offsetting Soviet conventional superiority and preventing the Soviet Union from concentrating its resources on a westward (Europe) or southward (Middle East, Africa) expansionary drive; 6. To obtain a comprehensive Middle Eastern settlement, without which the further radicalization of the Arab world and the reentry of the Soviet Union into the Middle East cannot for long be avoided, generating in turn serious consequences for Western Europe, Japan, and the United States; 7. To set in motion a progressive and peaceful transformation of South Africa towards a biracial democracy and to forge—in connection with this process—a coalition of moderate black African leaders in order to stem continental radicalization and to eliminate the Soviet- Cuban presence from the continent; 8. To restrict the level of global armaments through international agreements limiting the excessive flow of arms into the Third World (though with some consideration for goal No. 2), cooperative international restraints on nuclear proliferation, and a comprehensive test ban on nuclear testing; 9. To enhance global sensitivity to human rights through actions designed to highlight U.S. observance of such rights and through multilateral and bilateral initiatives meant to influence other governments to give higher priority to such human rights; 10. To maintain a defense posture capable of deterring the Soviet Union both on the strategic and conventional levels from hostile acts and from political pressure. This will require the U.S. to modernize, rationalize, and reconceptualize its defense posture in keeping with the broad changes in world affairs that have already been noted, to improve NATO military strength and readiness, and to develop capabilities to deter or to counter Soviet military intervention in the Third World. It should be noted in connection with these broad objectives that the promotion of human rights is a goal that cross-cuts our relations
