Yugoslavia a part of the regular State Department budget, and the program would be administered by the State Department. Minic said this was a satisfactory solution and he emphasized the importance of the program for mutual understanding, particularly for Yugoslavia as a developing country. Secretary Vance said we agree on its importance, and will be pleased if we can continue it by this means. Economic Matters, Exim Bank. On the question of loans and “superguarantees”, Minic said that he was glad to see the representative of the U.S. EximBank in the meeting and suggested that perhaps this was the moment when the two sides could reach agreement.5 Before coming to Washington, Minic said he had held detailed talks with the Prime Minister, the Finance Minister and the Vice Premier about this problem. The situation now is that the U.S. has made a proposal which is not acceptable in its present form to the Yugoslav side. He outlined the Yugoslav position as follows: Cooperation with ExIm has been very significant. Until a year ago 50% of U.S. loans were through ExIm. Now the percentage has dropped to thirty but the government of Yugoslavia is very interested in continuing its cooperation with ExIm. However, the new Constitution and the law of associated labor had introduced reforms. Under these provisions the Government of Yugoslavia and the National Bank do not have the right to issue “super-guarantees”. In order to reinstitute this procedure, a change of the law and perhaps an amendment to the Constitution would be necessary. Individual banks, a group of banks or a consortium of banks could give guarantees. Or a new bank for Export and Import which Yugoslavia is establishing to deal with questions of foreign trade and financing could give guarantees. The government can say that any bank or group of banks can get the required amounts of foreign exchange to meet its obligations on the basis of its dinar holdings. In the Yugoslav view, this should be sufficient to meet the requirement for guarantees. All European banks have agreed to this system and no longer require a “super-guarantee”. He urged that we do everything possible to resolve this problem. After this visit, the Secretary of Finance will send a written proposal to ExIm giving a detailed response. Minic added that the Yugoslav side had a very positive reaction to the formation of working groups on economic cooperation to be headed by Assistant Ministers and Ambassadors. He said that economic 5 The Yugoslav Government advised the ExIm Bank that it would no longer be able to provide “super-guarantees” by the Yugoslav National Bank on ExIm loans to Yugoslav businesses. Tarnoff informed Brzezinski of the emerging dispute between the ExIm Bank and the Yugoslav Government in a February 11 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 15, Yugoslavia,
