Afghanistan
715
gunship. When first introduced into the fighting, the weapon appar-
ently was very successful in intimidating many of the tribal forces.
However, as the more experienced Afghan Army defectors swell the
tribal ranks, the fighters have learned the helicopters’ vulnerability to
anti-aircraft ground fire. Refugee reports increasingly tell of gunships
being downed by the simple expedient of the rebels firing down on
the helicopters’ vulnerable tail rotor from gun implacements high in the
mountains. The rebels have discovered, thanks to their newly acquired
army allies, that while the helicopter is effective firing at the ground,
it is vulnerable to fire from relatively immune positions above the
aircraft. Rebel sources indicate that at least nine Soviet helicopters have
been lost in the past 60 days.
One of the many dilemmas confronting the Soviets in Afghanistan
is what to do with the remainder of the Afghan Army. If the Soviets
hope to conclude their Afghan adventure successfully, they will eventu-
ally need a reliable Afghan force. To build this force, they will have
to equip it with weapons which could continue to get into the hands
of the rebels.
267.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research (Spiers) to Secretary of State
Muskie1
Washington, May 9, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghanistan Covert Action Program
On December 28, 1979—two days after Soviet troops marched into
Afghanistan—we expanded the already initiated U.S. covert action
program there to include for the first time the supply of lethal weapons
to the insurgents.2 Prior to that date, our program had consisted essen-
tially of covert media efforts (radio broadcasts and leaflet distribution
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Special Caption Docu-
ments, 1979–1989 (Not for the System, Evening Reading, Personnel Sensitive), Lot 92D630,
Box 1, Not for the System: Jan–Jun 1980. Secret; Sensitive; Not for the System. Drafted
by Mark. Sent through Newsom. The memorandum was presumably meant to brief
Muskie, who became Secretary of State May 9, on the Afghan covert action program.
2 See Document 107.
