Human Rights 19 7. Memorandum From Robert Gates, Center for Policy Support, Central Intelligence Agency, to Acting Director of Central Intelligence Knoche, the Deputy Director for Intelligence (Stevens), and the Deputy Director for Operations (Wells)1 Washington, February 3, 1977 SUBJECT Brzezinski Meeting on Human Rights Summary 1. Dr. Brzezinski and Jessica Tuchman, NSC Staff Member for Global Issues, convened an interdepartmental meeting on 2 February2 to discuss translating the President’s commitment to promoting human rights abroad into “consistent and responsible” action. A list of participants is attached.3 In his opening remarks, Brzezinski referred to recent “complications” (the State Department pronouncements on Czechoslo- 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 80M01048A: Box 11, Folder 6: SA/DDCI (Lew Lapham) Chrono. Secret. Sent through the Acting Director of the CIA’s Center for Policy Support. Forwarded to Knoche under cover of a February 10 memorandum from Lewis Lapham. (Ibid.) A February 15 memorandum from Knoche to Brzezinski noted that Meyer would serve as “the Agency’s principal referent on matters concerning Human Rights in the international field.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 41, Presidential Determinations, Directives, and Review Memoranda [II]: 1/77–5/80) 2 On February 1, Tuchman transmitted the proposed agenda to members of the National Security Council Staff and invited those with an interest to attend. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North–South Pastor Files, Subject Files, Box 55, Human Rights: 1–5/77) Tuchman transmitted a brief synopsis of the meeting in the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s February 2 evening report to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 2–4/77) 3 Not printed. Participants included Brzezinski, Tuchman, and Kimmitt (NSC); Sanders (OMB); Lamb, Ericson, Jenkins, Vogelgesang, Lowenstein, Leurs, Preeg, Holbrooke, Derian, Gleysteen, Wilson, Patton, and Holloway (State); Bergsten and Richard Erb (Treasury); Weil, Downey, and Haslam (Commerce); Gates (CIA); Thompson (Defense); Packer and Anderson (JCS); Birnbaum (AID); Bastian (USIA); and Tyson (USUN). A February 10 routing sheet described why Gates was selected to represent CIA at the February 3 meeting: “Gates was apparently chosen to represent the Agency because of his past NSC service, rather than by virtue of his current assignment which is concerned with Soviet/East European affairs.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 80M01048A: Box 11, Folder 6: SA/DDCI (Lew Lapham) Chrono))
