September 1953–December 1954
913
help being concerned over the gulf existing between the present Gov-
ernment and many segments of the Iranian people.
2. Perron’s desire to work with Zahedi—Mr. Perron said that unfortu-
nately he had not been able to develop a harmonious working relation-
ship with General Zahedi. He was most anxious for the General and his
Government to know of his good intentions in this regard but found
that he did not have an effective means of communicating them to the
General. Unfortunately, he was unable to communicate them through
Ardeshir Zahedi with whom he does not have a common language. In
view of the close working relationship between the American Embassy
and the Zahedi Government and particularly with Ardeshir Zahedi, he
hoped it would be possible for the Embassy to have it made known to
General Zahedi that he was available to be of every assistance. Mr.
Perron proceeded immediately to his next point without awaiting com-
ment from myself.
3. American efforts to support anti-communist groups—Mr. Perron
said he was aware of efforts by the American Embassy to encourage the
development of anti-communist groups within Iran. In this connection
he wished merely to call to our attention that Aramesh and Bahbudi are
highly dishonest persons and should not be treated with any confi-
dence.2 I observed that I also had heard of this reputation. Mr. Perron
went on to make a plea for forthright American intervention in the in-
ternal political affairs of Iran, in order to insure success for the anti-
communist movement. He asserted that Point Four and the Military
Mission engage daily in domestic political matters and obviously only
the Embassy was reluctant to do so.3 He thought this reluctance was
most unfortunate, as it would be in the common interest of both the
United States and Iran for the Embassy to take forthrightly a more ac-
tive part in this vital matter. I noted that it was not the intention of OMI
or the Military Mission to dable in local politics and that I thought it im-
prudent for any foreign government to seek to manage the local affairs
of another country. Mr. Perron recalled that to his knowledge in the
past the American Government had pursued policies in Iran of which
the Ambassador had not always been aware; to which I observed that I
could speak only of recent months but that I was sure that during the
period I had been familiar with Iranian matters the Ambassador has
been fully informed on American policy towards Iran.
4. Mr. Klein’s visit4—Mr. Perron said he wished to point out the
most unfortunate interpretation being placed upon the visit of Mr.
2 Richards placed a check mark in the margin next to this sentence and underlined
“Aramesh” and “Bahbudi.”
3 Richards placed a check mark and his initials in the margin next to this sentence.
4 A reference to Harry Thomas Klein, General Counsel of the Texas Company.
