3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1980 859 We recognize that the Soviet Union has legitimate interests in the security of its borders and in friendly relations with Afghanistan. In our view, an independent and non-aligned Afghan government prepared to maintain friendly relations with all its neighbors would be consistent with Soviet interests. Such a government would have to be acceptable to the Afghan people, for otherwise there can be no restoration of peace and tranquility in Afghanistan. Any legitimate concern you may have regarding outside interference in Afghanistan could be met by mutual and reciprocal guarantees of non-intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan by all concerned parties. I would like to reiterate our strong interest in an improvement in US-Soviet relations based on reciprocity and mutual restraint. The key to an improvement in this relationship remains a political solution to the Afghan crisis which I believe can be achieved with the complete withdrawal of Soviet troops, pursuant to appropriate transitional arrangements. If you are prepared to discuss such a solution seriously, you will find us fully and immediately cooperative. ESM4 4 Printed from a copy that indicates Muskie signed the original. 293. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1 Moscow, July 15, 1980, 1722Z 11164. Dept. pass USDA/FAS for Saylor, Vovotny; USICA. Subject: Effectiveness of U.S. Grain Embargo on the USSR: Mid-July Assessment. 1. (C-entire text). 2. Although the grain embargo has been less effective than originally hoped for in terms of limiting total Soviet grain imports, it has nevertheless been costly to the Soviets. It certainly compounded the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, International Economics, Tim Deal File, Box 14, USSR: Grain: 7/80. Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information to Belgrade, Berlin, Brussels, Bucharest, Budapest, Prague, Sofia, Warsaw, and USNATO. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
