194 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement A. If any American in the PRC believes that contrary to the declared policy of the PRC he is encountering obstruction in departure he may so inform the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in the PRC and request it to make representations on his behalf to the Government of the PRC. If desired by the US, the Government of the UK may also investigate the facts in any such case. B. If an American in the PRC who desires to return to the US has difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of the UK may render him financial assistance needed to permit his return. 3. The Government of the PRC will give wide publicity to the fore­ going arrangements and the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in the PRC may also do so.” Gowen 153. Telegram 659 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 31, 1955, 6 p.m. 659. From Johnson. Comments today’s meeting. Wang was relaxed, made no serious effort press to any showdown, and showed no great sense of urgency. He quickly reached decisions at table on language draft and while immediately noting I had gone back on language our August 16 draft particularly on introductory para did not press his advantage this regard. Degree to which he conceded dis­ puted points in draft also indicated they may not have been attaching same value thereto as we had assumed. While I succeeded in avoid­ ing expressly committing myself to draft in face his willingness reach immediate agreement on text I will have to have very cogent reasons for introducing any further changes. Thus only remaining issue appears be Wang’s refusal set any definite time for release remaining Americans. Both of us repeatedly and categor­ ically stated our positions on this issue and there seems little left to say. In considering our future course of action believe must recognize that we have cut back representation arrangement to point it is much less attractive to CHICOMS than something along lines their original 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–3155. Secret; Priority.
