Afghanistan bring the Soviets into a direct confrontation with Pakistan. You could ask for Congressional views and point out the various ways in which we might have to respond. If we did this it would become public knowledge through leaks, and this would be a useful signal in itself. Muskie: That might be a useful approach. We would not want to take steps now that assume there will be a Soviet action after the Olympics. Bear in mind that there are restraints on the Soviets. Discussions would however be good to forewarn Congress and educate it about a possible future danger. We would keep the consultations limited (they would leak anyway). This will of course prompt the Congressmen to ask the very kinds of difficult questions that we are asking around this table here today. We will have to have our responses worked out in advance. They, too, will leak. It is hard to decide now but at some point we are going to have to determine what our future responses would be. Would a major invasion of Pakistan call for a US military response? The 1959 Agreement does not of course force us to make an automatic response. Brzezinski: If they ask that kind of a question, remind them of the trouble that Dean Acheson got into on Korea by answering that kind of a question. Muskie: Of course, but you should have the answer formulated in your own mind. Brzezinski: I think it would be good to make Congress think this issue through, just as we are doing today. Muskie: Also, let us consider that the assistance that we have provided to the insurgents has helped generate the very problem we are facing. If we provide more help, it will lead to more tension. Thus, our own actions are moving us along towards the ultimate question. I wonder if Pakistani steadfastness would warrant such action on our part? We have not faced this question in any serious discussions since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Turner: We have to ask ourselves how important it is for us to frustrate what the Soviets are trying to do in Afghanistan. Christopher: Having consulted with Congress often before, I am not sure it is in our interest to raise this question with them before an election. We would have to talk to people such as Church, Javits, and Lugar as well as Howard Baker. Congress is getting very gun-shy on the question of Pakistan; they note our general lack of money and the great distance that Pakistan is from us. We should do our full contingency planning before we go to Congress. The non-proliferation question also is going to be a difficult one as we know from our current experience on Tarapur. I am very skeptical about conditional consultations unless there is a new threat and we have a program that we want to sell.
