478
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
III. A U.S. Strategy for Central America
I think Central America is a powder keg of instability which could
blow up and take with it Carter’s Latin American policy. The scenario
is the same as what may face us in Nicaragua: a choice between sup-
porting an unpopular military dictator or intervening to prevent a
Communist take-over. Neither alternative is satisfactory, but in order
to face a different choice, we have to begin developing a strategy now
to mobilize U.S. influence in support of the goals listed above.6 We cur-
rently have no strategy and are doing nothing positive which con-
tributes to the realization of these goals except in an ad hoc fashion. We
are reacting to events at points of relatively little influence; we need to
get in front of the political process in Central America rather than get
pulled along by it.
I have spoken to Vaky, and he agrees on the urgency of this matter
and its great importance, but he doesn’t think that his Bureau has the
capability of handling it now.7 He suggested that I work on it with
Richard Feinberg of Policy Planning in State. I don’t think we can wait,
and if there are few people in State who can work on it, we can turn to
the Agency and to our Embassies for support. Indeed, I think it would
be very useful to involve our Embassies in this exercise as fully as
possible.
RECOMMENDATION:
1. That you agree that Central America is an area which requires
our urgent attention.8
2. That you approve, in principle, my drafting a terms of reference
for inter-agency review with Vaky and Policy Planning (Richard Fein-
berg). The terms of reference will proceed directly from the analytic
framework suggested in this memo, but I will send the final version to
you for your approval when it is completed.9
3. Would you like me to draft a short memo from you to the Presi-
dent on this subject?10
6 An unknown hand underlined the word “now.”
7 Reference is to Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Vaky.
8 According to Aaron’s handwritten notation in the left-hand margin, he supported
this recommendation.
9 According to Aaron’s handwritten notation in the left-hand margin, he supported
this recommendation. Next to the recommendation, Inderfurth wrote: “Why not a PRM?
RI.” Brzezinski approved this recommendation and wrote “PRM” on the “Approve” line.
10 Next to this recommendation, Inderfurth wrote: “Alternatively, have Bob reduce
this to one page for use in this week’s WR [Weekly Report] as an ‘Alert’ item.” According
to a handwritten notation below Inderfurth’s comment, Aaron supported this recom-
mendation. Brzezinski also indicated his approval by writing “OK. ZB.” Brzezinski also
wrote “1 page alert”—RI—WR” beneath the “Approve” line.” Inderfurth wrote an addi-
tional note to Brzezinski and Aaron: “ZB/DA, I also suggest that Turner be tasked with
preparing an intelligence assessment on prospects for instability in Central America.
Rick.”
