668 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 48. Wang said he had made clear his views on this situation and had nothing further to add. 49. I said, turning to his remarks concerning our draft, he had apparently slightly misunderstood or misinterpreted statement I had made this morning. What I was speaking of concerning embodiment in any declaration or statement on individual and collective self defense, was that it be clearly embodied as a principle. What I had said was that in light of history these negotiations and particularly public statement issued by Chinese Govt yesterday, they were in effect demanding that US renounce this principle. I had said this was what we would not do. In this, they were asking us to do something that we had not asked them to do. 50. Wang said he had made their position crystal clear in previous meetings as well as today on question of draft announcement. As he had said, he would welcome any constructive proposal or amendment which I willing present. 51. I said I had also made my position clear. Amendments which I had suggested to their Dec 1 draft, in spite of their importance, did not change draft’s essential nature. I had incorporated them in form such that it was difficult for me to see why they should not have been entirely acceptable. I had offered consider any alternative formulations that would accomplish same purpose. I was disappointed that this morning he persisted in rejecting what I had offered without making any constructive suggestions of his own. I did not see how I could go any further. 52. Wang said I could see that they had already made repeated efforts on question of draft announcement. I would recall that in their original proposal they proposed to include certain specific stipulations of UN Charter as well as para concerning holding conference For­ eign Ministers. However, in view our reluctance accept that draft and in spite fact stipulations UN Charter could be in no way objected to, subsequently in interest formulating draft meeting views both sides, Chinese side put forward Dec 1 draft, in which paras concerning UN Charter and convening Foreign Minister conference were withdrawn. 53. Wang said, however withdrawal of two paras did not mean paras themselves were objectionable or that they not proper for inclu­ sion in draft. Withdrawal two paras from original draft did not mean they were not qualified for inclusion, but represented effort their part formulate an acceptable form and effort their part to work for making such an announcement and not for its hindrance. Therefore, hard for him see why I not willing accept concrete proposal he put forth last meeting: to withdraw phrase concerning individual and collective self defense from amendment to draft I had put forward at last meeting.
