736
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
275.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, May 24, 1980, 1103Z
8285. Subject. Soviet Concern About Spill-Over of Islamic Funda-
mentalism From Afghanistan.
1. (C—Noforn—Entire text)
2. During a May 14 reception for members of the Incidents at Sea
(INCSEA) Delegations, Acting Political Counselor engaged a Soviet
Navy Captain 1/R Valentin Alekseyevich Serkov in a conversation on
Afghanistan. After remarking that it was heartening to learn that the
INCSEA talks were proceeding well, A/PolCouns referred to the over-
all state of bilateral relations and commented that the Soviet action in
Afghanistan had undermined détente.
3. Serkov responded along the following lines: “You Americans
must understand Soviet history in order to understand our actions in
Afghanistan. It took the Soviet Government twenty years to suppress
the Muslim resistance in Central Asia and to establish the Soviet Repub-
lics there. It was a bloody and costly struggle. Accordingly, we were
not going to just stand by and see a Soviet-supported government on
the borders of the Soviet Union overthrown by the same forces of
Muslim fundamentalism which we had conquered in the Soviet Union
earlier. This is the major reason we sent our troops into Afghanistan.”
4. Comment: Serkov is the Deputy Head of the Soviet INCSEA
Delegation. He has been involved in INCSEA matters since before the
agreement was signed in 1972, and is familiar to U.S. members as an
extremely serious, dedicated party member. He is thought to be the
controlling member of the Soviet delegation, often cowing higher rank-
ing members. His influence appears to far outstrip the rank he wears.
Serkov is not given to thoughtless, emotional or inadvertent remarks.
5. It is unusual to hear an official Soviet make so explicit his concern
about the possible spill-over of Islamic militancy into Central Asia
should the anti-regime forces in Afghanistan not be checked. Period-
ically Soviet media try to “sell” the intervention in Afghanistan by
drawing a parallel between these forces and the “Basmachi” movement
which carried on guerrilla war against the Soviet authorities in Central
Asia until well into the 1930’s. Pravda on March 7, for example, pub-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800259–0354.
Confidential; Noforn. Sent for information to USICA, DIA, CNO, COMNAVINTCOM,
Warsaw, Beijing, Belgrade, Bucharest, Budapest, Hong Kong, Islamabad, Kabul, Lenin-
grad, London, New Delhi, Munich, Paris, Prague, Sofia, and USNATO.
