September 18–December 16, 1978
451
leave anything in Gaza and the West Bank. I am trying to make Gaza a
compromise. Let the withdrawal from Sinai be postponed, instead of
nine months let it be ten months. I am ready to accept this.
President Carter: I see. Mr. President, I am not sure what this is
going to do to the negotiations. There is a limit to how much time I can
spend on it.
President Sadat: I know the effort that you have given to this.
Frankly, I cannot do anything detrimental for both of us. Even with the
Baghdad meeting and what is happening, I am in full control. But such
a step like the first phase of withdrawal without anything happening in
Gaza and the West Bank, it would be detrimental. It would be a sepa-
rate agreement. As I told you, Mr. President, I don’t want this first
phase of withdrawal from Sinai so early. We can postpone it. I have
given the Israelis the biggest concession they could want in starting the
normal relations after the first phase of withdrawal while they are still
occupying my country. I have been blamed all over the Arab world and
even by the critics of my country. Wherever I have given you my word,
I will stick to it. Let’s look to anything that will damage this.
President Carter: Not having discussed this particular point with
you, what you specifically want to occur in Gaza is . . .
President Sadat: The first phase of withdrawal in Sinai will take
place the same day the Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank start au-
tonomy. This will mean that before the first phase of withdrawal is
completed we shall work together with the Israelis and you on this. The
day withdrawal is completed the same day autonomy begins in the
West Bank and Gaza or Gaza and postpone the West Bank. I don’t want
to do it alone in Sinai.
President Carter: Let me ask you in the worst case suppose it takes
two years to do that?
President Sadat: Two years for the elections.
President Carter: Yes.
President Sadat: In this case they don’t want peace. They want any-
thing to wait until the next election in your country. You know the
weight of this.
President Carter: Suppose you, the Israelis and I work as hard as we
can and we cannot get the Palestinians to cooperate; we cannot get the
Jordanians to cooperate; we have difficulty getting people to register to
vote; and elections may not be held inspite of our best efforts. This is
what I fear might happen. I am not predicting that it will happen and I
hope it will not, but to tie the two things together may mean that there
will be a great delay in the whole process even if the Israelis and you
work in good faith. It is a very complicated thing to arrange for the first
