358
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President began by reviewing his talks2 with the Israelis. He
said that they had shown flexibility and that they would be going back
to their cabinet with a number of specific recommendations. He gave
the Egyptians copies3 of the revised treaty text. In the preamble, the ref-
erence to reaffirming a commitment to the framework agreement
would be left in, and in addition there would be a letter4 in which the
Egyptians and the Israelis would commit themselves to begin negotia-
tions on the West Bank and Gaza within one month of the signing of the
treaty. The President urged that they both sign the same text. The Is-
raelis have no objection to what the Egyptians put in a separate letter of
their own concerning their views on the West Bank and Gaza. The Is-
raelis will have a different letter on that topic. It is up to Egypt to decide
what to put into a separate letter.
The President said that he would suggest the deletion of a couple of
the paragraphs in the preamble and suggested one addition referring to
the Egyptian-Israeli framework agreement. The President asked if the
Egyptians had received any new instructions on the timing of the ex-
change of ambassadors and Boutros Ghali said that they had not.
The President then turned to the reference to Gaza in the treaty. He
said that Israelis were prepared to accept reference to the issue of the
status of Gaza. He might also propose a new sentence saying that the
status of Gaza and the West Bank will be decided in accordance with
the framework agreement at Camp David. The President said that he
understood that Egypt does not claim Gaza as a part of Egypt, but does
not want to acknowledge that it is a part of Israel. The Israelis reserve
their right to claim sovereignty over this area. A map should be ap-
pended which would show the border between Egypt and Israel, as
well as the boundary around Gaza.
El-Erian said the idea which would be reflected is that Egypt has
some responsibility under the general armistice agreements for Gaza.
Boutros Ghali said that he would accept the language proposed by the
President. Egypt will mention its special responsibility for Gaza in a
letter.
2 See Document 96. Carter had also met with the Israelis on the afternoon of October
20. The President’s Daily Diary records that Carter met with Dayan and Weizman in the
Oval Office from 2:50 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. No memorandum of conversation of this meeting
has been found. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
3 Reference is possibly to a complete, revised text of the draft treaty—including the
preamble, a draft letter on UN forces, and a suggested Egyptian draft letter on West Bank
and Gaza—forwarded from Atherton to Carter under an October 20 covering memo-
randum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
Box 55, Middle East: Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel, 10/19–31/78)
4 See footnote 3 above.
