546
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
through the series of agreed reciprocal steps, the process to allow an
early end to the crisis, including release of all 53 Americans now held
in Tehran.
—The US looks forward to a period beyond the present difficulties
when we can build a relationship with Iran and its people based on
equality and mutual respect.
C. March 15–17: The Commission would limit its public statements
to an announcement that it is reviewing the material collected. But, in
private messages to Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, the Commission would
recall in particular that it will be unable to complete its report until it
has seen all the hostages, and that it will be ready to return to Tehran
as soon as the Iranian authorities indicate to it the date and the condi-
tions under which the visit can take place. As the Commission discussed
with Bani Sadr, it would suggest that the visit take place between
March 21–25 and could ask the Foreign Minister to place at its disposal
all the remaining documents it wishes to submit to the Commission.
D. Transfer of the hostages to the authority of the Foreign Ministry
and of the Revolutionary Council.
III. The Return of the Commission to Tehran (Objective: March
21–25)
(The following would be agreed in advance by Bani Sadr, Ghotbza-
deh, and the Commission.)
A. On arriving, the Commission would state: It has returned to
complete its mission. It has asked the Foreign Ministry to place all
remaining evidence at its disposal.
B. The Foreign Minister, as the Imam requested, would collect all
remaining documents and enable the Commission to examine them.
C. The Commission would meet with the Revolutionary Council
to set forth the facts invoked by Iran, to state that it indeed has received
elements of evidence relating to these facts, and that within
days
it will be able to present a report to the Secretary-General giving the
findings and recommendations that it has been able to derive from the
evidence presented.
D. The Revolutionary Council would make a statement on its meet-
ing with the Commission.
E. The Commission would then visit each of the hostages under
the conditions which the Commission will prescribe.
F. The Commission would make another report to the Revolution-
ary Council on the conditions of the hostages. It would also tell the
Revolutionary Council that the credibility of its report would be seri-
ously limited unless the hostages are released. It would ask Iran to set
a date for releasing the hostages and would commit itself to publish
its report on that date. (The simultaneity indicated in the last sentence
is subject to review as the final stages are revised.)
