1955  365
26. Wang said since 15th meeting we had held four sessions and 
discussion agenda item two was still in beginning stage so easy see 
why he was dissatisfied with progress of talks. He hoped at meeting 
of Ambassadors when we had limited time at our disposal we would 
not bring up over and over again those questions we had dealt with 
in past. If we went on this way it would prevent discussion of major 
issues we came here to discuss. Points I have raised had been dealt with 
by his side many times. Remaining Americans who had violated laws 
were only handful and they would be dealt with in light of agreement 
reached, in accordance with Chinese legal procedures, and considering 
the seriousness of their crimes and their conduct. Individual reviews of 
their cases would be made and when completed his side would inform 
UK which was third country entrusted by our side. It not necessary for 
us to discuss at this meeting questions of this nature.
27. I asked if it was correct that his government did consider terms 
of agreed announcement applied to all American civilians including 
prisoners.
28. Wang said he had already replied to this question and he could 
not make any interpretation beyond his statement.
29. I said it was very simple question but I had difficulty interpret­
ing his reply. All I had asked for was clarification.
30. Wang asked if I was not clear about answers he had given me.
31. I said no, I was not.
32. Wang read again from prepared text which he said was 
only reply he could give because it was in conformity with agreed 
announcement.
33. I asked whether phrase “in light of agreement” could be trans­
lated as “in accordance with agreement.” At that point there was some 
discussion between interpreters during which it appeared “in light of” 
should from beginning have been translated “in accordance with.”
34. I said I had no intention of belaboring point but he had said 
he had also answered my other questions. If he had done so in previ­
ous meetings I may have missed his answers. I asked if he felt he had 
answered my other questions.
35. Wang replied he had answered some of them.
36. I said I could not recall when.
37. Wang said I might refer to record of meetings.
38. I said I had done so and I could not find his answers. I had no 
intention of belaboring point, but I wanted to know if each American 
had received text of agreed announcement in English.
39. Wang said this question had been answered in past.
40. Was answer “yes”?
