1078 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 334. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1 Cairo, January 28, 1980, 1431Z 1978. For the President and the Secretary of State from Ambassador Linowitz. Subject: Meeting With King Hussein January 26. 1. Secret-entire text. 2. This is to report that I delivered your invitation to Hussein morning January 26 and that he was visibly delighted and gratified by it. In our subsequent conversation Hussein sought to show understanding for our Middle East peace efforts and to assure me that he did not want to do anything to make our task more difficult. The King was warm, friendly and positive throughout the talk, and I believe he regarded your invitation and this meeting as having established a bridge between himself and us closing a period of estrangement with which he was obviously uncomfortable. 3. Hussein and I met alone at the outset during which I extended the invitation, (after consulting with Ambassador Veliotes and giving further thought to the matter I decided it would be best to lead off with the invitation.) I said you had asked me to tell him that you would be very pleased if when he is next in the United States he would come to Washington for an informal chat. Hussein brightened immediately and asked me to convey to you his thanks and warmest regards. He said he plans to be in the U.S. in May. I said if Hussein should plan to come earlier he would be welcome even before May and he replied that perhaps there might be an earlier opportunity. 4. Following this warm and very friendly exchange, which set the tone for the rest of the conversation Amb. Veliotes joined us. Hussein led off and spoke at length about Jordan’s place in the peace process, Resolution 242, his relationships with the Israelis, his reason for not joining the autonomy negotiations, and his relations with the US. Most of what the King had to say on each of these subjects is familiar to us. What he was obviously trying to do in going over this ground was to convey the impression that he had not deliberately taken a stance at variance with ours but rather that from his point of view at least there 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 56, Jordan: 12/79–2/80. Secret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Linowitz’s meeting with Hussein took place in London. (Telegram 591 from Jidda, January 28; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800048–1008) Linowitz then traveled to Cairo as part of his January 24–February 2 Middle East trip, which included stops in Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Morocco. (Telegram 19007 to multiple posts, January 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800039–0055)
