Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 709 Carter: David, my question was how close is the nearest settlement or town to Desert One. Jones: We are . . . I don’t know that information . . . I asked them for a full (plot out) (phonetic) on it. It appears in the rough map I have here it’s quite a distance to the first town. Carter: Yes. Quite a distance, OK. That was the question I tried to ask but couldn’t get through. Jones: OK. I’ve got the book map here and we’re just trying . . . we want to know which way it’s . . . the truck was going and information of that nature . . . and if the 41 people . . . where they may have been going, leaving home and going to a place like Teheran or something may be expected at home, whatever the . . . we’re trying to figure out where the closest gendarmerie station. We’ve got the report as of a few minutes ago that about 40 minutes after the supposed truck fire gendarmerie were still not up on the network as of now. Carter: Yes. And you don’t have any report on the helicopter’s location? Jones: Well one report that they have passed the point of no return and the fuel to the carrier . . . the six have and that means they were only within 30 minutes out from the landing point, I should be getting a report at anytime on the helicopter in . . . and the refueling. Carter: OK. Jones: There’s a small town about 15 miles through the roads here to the west . . . it is much further over to the northeast depending on which way the truck was going. It is still . . . it is quite a ways to (NAIENE) (phonetic) and (YAZDEH) (phonetic) where the . . . it will be over 100 miles where we would expect the gendarmerie major post to be. We’re listening to all of those and there’s no report. But there is this town . . . we’re trying to figure out whether those would be any communications out of this little town of (ALI ABAD) (phonetic). Carter: David, just as a matter of intent . . . do you recall why we decided to land just adjacent to a highway? Jones: It’s not a highway, sir, it’s that little road . . . the only place we’ve been able to find, so for that we could land the 130s . . . and we looked and looked and looked and it’s the only place we found. We looked at another one and hoped to land there, and . . . we just did not find any place to land. We have speculated that if we had some delay or something to send the Otter back in if we could find another place. But we had not found another place to land, and the alternatives were (NAIENE) (phonetic) to go ahead and seize the field, or to go to this place. Carter: OK. If you have any further reports just send them to Dr. Brzezinski.
