1979  639
3. With respect to trends of the regional military balance, in the Far 
East favorable political trends may offset an unfavorable military bal-
ance; instabilities in the Persian Gulf/Mideast region create an adverse 
balance with an uncertain future; and in NATO the balance is slowly 
improving. (TS)
4. The strategic nuclear balance is deteriorating faster than we 
expected two years ago and will continue to do so to the early ’80s. The 
Soviets have been outspending us in defense since the late 1960s and 
military investment is important because it accumulates. (TS)
5. In the early 1980s we will face “a strategic dip.” We will not meet 
the criteria established in PD–18 that we maintain essential equivalence 
and a balance no worse than that existing in ’77.3 (TS)
6. The strategic gap of the early ’80s could produce damaging 
political perceptions and encourage assertive Soviet behavior. (TS)
7. If these trends are not corrected, the US will be able at best to 
wage a spasmic apocalyptic war rather than one controlled for political 
purposes. Because of this situation, the US will be less able to bargain 
stably in a protracted crisis situation and therefore the US may be less 
able in the ’80s to deter the Soviet Union from assertive behavior. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski also noted that it would really be an irony if our 
strategic position in the 1980s forces us to again rely on massive retali-
ation just as we did in the ’50s when we possessed a massive strategic 
superiority. Finally, Dr. Brzezinski said that he recognized that there 
were some divergent views with respect to these conclusions and sug-
gested that the other principals comment. (TS)
Secretary Vance said that he agreed with all Zbig’s conclusions, 
with two exceptions. First, he felt that characterizing the situation 
outside NATO as adverse was too pessimistic, that it would be more 
appropriate to characterize it as uncertain. More important, however, 
he felt that we will have a situation of rough strategic equivalence in the 
early ’80s and that we should not take the position ourselves that we 
are inferior—­this is a very dangerous way to characterize our situation, 
and we may hurt ourselves in doing it. (TS)
Secretary Brown began by saying that while he felt the comprehen-
sive net assessment was in some cases too pessimistic—­the strategic 
forces balance being one example of this—­he thought the assessment 
was too optimistic overall. In supporting this view, Secretary Brown 
made the following points:
—While relative dislike of the Soviets felt by other nations is a 
modest advantage to us, making too much of this point draws attention 
away from the fact that the Soviets can play on other nations’ fears of 
them to achieve their objectives.
—We would be hurt more than the Soviets by adverse events in the 
Third World.
3 See Document 31.
