494  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
We must, at possibly considerable cost, avoid making a wish father 
to an illusion. The key to the Dominican situation is the growing, so-­
called “dissident” group of middle and upper middle-­class, profes-
sional and business people who are normally U.S. oriented. Ardently as 
a quick victory might be wished for them to end their troubles and 
ours with Trujillo, a very detailed assessment—­including a trip I made 
to consult with Ambassador Farland in Ciudad Trujillo and detailed 
consultation with all agencies concerned—­lead to these conclusions: (a) 
the “dissident” group does not now have the capability or organization 
to control any revolution it sets afoot, even if it assassinated Trujillo 
and/or escaped immediate suppression; (b) it would in any event have 
to depend on decisive elements of the Dominican Armed Forces—­not yet even 
identified—­to maintain control of any revolution and to establish a stable 
government resistant to Castro and Communism; (c) such a government if 
established with the help of the Armed Forces, although less malodor-
ous than the present one, would have to pursue firm internal policies 
and would be the object of continuing Castro and Communist attacks as “anti-­
democratic”; and (d) unless the U. S. were to decide on more or less open 
material intervention, it will be many months before any actions of the 
U. S. could materially alter the situation in favor of the “dissidents” and 
that premature action on their part subjects them to piecemeal extermi-
nation, as so tragically shown earlier this year. It would, in short, be an 
illusion to think what we desire will be possible any time soon.
In the background, unfortunately, is the necessity for us to choose—­if 
need be—­until something better is available, between the continuation of 
Trujillo and the assumption of power by a Castro-­oriented government. This 
is an extremely ugly choice, and in selecting either we must stay at arms 
length if possible. However, we must be sensitive to the fact any of our 
actions which turn out to be more helpful to the assumption of power 
by a Castro-­type government than to a pro-U.S. government would not 
only prolong the Castro problem and be a severe blow to our secu-
rity interests but also expose the Department to what might well be the 
greatest-­yet criticism from Congress and public opinion.
