424 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 (2) Avoid unnecessarily sacrificing legitimate United Kingdom interests or unnecessarily impairing United States–United Kingdom relations. (3) Not permit the United Kingdom to veto any United States actions which the United States considers essential to the achievement of the policy objective set forth above. (4) Be prepared to avail itself of the authority of the President to approve voluntary agreements and programs under Section 708 (a) and (b) of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended. d. Recognize the strength of Iranian nationalist feeling; try to direct it into constructive channels and be ready to exploit any opportunity to do so, bearing in mind the desirability of strengthening in Iran the ability and desire of the Iranian people to resist communist pressure. e. Continue present programs of military, economic and technical assistance to the extent they will help to restore stability and increase internal security, and be prepared to increase such assistance to support Iranian resistance to communist pressure. f. Encourage the adoption by the Iranian Government of necessary financial, judicial and administrative and other reforms. g. Continue special political measures designed to assist in achieving the above purposes. h. Plan now for the eventual inclusion of Iran in any regional defense arrangement which may be developed in the Middle East if such inclusion should later prove feasible. 5. In the event of either an attempted or an actual communist seizure of power in one or more of the provinces of Iran or in Tehran, the United States should support a non-communist Iranian Government, including participation in the military support of such a government if necessary and useful.3 Preparations for such an eventuality should include: a. Plans for the specific military, economic, diplomatic, and psychological measures which should be taken to support a noncommunist Iranian Government or to prevent all or part of Iran or adjacent areas from falling under communist domination. b. Politico-military discussions with the British Government and such other governments as may be appropriate, with a view to determining (1) courses of action which might be pursued and (2) the allocation of responsibility in carrying out such courses of action in the area. c. Preparatory measures for the implementation of special political operations in Iran and adjacent Middle Eastern areas, including the 3 If it is found necessary for the United States to provide military forces in this area, implementation will require either a substantial augmentation of over-all United States forces or a reduction of present United States military commitments elsewhere. [Footnote is in the original.]
