1080 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement of demonstrating that the programs and policies we espouse will offer Peru a higher standard of living we must effectively refute the communists. In the Lima area we can probably do this best by assisting media to do the job for us. In southern Peru, however, the job is much harder but this is where the communist danger is greatest and this is where we should concentrate our effort. We can probably make a greater impact on public opinion if we concentrate our leader grant program on people who help form public opinion on a daily basis, i. e., Congressmen, newspapermen, labor leaders, etc. 5. [text not declassified] 6. We should intensify our efforts in the universities along the lines we are now proceeding. The close working relationship between USOM and the medical faculty at San Marcos University has paid off in considerable good will toward the United States. The financial support we have given to this Faculty including laboratory and technical equipment has helped to make it one of the most stable faculties in the University. The exchange of students between the University of Indiana and San Marcos has also paid off. We should encourage more such exchanges, and in addition encourage any interest arising on the path of mature, responsible American students and scholars to study at Peruvian universities. Such a program would involve risks in that all participants might not be effective representatives of the U.S. The advantages to be gained in such exchanges, however, would greatly outweigh the disadvantages. The relatively few students from the U.S. in Peru have handled themselves extremely well. The “hotbeds” of communism in the universities are usually the economics and law faculties. We should concentrate our exchange professor program in these two faculties in an effort to propagate our economic philosophy and our legal concept on the balance between duties and responsibilities of the citizens and the State. Our effort should be more in the constitutional law field than any other. 7. The real battleground in the student field is not, however, in the universities but in secondary education. It is only a small percentage of Peruvians who ever get to the universities. Our efforts in secondary education should be directed at the student body in teacher training schools in Peru. We cannot hope to influence directly the large mass of Peruvian secondary students but we can influence them through their teachers. The more secondary school students who can be assisted to spend at least a year at school in the U.S. the better. 8. The Church in Peru should be encouraged to take a more active role in improving social conditions in the country. The Church should support a more equitable distribution of wealth. It should help in a
