250
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
possibility of Arafat going to Tehran, but he is hesitant to go if he is
not likely to succeed. Fourth, we have been in contact with a number
of Islamic leaders—heads of state—who have expressed a willingness
to go to Qom and see Khomeini directly. We have also got members of
the Islamic clergy to weigh in, but unfortunately not senior Shia leaders.
That is the sum and substance of our contacts. We expect an Arafat
decision in the next two or three days and he has been pressed very
hard by Prince Fahd, plus the Islamic Council.
The Secretary said he would like to discuss military options in a
smaller group and thus did not wish to say anything more than that
we had placed adequate forces in the area and that he felt this was a
useful step. We intend to pursue and exhaust all peaceful means, but
we cannot allow the situation to continue indefinitely as it is and, in
effect, freeze the status quo. We believe there is only a small chance
of the steps already taken having an effect, so therefore we have added
economic pressures as the main element, along with our diplomatic
activities.
In that area, we will soon face the question of Chapter 7 sanctions.
We cannot sit by and see the Security Council and the World Court
ignored. The world must recognize that this indeed constitutes a threat
to the peace and, therefore, Chapter 7 would be appropriate. We hope
and expect the support of the world community and, of course, particu-
larly of our friends and allies if that action becomes necessary. In the
meantime, we would like to have international actions to help with
the economic pressures we have already begun. The time for collective
action is now. We know that even the economic action that we have
taken thus far is beginning to hurt because we know that one of Far-
hang’s instructions will be to get the removal of the freeze on assets.
Therefore, we know they are having a negative impact. The Secretary
then turned to his discussions with Prime Minister Thatcher and
Foreign Secretary Carrington.4 In those discussions, it was agreed that
the best way to support our actions would be for our allies to join us
in freezing Iranian assets. This would be the most direct means and it
would be related directly and solely to the hostages. Thus the freeze
could be lifted if the hostages were released. Second, another means
could be used short of a total freeze, which would be to invoke the
cross-default clauses in outstanding loans. The Secretary said that such
steps were necessary to make our action effective in putting on pressure
for the release of hostages and also to prevent any undermining of the
4 As reported in telegram Secto 12007 from Paris, December 10. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790569–1090)
