Guatemala 697 changes the President and his Government might wish to make in the program. The most extensive discussion occurred under the heading of Rural Development. This likewise has the largest amount of funds remaining, amounting to over $7 million. The President spoke at very considerable length contending that land distribution, or the promise thereof, is a principal weapon of the Communists or leftists, that nothing in this respect had been done by his immediate predecessors and that some vitality must be given the program even at the expense of handing out small parcels of land. He maintained that land ownership was a principal deterrent to Communist ideology. He agreed that the kind of land distribution or land resettlement with which the United States has assisted is important in the long run and in raising the productive level of Guatemala. However, he felt that urgent distribution of small tracts was needed on a political basis. After he had finished and before the head of the Agrarian Department could reply, the Minister of Agriculture took the floor and by the clock spoke for 18 minutes. This discussion has been aptly described as a sustained tirade damning the rural development program, American technicians, the direction of U.S. aid in Guatemala, improper budgetary practices of the Guatemalan Government, a defense of Indian farming practices and practically everything else in the book except a defense of oxcarts. His statement, if such it may be called, was greeted by others present with a mixture of curiosity and amazement. He finished without any comments by the President or anyone else present. Attempt was made to progress to the next item on the agenda when Colonel Peralta, head of the Agrarian Department, only after some insistence, was able to get the President’s permission to speak in defense of the Rural Development Program. This he did at some length refuting many points brought up by Lic. Clemente Marroquin Rojas, the Minister of Agriculture. When this was over, the President still made no comment. Before the day was finished, it looked as though the President was acting as umpire between the unruly members of his family, including a slightly weak-­minded member thereof. With respect to other projects under the subject of special assistance, such as housing, malaria eradiation, environmental sanitation, education, public safety, community self-­help, the various Ministers spoke in turn. Each expressed himself as very much satisfied with the program and demonstrated resistance to giving up any of their funds for the use of any other project. Certain worthwhile and revealing discussions ensued, for example, the desirability of combining work in environmental sanitation with water supplies in the Ministry of Communications and Public Works in order to avoid any duplication of effort. Following the discussion of these several programs, the
