3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
481
8. I began my reply by saying that I was sorry to have to state that I
felt that the Soviet side had not taken appropriate account of the very
substantial moves made by the President in the meetings in Wash-
ington. In my statement, I reviewed those efforts, noting that they dealt
with almost every major outstanding concern of the USSR and, in our
view, represent a major effort to reach a fair and mutually beneficial
agreement. I then summarized the U.S. positions and the areas of
agreement and disagreement on the issues. It may be significant that,
although he interrupted at a number of other points where he claimed I
had not correctly summarized agreed points on Soviet views, Gromyko
did not challenge my statement that the Soviet proposal to drop the
2,500 km range limits applied to both testing and deployment and
meant that there would be no range limits for cruise missiles in either
the protocol or the full agreement, except the 600 km limits.
9. Telemetry encryption. When, in the course of my statement, I
said that the exchange between Warnke and Semenov indicated agree-
ment that the already-agreed ban on deliberate concealment applies to
deliberate denial of telemetric information, such as by encryption and
that telemetric information can be important for verification purposes,
Semenov interrupted to say that was not an accurate report of their
conversation. Gromyko later said that nothing would come of attempts
to reach agreement on telemetry, that there was no necessity for agree-
ment, and that both sides will be in the same situation in the absence of
agreement.
10. We will of course discuss the telemetry issue again with them. I
don’t think Gromyko understands the issue and rather than dealing
with the underlying concept is concerned that we are charging them
with a current violation of the Interim Agreement. I believe this issue
will be satisfactorily resolved.
11. Now that we have gotten through the usual opening ex-
changes, we will be able to get down to real business in the talks among
the smaller groups, that is, Vance, Warnke, and Toon opposite Gro-
myko, Korniyenko and Dobrynin.
Vance
