744 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The mobilization process cannot be fully tested because it involves the private sector. In Exercise NIFTY NUGGET, conducted in October 1978, we made the first attempt since World War II to test, in a combined mobilization exercise, military and civilian agency plans and procedures. Although many mobilization activities went well, there were serious shortcomings. Recognizing the need to correct the shortcomings identified in NIFTY NUGGET, we established a DoD Mobilization and Deployment Steering Group chaired by my Under Secretary of Defense for Policy. The charge to this Steering Group is to provide high-­level direction and coordination throughout Defense as well as foster military-­civilian cooperation. The areas of general weakness discovered in NIFTY NUGGET and follow-­up activities are: —Mobilization Planning —Our planning relied on an assembly of old, unconnected, and inconsistent emergency orders, policies, regulations and procedures. For example, you have statutory authority to recall Regular Army and Air Force retirees, while all other retirees cannot be recalled until after a declaration of national emergency. In addition, the existing plans were too general for decentralized execution to proceed without major blockages. —We are now preparing a Defense Mobilization Plan that assigns responsibilities, identifies tasks and provides guidance for my staff, the Military Departments, and Defense Agencies. That planning activity will help coordinate and decentralize the mobilization process. —Deployment Planning —The exercise identified shortcomings in our planning to transport military units and equipment overseas. For example, we found that many Army units required more cargo airlift than plans had allocated to them. We also found that airlift was underutilized because we did not have a good mechanism for adjusting schedules. —To improve deployment planning we created within existing manpower a Joint Deployment Agency that reports to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. This agency is revising deployment planning so that it is more flexible. It is also more accurately calculating air and sealift requirements for unit movement. —Interagency Coordination —NIFTY NUGGET showed that we need better coordination between Defense and other Federal agencies. One example was the difficulty experienced in the reception and relocation of the large number of noncombatants assumed to be evacuated from the war zone. Both Defense and the civil agencies had made incorrect planning
