Covert and Overt Operations
875
sensible attitude. It had attempted numerous actions which had wors-
ened the atmosphere constantly and widened the gulf between the two
countries. He cited the following examples:
1. The freezing of Iranian assets in U.S. banks had been an illegal
action. These assets derived from the sale of oil which had been con-
cluded at low prices, about 1/10 of the actual value.
2. Also illegal is the blockage of delivery of spare parts for projects
which had been forced on Iran in the first place, with a guaranty of
ongoing supplies. Fortunately, in the meantime, Iran is in a position
to make its way even without these, partly vital, spare parts.
3. He referred to the strong U.S. pressure on its satellite countries
to join the economic boycott. But Iran can stand on its own feet and
bravely withstand the effects of the economic boycott.
4. The military offensive in Iran (Tabas), of which there are still
many details missing.5 This act could in no way be put in a favorable
light before the eyes of the world.
5. The continued active support of the Shah before and after his
overthrow and to the very end, and the support for the minions of his
regime in Iran and abroad constitutes an unfriendly act towards the
Iranian people.
6. Extensive propaganda activities in the whole world with the
object of defaming the Iranian revolution. After all, it is obvious that
the Iranian revolution must be considered the most humane revolution
in recent times, marked by the spirit of mercy and forgiveness.
7. U.S. support for leftist groups active in Kurdistan, Khuzestan,
Azerbaijan, and Turkestan trying to weaken the Iranian revolution,
although supporting these groups can certainly not be in the interest
of the Western World.
8. Active subversive propaganda by the Farsi service of the VOA
with the goal of bringing about a military coup as planned by Bakhtiar
and other accomplices of the Shah. General U.S. support of all those
who are actively considering a coup.
9. Active American involvement in the recent abortive coup.6 This
coup was the work of all counterrevolutionary groups (Bakhtiar/the
Shah’s people, etc.) as well as the United States and its mercenaries
(Israel, among others). The names of those involved had been found
in the U.S. Embassy. Only thanks to God’s mercy and the vigilance of
the people, this sinister attempt had failed.
5 Reference is to the rescue attempt.
6 See Document 313.
