1510  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
position taken by Mr. McCone. Mr. Irwin said that he would discuss this 
matter with the Secretary of Defense and let Mr. Herter know as soon as 
possible whether Defense was prepared to change its position.
Mr. Herter raised the question whether, if the proposed change in 
position is made, it should be made with great public fanfare as the Brit­
ish seemed to prefer. Ambassador Wadsworth, Mr. Allen, and Mr. Irwin 
agreed that the concession should be made as routinely as possible in 
the course of negotiations and with a minimum of hue and cry which 
could be taken to imply that the President’s August 22 position was 
wrong. Mr. Farley noted that one of our major objectives in the cur­
rent negotiations was to gain Soviet agreement to an effective control 
system. Our change in position could be justified on the grounds that 
Soviet acceptance of the controls sought constitutes a most important 
step forward which in itself makes future progress in disarmament more 
possible. Thus it is not a case of our previous position being wrong but 
simply a recognition that the objective of disarmament progress could 
in reality best be served by conclusion of an agreement on nuclear tests 
with firm control provisions. There will be adequate protection for U.S. 
interest, since it would be possible to withdraw from the treaty if the 
Soviets obstruct operation of the control system.
General Loper asked whether it would not be possible to postpone 
a decision on the link until a later stage, since it would not be necessary 
to discuss the duration article until near the end of the negotiations. 
Ambassador Wadsworth said that he had been giving the question of gen­
eral tactics in the negotiations further thought over the holidays and 
felt that our best procedure now would be to move ahead and table all 
of the remaining articles of our draft treaty, seeking agreement on as 
many of these as possible, and by-­passing for the time-­being some of 
the more difficult issues such as the question of unanimity. We are pres­
ently vulnerable to Soviet charges that we have not given a clear idea 
of the total scope of the treaty we propose. Furthermore, it would be to 
our advantage to be free to come back at will to some of these difficult 
issues, such as that of the “veto”, at a later stage since these were the 
issues on which any breakoff would be favorable to the U.S. Mr. Herter 
agreed that the U.S. would be in a far better public relations position if a 
breakoff in the negotiations occurred on the question of controls than it 
would if the break were to be on the matter of relationship to disarma­
ment. Mr. Irwin said that if the decision were made to break the link, the 
Department of Defense would prefer to see this policy change played 
in a low key and with a view to making the most of it as a bargaining 
counter in the negotiations.
Passing to the second item of the agenda, Mr. Herter asked Dr. Kil­
lian to explain the nature and implications of the new data relating 
to detection and identification of underground tests obtained in the
