National Security Policy  177
48.	
Record of Telephone Conversation Between John Foster 
Dulles and Anderson1
Washington, April 30, 1958, 3:45 p.m.
TELEPHONE CALL FROM SECRETARY ANDERSON
The Sec returned the call and A said he was briefed for NSC tomor­
row. It seems to him we are getting away from what he has thought of 
as military power being a means of enforcing the policies of the U.S. 
and being an implement by which we achieve our policy. A thinks we 
should develop more flexibility to give strength to State—apart from 
dropping the atomic bomb. The Sec said the trouble is people doubt 
we would do it and therefore we have nothing. The Sec went to the 
Pres and asked if he could not go to Defense and meet with the offi­
cials and JCS and discuss this problem and he agreed and the Sec went 
and they are making a review of the strategic concept, but the fact is 
our present policies are running into a dead end. They agreed we need 
more flexibility but also think we are getting more in the way of deter­
rent power than we need. A said if he says he thinks we should have 
more flexibility they say this is good—give us money for the nuclear 
defense and [illegible in the original] what we need for flexibility. We, 
said the Sec, have got to make some kind of an estimate and admit it 
cannot be 100%. Our deterrent capacity does not go down as the Soviet 
capacity goes up. The Sec said it goes down as they develop means of 
shooting down bombers so we can’t get through. The Sec thinks we 
are embarked on a a theory—not on a really thought-­out thing. We are 
trying to get all we can as fast as we can and not accepting any limit 
other than the limit which seems to be imposed by physical limitations 
or lack of knowledge or budgetary controls. If we are given knowledge 
and no limitation from a budget point of view, there is no limit. A said 
it will never be settled by Defense or the JCS and the Sec agreed. A said 
para 14 is the focus of it and he was wondering tomorrow. . . . The Sec. 
said we should spend several sessions on it. A said to get the top fel­
lows of the NSC spelling it out clearly, review it for the Pres and take it 
in as top-side policy for his consideration. The is the top problem ever 
since A hit Defense. A said it is worthy of such time and debate as it 
takes to get it resolved. The Sec did initiate this request to reexamine 
the strategic concept which involves pretty much what is in para 14. 
He might want to see it before we try to formulate this. A said that is 
perfectly all right. They agreed it is crazy to resolve the paper between 
1 Source: Basic national security policy. No classification marking. 2 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
