Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 These are facts; but another fact is that we have not publicized our successes as we need to do—and, for that and other reasons, thus do not get the credit that you and your Administration justly deserve. We can be assertive—not defensive—in this area. With regard to peace, the record is clear: despite the anxieties and difficulties of various crises (like Iran), no U.S. soldier has died in combat.13 This is the first four-year term since Eisenhower’s second when that has been true; and in fact you are the first President since Hoover (!) to have no combat losses. You also did the “impossible” in bringing Egypt-Israel peace and the end of the Rhodesia-Zimbabwe race war. Strength and peace are two excellent themes. And combining them also brings in arms control, the effort to reduce the risks of conflict from a position of strength, and the balanced, mature approach to the Soviet Union.14 The morality issue has primarily a selective audience—e.g. ethnic-Americans on CSCE; the “Humphrey wing” of the party on developing-country problems.15 But there is also a general sense in the country of the importance of “standing for something”—a theme you used in good effect in 1976.16 Finally, there is value in emphasizing how your policies build for the future, beginning with national strength, but also in strengthening our alliances (where, of course, there will be considerable press/public skepticism); dealing with economic and energy realities; and creating openings to the new poor centers of the future.17 Put in this sense—not as adjusting to “complexity” or “change”—I believe most Americans would welcome straight talk from their President, as opposed to the simplicities of a Reagan. Americans are also responsive to challenge, provided at the same time they are told what to do about it—as we have been doing, though often without the clarity and persistence that is needed. II. Public criticism of Reagan’s approach: In contrast, Reagan’s approach can be attacked head-on for being both escapist and dangerous. In brief: 13 The President placed a bracket in the right-hand margin next to this sentence. 14 The President placed a bracket in the right-hand margin next to this sentence. 15 The President underlined “morality issue.” 16 The President underlined “standing for something.” 17 In this sentence, the President underlined “build for the future,” “national strength,” “strengthening our alliances,” “economic and energy,” and “new poor centers.” He also placed a bracket in the right-hand margin next to the first part of this sentence.
