520
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
I don’t see much hope that we can influence Congress in a more
constructive direction until we’ve taken some initiatives ourselves.
Certainly however it does seem as though abandoning or weakening
the policy is not the answer. We have always recognized that human
rights is a high risk policy because it can so easily be used as a tool by
both political extremes, and we are finding our expectations on this to
be then fulfilled. We don’t yet have many of the substantive or political
answers to the difficulties, but I think we can conclude that the blame
for some bad statutes now on the books lies with the Congress, but the
blame for allowing the Congress to get into its present frame of mind
on this issue lies with the Executive Branch.
161.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews and Robert
Pastor of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 23, 1978
SUBJECT
The OAS and Human Rights
Attached at Tab A is a letter to the President from Secretary Gen-
eral Orfila officially informing him of the entry into force of the Amer-
ican Convention on Human Rights and thanking him for his attend-
ance at the OAS meeting.2 We believe that no reply is necessary.
In sending the letter to State for comment, we also asked for sug-
gestions of steps which could be taken by the Administration to en-
courage Senate ratification of the OAS Convention. Now that the Con-
vention is officially in force, thanks in large part to our efforts, we look
a little silly in not being able to take part in its implementation since we
have not ratified. State discussed ratification with Church’s staff and
reports that prospects are not bright. The Convention contains many
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North–South
Pastor Files, Subject File, Box 56, Human Rights: 6–12/78. No classification marking. Sent
for action. Sent through Albright, who did not initial the memorandum. A handwritten
notation on the memorandum reads: “FYI—Bob Pastor.”
2 Attached but not printed. In the July 19 letter to the President, Orfila referenced
the Government of Grenada’s actions in bringing the convention into force and effect by
the deposit of its instrument of ratification in Washington on July 18.
