692 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement because I raised some historical events at last meeting that compelled him make their views clear. 37. Wang said I had again asserted that no intent part US threaten security China when Korean hostilities started. However, Chinese peo­ ple could never forget historical lesson given in path taken by ­Japanese imperialists when seized Korea in order attack China in long run. I had alluded to UN resolution on question of who was aggressor but he might point out that resolution adopted under entire manipulation of US and therefore completely illegal. 38. Wang said, again on question of spread of Korean war which had been prevented: he might point out that was due to strength ­Chinese and Korean people that expansion Korean war prevented. 39. Wang said, then turning my denial US has occupied Taiwan and turned it into base for attack against China, he might pont out US has made no gestures withdraw Taiwan area but is steadily reinforcing strength that area. Could only raise question whether US is not trying strengthen forces in order launch attack against China. 40. Wang said my claim tension Taiwan area not caused by US but rather by China was glaring distortion facts. It matter fact that libera­ tion by Chinese people entire mainland China had never posed threat against anybody else. If there no presence American forces this area there would be no tension this area. 41. Wang said, as to proposal for relaxation tension between China and US in Taiwan area, proposal first advanced by Chinese Premier at Bandung conference in which he proposed China and US enter negoti­ ations resolve disputes between them by peaceful means. 42. Wang said in order eliminate conflicts in Taiwan area and ten­ sions that area, necessary take practical actions rather than merely ren­ der lip service. 43. Wang said I had proposed that disputes in Taiwan area be set­ tled unconditionally, yet in draft presented by US, US claims right of self-­defense in Taiwan area. This is exactly a condition imposed by US. 44. Wang said it was this condition that prevented our talks from making progress. Chinese people will never accept my denial that US has ever occupied Taiwan, nor my statement regarding relations between my government and Chiang Kai-­shek. It well known fact entire world that corrupt regime Chiang Kai-­shek long been veil worn by Chinese people. Without support of US, this Chiang Kai-shek clique can never exist for single day. Action US in supporting Chiang clique and occupying Taiwan is outright violation sovereignty China and interference with China’s internal affairs. 45. Wang said if US continues persist claiming right to self defense in Taiwan area then all my remarks concerning not requiring Chinese
