Chapter 7, January–May 1991 993 require a modification of the bulkhead of the bomb bay and will take at least six days. It can be conducted at an airbase, but it will be a long process, requiring a lot of work, including the replacing of the bomb bay doors. The work on the ALCM attachment points take at least two days, and that procedure can also only be done at a special location. And that means it would take at a minimum eleven to thirteen days to convert one B–1 bomber. If a decision was taken to convert a unit of twenty B–1s, it would take at least a year and a half. Bartholomew: Well, it would take over a year to a year and a half in addition to reconfigure the additional time is required to reconfigure the aircraft to train the crews. You know it takes that long to get them fully operational. Baker: Well, we’d better get a little more precise. Thirteen days per aircraft and it doesn’t seem like a year and a half if you are talking about twenty aircraft. Bessmertnykh: Well, we’ll use the phrase of well over a year. Baker: We should probably say for the entire process it will take well over a year to a year and a half. Burt: Yes, it’s the entire process including procuring new equipment and the training of crews. This would be a whole new mission, and that’s why it will take so much time. Bartholomew: The first unit of twenty plans will take about a year and a half. The second obviously will take less time. Burt: Our position is that if we decide to convert, we will have to count this against the ALCM numbers overall. We certainly couldn’t do that quietly and we certainly couldn’t do it over night. Bartholomew: The important point is that we have no plan to do this. Baker: We need to be very precise on this point. Bartholomew: Now it is our assumption that it’s the B–1 that’s reconfigured to carry ALCMs. Notification will have to be given. This is an understanding that would be recorded and read into the negotiating record of my meeting with the deputy minister. With this, the US would return the Houston agreement on the B–1. With regard to this, there are to be no more than two types of missiles on each side—­no more than five warheads, no more than a total of 1,250. Now, there are to be no prohibitions on mobile ICBMs and its supplies to base-­by-­base and with regard to ICBMs and with regard to SLCMs, it’s ocean by ocean. We’ve also given the explanation provided by Eduard Shevardnadze on December 30th and January 12th, that the B–1 was done prior to the treaty and is not included in the types and the limit of 1,250. So, subject to this
