Chapter 4, February–April 1990  465
the next topic, non-­circumvention. He handed over a copy of the draft 
declaration.
Shevardnadze thanked the Secretary for the proposal. It would be 
necessary to study the draft declaration before responding. The U.S. 
was aware of the Soviets’ fundamental approach. They believed it was 
necessary to set limits on long-range SLCMs, to determine the range 
above which systems would be limited (namely, 600 km), and to set a 
ceiling of 1000 on such weapons. The Soviets could agree to do away 
with separate nuclear and conventional categories and consider SLCMs 
in the single category if the U.S. preferred. To reach agreement on spe-
cific numbers of SLCMs with which surface ships and submarines 
could be equipped, the Soviets had suggested that ships be permitted 
to carry no more than 1000 SLCMs. In other words, we should agree 
on the number of surface ships and submarines equipped for SLCMs.
With respect to verification, Shevardnadze said the Soviets real-
ized this was complex but they believed such measures should be 
based on exchange of information on what types of surface ships and 
submarines were equipped for SLCMs; it was possible to agree that 
such a data exchange would be kept confidential. The sides, using 
NTM, could verify the numbers of surface ships and subs. At the same 
time, continuous monitoring of SLCM production facilities could be 
established and, for each cruise missile produced, a unique identifier 
could be applied. In addition, we could agree on cooperative measures 
to facilitate verification.
An agreement had to be acceptable to both sides, Shevardnadze 
added, if we were to arrive at a final solution. He did not know about 
the U.S. declaration, or whether it contained any convergence of views 
in principle. If it did we could perhaps make progress. Shevardnadze 
reiterated that the problem of SLCMs was very complex and difficult 
for the Soviets. Gorbachev had told this to the President at Malta, say-
ing that an agreement on SLCMs would not be included in the START 
agreement itself but should be considered in connection with the 
Treaty. Without an understanding on SLCMs there would be no treaty. 
Shevardnadze said he would comment at the next session on the U.S. 
paper on SLCMs. He hoped what he had just said sounded better than 
the U.S. declaration.
The Secretary said that Shevardnadze’s comments suggested that 
there was still a lot of difference between us on SLCMs—­more differ-
ence than he was hoping to hear. He urged that Shevardnadze look 
closely at the U.S. draft declaration. A lot of thought had gone into the 
proposal, and he urged Shevardnadze to keep in mind what a declara-
tion would mean in the U.S. political system. This said, the Secretary 
assured Shevardnadze that he had been heard clearly: the Soviets still
