Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 269 tries. We will seek common ground with these countries, for progress will only be possible when solutions are mutually beneficial to all parties. Second, we will recognize in our actions that interdependence is more than a slogan. It requires us, as we fashion our domestic economic policies, to take into account their impact on the rest of the world, including the Third World. Traditionally, the economies of the developing countries have relied upon the economic dynamism of the major industrial economies. We must continue to be reliable on that score. But it is increasingly true that we have a major stake in the health and vitality of the Third World, as well. No less than 35% of our exports went to developing countries, while almost half of our imports came from them. Third, the structure of the international system is changing, gradually evolving from a “North” and a “South” into a global community in which all countries have responsibilities as well as rights. Much of the North-South rhetoric has, unfortunately, implied that only the industrial nations have obligations. This cannot be true. If fully accepted, it fosters both paternalism and resentment. Even the phrase “North- South,” and the dichotomy it sets up, obscures the gradations that exist among nations. This analysis does not mean we can—or should try to— split the Group of 77.2 But as the economies of developing countries advance from one level to another, it is important that they show increasing concern for the global welfare. They will have a growing stake in the common good. Key oil-producing nations, for example, now ponder the damaging effect of rising oil prices on the health of the global economic system and, therefore, on their own long-term economic development. Even small oil price rises can easily wipe out the gains which the Third World could reap from aid, investment, and loans from the industrial nations. Treasury Secretary Blumenthal calculated the other day that each percentage point of increase in oil prices adds $400 million to the U.S. energy cost; it has an even more devastating impact on other countries. Each nation must also face its responsibilities to its own citizens, who are most in need—and our own country is no exception. However well-functioning the international economic system, development is fundamentally a challenge for each government and society to address in its own terms. 2 The Group of 77 is a caucus of developing countries formed in 1964 at the first U.N. Conference on Trade and Development to present a unified bargaining position in their negotiations with industrialized countries. It is now composed of 115 developing countries. [Footnote in the original.]
