1979 589 4. Disaster: Air-­mobile or Hybrids Thereof The President may choose the air mobile concept over Harold’s objections or after persuading Harold to agree that it is a very poor third, but acceptable, choice. Much of the defense technical establishment, including the Air Force, is very likely to be hard against him. The budgeteers will shudder at the cost implications. And everyone will really doubt whether the President intends to follow through. This will look like an interim effort to make it seem like M–X is going forward, while avoiding selection of MPS. Some in the defense community might be willing to go along because they would believe that a new Administration would review the issue. In the meantime, we would at least keep moving on M–X. But these sentiments would clearly be the opposite of the strategic consensus that we need. (TS) An equally bad variant on this disaster would occur if the President selected truck mobile. Over the long term, trucks are a sensible option to continue to explore, perhaps as a later 1980s adjunct to DYAD or MPS. But they are anything but an answer to the Minuteman survivability problem now, politically or strategically.9 (TS) Therefore, the real options are MPS or DYAD, the latter accompanied by a very tough strategic line that will be extremely difficult to adopt or make convincing. (TS) You should understand that the above judgments are informed by a fairly conventional appreciation of the technical and strategic arguments as DOD seems likely to present them, on one hand, and a very subjective view of what the political situation warrants, on the other. We know that the Congress wants urgently and SALT requires urgently a firm decision on ICBM basing. But I worry that our understanding of Congressional sentiment on a) how vital M–X per se is, and b) on the basing choices is not sufficiently firm to plot one of the two workable scenarios in political terms. (TS) Suggesting now that the President is leaning against M–X and for DYAD (which he implied in his New York speech)10 has grave risks. The press is already onto this. What we should do is get a better sense of Congressional views on the basing options now, knowing that they won’t become firm until the President has begun consultations and made a decision.11 (TS) 9 Brzezinski underlined the word “now,” drew a vertical line and wrote “Why? The others are later” in the left margin next to this sentence. 10 Reference is to Carter’s April 25 remarks at the Annual Convention of the American Newspaper Publishers Association. (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, pp. 693–699) 11 Ermarth wrote a postscript at the bottom of the page: “Zbig, These are my own thoughts. Once DOD comes over with its 30 April report, I’m happy to work this problem jointly with Vic et al. F.”
