1304 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President asked whether Yadin had been able to see Egyptian antiquities. Minister Ali said yes. The President said that Yadin had asked him (the President) to arrange it. Minister Burg said that Yadin had been to Memphis, and shown a strong interest in it. The President said that he had asked Yadin if he (the President) could help arrange such a trip to Egypt. Yadin had said he would like to go. He (the President) had said that this would be the first thing he would raise with Sadat—that Yadin should go to Egypt and see its antiquities. Sadat said he would invite Yadin personally. Minister Burg said that he was in Egypt 40 years ago, travelling from Geneva to Palestine via Lisbon and Africa. The trip took four and a half months. The President said that people forget what has been done in the past two years. He does not want us to move backwards with disagreement or failure. If we continue to work we can succeed. Minister Burg said that too much has been invested to permit failure. The President agreed. Secretary Muskie asked whether the Egyptians had removed all the artifacts before Aswan was flooded. Minister Ali said yes. Secretary Muskie asked if this was all of them. Minister Ali said that it was all. They had teams that went throughout the valley to see whether there were other artifacts. They succeeded in digging out the ancient buildings. The President said that it was a mammoth job in raising the sites above the water. Minister Ali said that the biggest was Abu Simbel; it was more than 20,000 tons of stone. The President said that autonomy should be easy in comparison (laughter). Secretary Muskie said maybe we should build a new pyramid. The President said he was very glad that the discussions have got so far. Minister Ali would talk to Sadat tomorrow. Does he have to wait? What time is it in Cairo? Minister Ali said that sometimes Sadat goes out and comes in late. The President asked whether Sadat goes to bed late. Minister Ali could tell Sadat that he (the President) considered this important enough to call him (Sadat) tonight.
