1136 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI precedent established by the agreement between the governments of the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. and through an exchange of notes between the Embassy of the U.S.A. in the U.S.S.R. and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the U.S.S.R. dated April 20-23, 1990, concerning the release to the public of information which is contained in notifications provided pursuant to the Treaty Between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the Elimination of their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles of December 8, 1987, including data updates with respect to the categories of data contained in the memorandum of understanding regarding the establishment of the data base for the treaty of December 8, 1987. The Soviet side further understands that such consultations shall be concluded prior to entry into force of the treaty. Statement of Policy by the United States of America Concerning Encryption and Jamming The United States of America, as a gesture of its goodwill and recognizing the value of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, declares its intention not to use encryption and not to use jamming during flight tests of ICBMs and SLBMs beginning 120 days after signature of the treaty. The United States of America declares its intention to continue this goodwill restraint for one year or until entry into force of the treaty, whichever is sooner. Statement of Policy by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics Concerning Encryption and Jamming The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, as a gesture of its goodwill and recognizing the value of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, declares its intention not to use encryption and not to use jamming during flight tests of ICBMs and SLBMs beginning 120 days after signature of the treaty. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics declares its intention to continue this goodwill restraint for one year or until entry into force of the treaty, whichever is sooner. U.S. Statement on Launch-Associated Support Vehicles and Driver Training Vehicles The U.S. side has taken note of the Soviet side’s statement and believes that such information would be helpful in discussing compliance concerns when and if such concerns are considered in the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission. Statement by the Soviet Side on Launch-Associated Support Vehicles and Driver Training Vehicles The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has vehicles in its inventory that resemble launch-associated support vehicles and driver training vehicles. In the event that a compliance concern arises because of the presence of such a vehicle at an eliminated facility, the Union of Soviet
