288 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement nationals, including those in jail, have been informed their rights under Agreed Announcement and that Office of UK Chargé has been given necessary advice and facilities by PRC. As to those in jail, we should insist that UK Chargé be given access to them, since they have no access to him. US Government does not care whether PRC calls this approach to UK Government invitation, notification or request. US Government unable see that this is more than mere quibble. Essential objective is inform Americans and enable UK Chargé to act. We will not allow this question rest until satisfaction afforded. 3. Department requesting Embassy London inform you by direct cable if possible in time for tomorrow’s meeting whether written For­ eign Office reply yet received to our note of September 12, and whether any word yet received by Foreign Office from PRC as to arrangements for performance UK function. Our reply to London’s 1034 has been delayed from day to day in anticipation early word from Peiping. Replies to London’s 1034 and 1119 will be repeated you in any event before tomorrow’s meeting. 4. Re paragraph 5 reftel concur most unlikely that discussion anything in regard to Item Two can appropriately take place at next meeting in view scope and seriousness our unanswered questions on implementation Agreed Announcement. 5. Indian Ambassador called at Department September 20 to dis­ cuss Indian role. He reaffirmed Indian acceptance and satisfactorily cleared up all questions of interpretation which had occurred to him. Expressed appreciation for US assurances full cooperation. Said dis­ charge Indian function will begin promptly. 6. FYI. We are working on draft letter from you to Wang requesting accounting for 450 missing American servicemen, and on renunciation force study. These are for possible introduction next week or later. 7. Re your 753, Subject Secretary’s approval we have discarded idea of raising subject seized US Government properties on China mainland in course these talks. END FYI 8. Department believes we should concentrate efforts and atten­ tion on implementation Agreed Announcement. We question advisabil­ ity devoting emphasis to demands for reports on health and welfare jailed Americans about which we could do nothing. Most constructive approach problem health and welfare prisoners would be their release. However, you may wish seek reason why Kanady has not yet departed and why Sister Dugay apparently unable leave Shanghai on SS HUNAN (Hong Kong’s 630). We are suggesting to Maryknoll Mission that it repeat its orders to Bishop Walsh (your 761) apply for exit permit. Hoover
