1978  453
there is good agreement that they can provide an adequate approach to 
this problem.5
The first verification method involves insuring that the Soviets 
can monitor the number produced. We could do this by designing 
MAPS so that all missile-­launcher combinations go through an assem-
bly process which can be observed by satellite reconnaissance before 
they enter the shelter area. Thus the Soviets can count the missiles and 
launchers going into the shelter area without knowing which particular 
shelters (silos) they are going to. (This is similar to the way we verify 
SLBMs today, in that we make our count in the assembly area but do 
not know where the missiles are after the submarines carrying them 
are deployed.) The length of time required to assemble and deploy a 
missile and launcher before it is put in a shelter is long relative to the 
intelligence cycle time. The Soviets may worry that we would cheat by 
deploying a covertly assembled missile and launcher into a MAPS shel-
ter overnight under cover of darkness. While this would be a difficult 
and risky undertaking, it is conceivable for MAPS (as for a variety of 
other strategic systems).
To help reduce this residual uncertainty about whether illegally 
produced launchers had been deployed secretly, we could also make a 
practice, or formally offer, to open a few groups of shelters on demand to 
prove that there is only one missile and launcher per group. We would 
open all shelters in a designated group except the one that was full. 
This occasional checkup could be accomplished by satellite; if the Sovi-
ets prefer, some of these inspections could be done by ground observers 
since there is no security risk in showing them empty shelters. I believe 
that countermeasures can be used to maintain security but still permit 
adequate verification. For a covered MAPS (hybrid trench) the missile 
would be assembled and put into the trench while under observation. 
Then the trench would be sealed except for a small opening for main-
tenance purposes.
No set of measures such as these can be absolutely cheat-­proof—­
but there is a residual uncertainty about verification of any weapons 
system. This kind of measure would eliminate any basis for a good-­
faith claim that the situation for MAPS was in any way more uncertain 
than for other, more familiar systems.
3. Is the Soviet Union likely to deploy a MAPS?
Probably not. First of all, MAPS as such is an expensive defensive 
system which as such gives them no additional striking power. Sec-
ond, if the Soviets decide to improve the survivability of their ICBM 
5 In the left margin next to this paragraph, Ermarth wrote: “oh?”
