1320 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tonomy, and the psychology that is operating. Muskie, after all, has not been to the Middle East, yet, and needs to do so at some point. Of course, there are downsides—including not raising expectations; delinking a visit from East Jerusalem—not an easy job; and not appearing to undercut Sol (to say nothing of Muskie’s probable disinclination to climb on a plane). To broaden the trip, Muskie might also go to Riyadh for a “get acquainted” visit.11 (S) Such a trip (perhaps next week or so) would not be the answer to our prayers; but it might help to calm the situation, and indicate that we are not just prepared to be passive as the situation gets more convoluted. (S) FYI: Butrus Ghali has told Sol’s people that he would like Muskie to take the lead in trying to get Palestinian views into the negotiating process. That would probably not be a good thing for Muskie to attempt, at least on a first Middle East trip (the initial reaction from the Palestinians would be to demagogue in public); but this idea is consistent with the President’s approach to Hussein,12 and Muskie might again float the need for some Palestinian “involvement,” which even Burg says could be worthwhile. (S) 11 Brzezinski highlighted this and the following paragraph in the right-hand margin and wrote: “[what?] would he accomplish” 12 See Documents 384 and 385. 394. Editorial Note On July 30, the Knesset voted 69–15, with three abstentions, to approve the Cohen Bill, thereby making Jerusalem the de jure capital of Israel. (Christopher S. Wren, “Israel Enacts a Law Making All of Jerusalem the Capital,” The New York Times, July 31, 1980, page A1) The Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of Israel had four articles: 1) “Integral [shlema] and united Jerusalem is the capital of Israel;” 2) “Jerusalem is the seat of the president, the Knesset, the Cabinet and the Supreme Court;” 3) “The holy places will be guarded against desecration or any kind of offense or anything that might harm the freedom of access of members of [all] faiths to sites that are held holy by them or might hurt their feelings toward those places;” and 4) “The Cabinet will energetically take care to develop Jerusalem and make it prosper. It will also make efforts to care for the well-being of its inhabitants by allocating special resources, including giving Jerusalem municipality a special an-
