590
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ment on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is its first Article, which establishes
the most-favored-nation principle (unconditional MFN in today’s
jargon). Unconditional MFN is also embodied in numerous treaties of
Friendship, Commerce, and Navigation that the United States has
signed.
Despite the weight of tradition and GATT practice, as a negotiating
tactic in the MTN the United States and other developed countries have
suggested that the rights and benefits agreed to in the trade codes, e.g.,
on subsidies and countervailing duties, will be extended only to coun-
tries that become parties to the codes. This tactic was intended to en-
courage LDC participation in the codes; there is also a feeling in the
Government and in some trade policy circles that only those countries
that accept a code’s obligations should benefit from it.
Trade policy officials in the U.S. Government have postponed as
long as possible the day when a choice will have to be made between
maintaining the tactical position and reaffirming or rejecting uncondi-
tional MFN. That day may now be upon us.
The problem arises most clearly in the case of the subsidy code and
to a somewhat lesser extent in the Government procurement code.
Among LDCs, only Brazil has indicated its willingness to sign the sub-
sidies code and may even decide to put off its adherence until after
UNCTAD V.3 We may well have to present the code to the Congress
without assurances of LDC support.
Those in favor of conditional MFN4 argue that:
—U.S. acceptance of an injury test in the subsidy code depends on
other countries’ acceptance of greater discipline on subsidies. Giving
LDCs a free ride on the injury test upsets this balance. It would be diffi-
cult to defend to Congress and could undermine chances for approval
of the subsidy code and the MTN package.
—The principle that trade negotiations must result in “reciprocal
and mutually advantageous arrangements” is as important to the
GATT as the MFN principle.
—Without the leverage of conditional application of the injury test,
LDCs will have no incentive to accept the rules on subsidies or to par-
ticipate in the administration of evolution of the subsidy code.
3 See footnote 2, Document 148.
4 On February 26, Bergsten sent Cooper a Treasury Department memorandum enti-
tled “Unconditional MFN and the Codes.” According to Bergsten, both Blumenthal and
Solomon felt “very strongly that we must go conditional on the subsidy code, and we
would want to discuss it at very high levels if you were to support any other course of
action.” (Memorandum from Bergsten to Cooper, February 26; National Archives, RG 59,
Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Af-
fairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81D134, Box 4, Trade—MTN—Jan–Mar, 1979)
