Schüller has conducted all the negotiations with the Austrian Committee of the League, with the Relief Credit Committee and with the Reparation Commission. He has been to London, Paris and Geneva. He talked with Mussolini in Rome many months ago. Why should he not go to Washington? 2. It is recognized that some emergency may develop unexpectedly. Schüller will have a plein pouvoir and will be empowered to deal with any situation which may arise. Congress or a Committee of Congress may desire certain information. Prochnik may not have it at his finger tips. Schüller will and he will be, for several weeks any way, within reach—in the background always and making all communications through his Legation, unless the wish should be expressed to see or talk with him personally. If a formula should be desired to satisfy the United States in the event that Italy should ultimately get a more favorable relief debt settlement than the other relief creditor States, Schüller, with his pleins pouvoirs, can give it. The possibility that Italy will or can get more favorable terms is, however, scouted. The 1929 budget will carry a 10,000,000 schillings item, as I understand, to provide for the first of the forty annual installments for the liquidation of all the relief debts, providing the assent of all the relief creditor States be first attained. As is well known, it remains for the United States and Italy to act. Schüller will be in a position to explain all these and other relevant matters to the Department, if desired. I recall, for example, that some natural curiosity was expressed at the Department about the conditions surrounding the issue of the Austrian renewal bonds of January 1st, 1925. These bonds consolidated, with the principal due, the unpaid interests which had accrued up to this date, but reduced the rate of interest from 6 to 5½ per cent. These renewal bonds were issued as the result of negotiations with the Relief Credit Committee, of which the United States is not a member. The European creditor powers, so Schüller says, were not, as a result of this action, put in a more favorable position than the United States. The renewal bonds, even with the consolidation of principal and interest, are, because of the interest reduction, slightly less desirable than the original 6 per cent bonds which have never been exchanged by the United States.
