3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 225 given replies but I must state in all frankness that these replies had not been satisfactory. (Thumping the table, Brezhnev interjected: “Excuse me. Your own specialists came here to test. They came to the conclusion that your radiation dosage is higher in the U.S. than here.” Aleksandrov added that our dosage here was below the “sanitary norms” of both the U.S. and USSR. Drawing a rectangle on paper Brezhnev said he couldn’t understand the U.S. position. Radiation could not be (merely) aimed at a particular object for it also affected the people living around that area. “This is stupidity.”) I said that in view of his further remarks I was compelled to show some evidence. Presenting photographs of the Soviet microwave radiation projection both east and south of the Embassy, I said I was not complaining about the general level of radiation in the general vicinity: I was complaining about radiation beams specifically aimed at the Embassy from these two sources. I hoped he would examine the evidences for the issue was of great importance not only to me but to all in the Embassy. (Pointing at the photos Brezhnev exclaimed: “To be silent is to indicate tacit consent? This is just not true. Your former Ambassador—what’s his name? (Aleksandrov: “Stoessel”)—also participated in these studies and he said it was not true. Now there’s a new Ambassador and the same old story. Not one person has fallen sick or will fall sick. You should heed us, heed me, heed the facts of the matter. These stories are put about by ill wishers who want to worsen relations.”) I said that I must take issue. These were not put out by ill wishers. They were a fact of life. I could not believe that Stoessel had made the statements attributed to him and I hoped Brezhnev would study the matter. (Brezhnev: “All right, I’ll study it.”) (G) Amnesty for dissidents—Regarding that portion of President’s letter implicitly touching on this subject (Note: The words amnesty and dissident were never mentioned in the entire conversation) I said I could assure Brezhnev that the President has no intention of interfering in Soviet internal affairs. He simply wanted to call attention to the fact that certain developments here have a bearing on our bilateral relations and give rise to considerable concern in the U.S. This question had been discussed at length when Gromyko was in the U.S. (At this point Aleksandrov remarked that Brezhnev had exchanged letters with many heads of state but none of these had ever raised a question pertaining purely to Soviet domestic matters “and that is why this evokes such a reaction”). 13. In closing I again thanked Brezhnev for receiving me and for the frankness of such exchanges which can only lead to better understanding, not to misunderstanding. Brezhnev said he agreed. Asking me to convey best regards to the Pres. he said he hoped we could accelerate steps toward greater peace and security throughout the world
