1980  931
General Jones said that we don’t plan to remove divisions from 
Europe in any event. They are not trained for it nor are they equipped 
for it. Our contingency plans and military strategy since World War II 
have been concerned with war in regions; Europe being the primary 
region, Korea the second region. Now we have a third region in South-
west Asia. The strategic lift is the same for all three regions. We might 
take a calculated risk by removing things like bombs and some support 
equipment from Europe, but not divisions. It is doubtful that that kind 
of shift from Europe would put much pressure on the allies. (S)
The Vice President asked if General Jones agrees that we will build 
no more divisions in the United States. Jones answered that there are no 
plans now to do so. Even if we did, we could not deploy them because 
of the lack of lift. Another major constraint, he added, is our industrial 
mobilization weakness. It would require about three years to gear up 
for increased aircraft production. Tanks, artillery, and aircraft would 
not be produced in significant numbers for several years. Therefore, 
the size of our forces could not go up if you gave us all the money we 
want. (S)
The President said that he does not see from this discussion what 
we would do differently from what we are now doing in our military 
strategy. (S)
Jones said that one difference would be to take a global look and 
plan for contingencies in both Korea and the Persian Gulf, but only one 
at a time, not both simultaneously. (S)
David Aaron mentioned another difference as preparation for 
horizontal escalation. General Jones replied that other than some lim-
ited naval operations, there is little promise in such an effort. Brown 
repeated that we cannot find an even swap in horizontal escalation 
with Iran. (S)
Brown continued that we might make our strategy first priority for 
Europe, second priority for Asia, and as a third priority, deal with the 
Far East through building up our relationship with China to include 
military cooperation. (S)
Turner, noting that the President had asked what he would put in 
a Presidential Directive that we are not now doing, agreed with Harold 
Brown and General Jones that lift is the most important thing to empha-
size and also an increased priority for Southwest Asia. In a Presidential 
Directive the President could direct that a new acquisition of forces and 
training, the emphasis should be on third world contingency. The Pres-
ident asked at the expense of what? (S)
Turner responded, Central Europe. You do not have the option 
to deal militarily with the Persian Gulf and other non-European areas 
because of 30 years of tradition of preparing for the defense of Europe. 
We need to reverse this basic concept in our strategy. We have assumed
