990
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
changes, but not negotiations. Other Summit participants are skeptical
as to the value of this Committee.
—East/West Issues. The Jamaicans proposed that the Summit coun-
tries call upon the Soviet Union and other Eastern European nations to
collaborate with industrialized democracies in support of Third World
development. This was the main Jamaican initiative during the meeting
and it reflects Jamaica’s hope that the Socialist countries will play a
larger role in world development. Manley may have supported this ini-
tiative because he believes the Socialist countries have something to
contribute but also because he feels the West would do more if the So-
cialist nations were more forthcoming.
The Bonn Summit
Jamaica would like to see several results from the Summit:
—recognition that economic development in the LDCs will
strengthen prospects for growth in developed countries, thus there is a
mutuality of interest in economic progress in developing countries.
—agreement on the importance of providing increased assistance
to LDCs for development purposes, and to provide special support to
LDCs in balance-of-payments difficulty.
—a commitment to provide substantial benefits to the developing
countries in the MTN.
—discussion of, but not necessarily public statements about, the
desirability of joint East/West collaboration for development.
Recommendations
What to say at the Summit: I recommend that at the Bonn Summit
you stress:
—The importance of developing country growth to developed
country prosperity.
—The need for a common commitment to substantial increases in
development assistance, including the need for large World Bank and
Inter-American Development Bank capital increases and a large IDA
replenishment (along the lines you already approved), stressing your
personal commitment to work with the Congress to make good on our
commitments.
—The importance of a common effort by developed countries to
insure that the developing countries both contribute to and benefit
from the overall results of the MTN, namely through greater developed
country tariff concessions on specific products of concern to LDCs, and
avoidance of a closing off of offers and final agreements on tariffs and
codes—especially the safeguard code—until adequate negotiations
have taken place with LDCs. In this connection the Summit should ask
negotiators to integrate the LDCs more in the MTN.
