164 Foreign Relations, 1958вҖ“1960, Volume III, Supplement in every possible way to move, no matter how slowly, towards a more popularly based governmentвҖ”and to move, no matter how slowly, into becoming a respected member of the family of nations. It will probably be argued by many people that this is a Utopian objective; that there is no hope of ever converting the Communists to a less aggressive, more peaceful and democratic way of life. This, to my way of thinking, denotes a negative and defeatist attitude. It denotes a crisis of confidence in our ability to surmount the obstacles confrontВӯ ing us. This psychology is dangerous to our leadership in the worldвҖ”Вӯ moreover, it is not justified. The increasingly dangerous situation in which we now find ourВӯ selves is by no means one-Вӯsided. The increasing threat to our security arises from the explosive progress in science and technology which is producing weapons of ever increasing speed and destructive power. But the USSR is in the same boat. They have every reason to be just as fearful as we areвҖ”Вӯand more so. Ironically, of all the peoples in the world, they and we are the most in danger. In this we have a commuВӯ nity of interest and for this reason the people of the USSR and the peoВӯ ple of the United States have the greatest stake in the achievement of a solution to this terrible dilemma. On the political-Вӯeconomic side of the problem we have every reason to be confident that ours is the вҖңwave of the futureвҖқ. Present trends in the USSR give strong encouragement to this belief. President Eisenhower, in his recent address to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, noted this trend. He said: вҖңAnd slowly but significantly the Iron Curtain has started to lift. Behind it the personal security and intellectual freedom of the oppressed peoples gradually increaseвҖ”Вӯanother development not withВӯ out promise.вҖқ It is unfortunate that this same hopeful and positive note is not reflected in the proposed policy paper. In this connection, of all nations in the Communist bloc the USSR is, in certain respects, the best prospect for conversion to a way of life more similar to ours. The more advanced, educated and prosperous the people of the USSR become the greater will be their demand for a voice in their own destiny and the right of freedom of speech and movement and in the selection of jobs. It is not fortuitous that Khruschev holds up the United States as a shining example of achievement towards which the Russian people should strive. He is constantly exhorting the Russian people to catch up with the United States in food, clothing, indusВӯ trial production, etc. After forty years the leaders of the USSR are still striving to achieve the material success that we have achieved in this country. Our policy should be to encourage this competition; to take up this challenge and make it more difficult for the Russian
