Chapter 4, February–April 1990 581 be prepared to proceed. He then handed over the draft predictability agreement (attached).7 The Secretary added that the measures proposed included an exchange of data, meetings of experts, briefings, visits to laboratories, and notifications of certain tests. A sound agreement on these modest but valuable confidence-­building measures would be an important step toward resolving our differences in this area. Shevardnadze said the Soviets would study the document very carefully. He only wanted to make two general clarifications. In Wyoming we had found a reasonable solution that would make it possible to sign a START agreement in the near future. But he wanted again to emphasize what he had said many times before: the START treaty would not be able to be effective or remain in force if the ABM treaty were violated. In Geneva, at the level of negotiators, we should make a determined effort to resolve the principal issue as to what is prohibited and what is permitted. The Soviets were prepared to discuss this and find a reasonable solution. The Secretary did not comment and asked whether Shevardnadze wanted to turn to other arms control areas. [Omitted here is discussion not related to START.] Naval Arms Control Shevardnadze said he once again wanted to raise a subject that he didn’t repeat too often, but one which we needed to approach on a more constructive basis. He had in mind naval forces. (Shevardnadze quipped that Akhromeyev perhaps reminded the U.S. of this question more often than did he.) Naval forces were an objective problem, a major challenge with respect to verification and monitoring. He knew the political and psychological difficulties this subject created for the U.S. and its allies. Therefore, the Soviets would like to move toward enhancing stability on the seas in a step-­by-­step manner. In this way we would not overload the boat. As a first stage, Shevardnadze continued, the Soviets proposed that we elaborate measures of mutual understanding and openness. Such measures would not touch the structures of our naval forces; they would not affect NATO’s current edge in naval systems or any programs of modernization. From this phase, Shevardnadze went on, we could proceed to discussions of stability in naval forces. After this there could be pre-­ negotiation consultations with the participation of all interested states, including all the major naval powers. These consultations could discuss the mechanism, format, ultimate goal of the talks, and the way to move toward such talks. 7 Not found.
