116 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI U.S. Position: Space-­based Sensors. The U.S. has also proposed that the sides agree not to object, “on the basis of the ABM Treaty, to the development, testing, and deployment . . . of space-­based sensors.” In explaining this initiative to the Soviets, the U.S. noted that satellite sensor programs are vitally important to both sides in providing warning of an attack, and thus are also vitally important to stability. Furthermore, it is very difficult and, as both sides improve their systems, becoming increasingly more difficult to distinguish independently between space-­based sensors capable of substituting for ABM radars and those that are not. Thus, limitations on the capability of deployed space-­based sensors are neither desirable nor verifiable. The U.S. has presented to the Soviets a definition of “space-­based sensors” in the context of this proposal; but it has not been agreed to by the Soviets. (S) Soviet Position. The Soviets have criticized the sensor proposal as undermining the ABM Treaty and they have responded negatively to the additions to the Predictability Protocol proposed by the U.S. in association with our assurance on testing of space-­based components capable of substituting for ABM interceptor missiles. As a means of identifying testing activities in space that would be permitted during the non-­withdrawal period, the Soviets proposed in April 1987 that the sides negotiate a “list” of criteria for devices to be banned from launch into space, using as a starting point their proposed “list” of performance parameters. Under the Soviet concept, everything below the specifications or thresholds for devices banned from being tested or stationed in space would be allowed for testing or stationing in space. In October, 1987, the Soviets clarified the “list” proposal: devices below the list thresholds could be put into space for any purpose, whether ABM-­related or not. Production and ground-­based test range activities involving devices not on the list and those with critical parameters above the thresholds would be permitted. The Soviets also proposed at this time, that, alternatively, the sides could agree to “observe the ABM Treaty as signed and ratified in 1972.” (S) Since the Washington Summit, the Soviets have alluded to the “list” proposal only in the context of discussing “data sensors” and have emphasized the WSJS language, without defining what that language means. We do not know whether or not the Soviets have abandoned the broader scope of the “list” proposal. (S) The U.S. responded that the “list” proposal was too complex, inherently unverifiable, and imposed restrictions on SDI beyond those of the ABM Treaty agreed to in 1972, and in many cases the values proposed were in effect more restrictive than even the narrow interpretation. (S) Soviet negotiating tactics (including a refusal to work a joint draft treaty text) are consistent with what appears to be their strategy in the Defense & Space talks: to defer issues and serious discussion in the hope
