862 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Mubarak conveys greetings, friendship, etc. and hands message2 to the President. The President reads and summarizes. Sadat appreciates U.S. position on settlements; wants more F–4s with Mavericks. Carter refers to Mubarak’s talks with Harold Brown;3 indicates we cannot now convey new destroyers; urges Egyptian acceptance of cruiser—could be symbolically very impressive. Why does Sadat dislike the cruiser? Mubarak: The destroyers you offer have lower capability than the Soviet. Carter: They will be equipped with Harpoons. Mubarak reviews what the U.S. has offered—35 planes and two old destroyers—and compares that with what Soviets offered in the past. This is creating a bad impression in the armed forces. Carter: I understand the problem. On the navy side the cruiser and destroyers would be symbolic, bold move. Maybe you and Sadat could visit the ships. On the other points Harold Brown will give me a report.4 2 See Document 259. 3 Brown met alone with Mubarak on the morning of June 11. Brzezinski summarized the meeting for Carter in a June 11 memorandum. “Mubarak’s main point,” Brzezinski reported, “was that we need to do more for the Egyptian military in order to ensure its loyalty to Sadat. He wants Egypt to be treated like Israel in terms of our overall military relationship. In particular, he argued that our approval of specific items of military equipment should not be constrained by the financing that is available at any given time.” Mubarak asked Brown for more F–4 fighter aircraft and Chinook helicopters. He reiterated Sadat’s unwillingness to accept the U.S. offer of Gearing class destroyers. Brown suggested that the Egyptians “look again” at these destroyers as the United States had “nothing else readily available.” Brown also “agreed in principle” to develop “a long term defense plan for Egypt, including a program for the next five years.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Middle East, Subject File, Box 13, Egypt: Arms and Military: 1–7/79) 4 Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Robert J. Murray prepared a draft report—drawing on the June 11 conversation between Brown and Mubarak—for Brown to sign and submit to Carter. The report proposed that Brown “refine” Egypt’s defense requirements list “in the course of further U.S.-Egyptian defense consultations over the summer,” ultimately developing a five-year equipment plan for Egypt that would encourage Cairo to “limit its arms procurement ambitions,” demonstrate to the Egyptians ways to reduce the size of their armed forces, agree in principle to more aircraft and additional ships provided these fit Egypt’s available financial resources, and look at ways to use Egypt’s existing military industries in support of the program. In a handwritten note, dated June 12, on the report’s undated covering memorandum from Murray to Brown, Brown wrote “6/12 R Murray—OK to proceed along these lines; e.g. 5 year planning, consider added ships & a/c in that plan over time, help w/defense industry. HB.” (Washington National Record Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–82–0205, Egypt 1979 Jan–July) A final version of the report has not been found.
