828 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX government. For a few days there was some doubt as to the outcome. In the end the government did survive and in doing so appeared to learn some lessons that make it less vulnerable today. The proximate cause of the January rioting was the government’s announcement of precipitous rise in prices of basic commodities. It has not repeated this mistake, but, rather, has achieved much the same goal by resorting to incremental price increases. There have been some grumblings, but there appears to be no mass discontent. 5. This is partly due to the fact that Egypt’s overall economy has been steadily improving. Since January 1977, the Egyptian GNP has gone up by approximately 8 percent per annum in real terms (the Ministry of Economy says the figure is more than 9 percent). The balance of payments picture has dramatically improved and, for the first time in its history, Egypt is current on its external debt. Income from Canal tolls, oil exports, tourism, and remittances are all rising. Some sectoral snags remain, however, particularly in the construction industry. 6. There is some question, however, on how much of this improvement in the large has trickled down to the lower income levels. Certain sectors of society obviously have benefitted from Sadat’s open door. Others, particularly lower paid government employees, have not. The frustrations of living in Cairo and other Egyptian cities increase daily. This is a function of population explosion, of urban migration, and of an infrastructure which was sorely neglected for 25 years. Cairo could comfortably house 2½–3 million; it is called upon to shelter some 9 to 10 million. The housing shortage is acute; perhaps as many as a half million Cairenes are camped out in a semi-permanent status in the City of the Dead, with virtually no government services. Cairo’s water, sewage, transportation, and telecommunications are all woefully inadequate. 7. In addition to a lack of real resources, the government’s ability to address problems is limited by institutional weaknesses, including considerable corruption. The Egyptian bureaucracy has grown so large that in many cases it barely functions. Everyone dealing with it, Egyptian or American, is fast frustrated. Egypt’s bureaucracy has been notably inefficient and venal on at least a petty scale throughout history; with the increased money available in the economy this phenomenon is on the increase. This corruption is widely assumed to extend to the highest level of Egyptian society. Sadat’s wife and his closest advisor are popularly believed to be involved, although hard evidence to support this charge is difficult to come by. 8. The government’s ability to deal with major social and economic issues is further limited by Sadat’s physical and psychological isolation. His peripatetic style of government makes it difficult for key officials to get decisions. Access to the President is strictly limited, and
