Afghanistan
357
a standing mechanism for coordinating any joint actions with the Allies
which may be taken in response to the Soviet intervention in Afghani-
stan. States are more likely to support actions as a group than alone
without the reassuring presence of other states in the group. (S)
NSC on the larger Strategic Questions Posed by Soviet Intervention in
Afghanistan—It was agreed to seek a meeting of the NSC later this
week to discuss the larger regional issues arising from Soviet actions
in Afghanistan as well as issues concerning our Allies in Europe and
Asia. (S)
131.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Czechoslovakia Revisited: Patterns and Lessons (U)
While there are obvious differences between the Soviet intervention
in Czechoslovakia in 1968 and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, in
assessing the risks the Soviets were probably influenced at least in part
by their experience in Czechoslovakia, particularly world reaction. It
may be useful, therefore, to briefly review developments in the post-
invasion period for insights into Soviet attitudes and possible diplo-
matic moves in the future.2 (C)
In my view there are several aspects of the post-invasion period
which are important in the present context:
1. The sobering impact on Eastern Europe. The invasion not only halted
the deterioration of the situation in Czechoslovakia but had a sobering
impact on all of East Europe. This was particularly true of Romania
and Yugoslavia. While they condemned the invasion, they also were
more cautious for several years thereafter in undertaking initiatives
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Outside
the System File, Box 45, Afghanistan Invasion: U.S./Allied Relations, Olympics, Grain
Embargo: 1/80. Confidential; Outside System. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote:
“agree, ZB” in the top right corner, and drew an arrow pointing to the edge of the page.
See footnote 7, below.
2 For documentation on the U.S. response to the Soviet intervention in Czechoslova-
kia, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XVII, Eastern Europe, Documents 80–99.
