952 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement It would appear that a sounding might be taken of Congressional attitudes toward our unilateral display of the Panamanian flag toward the end of the present session, in order to determine the feasibility of action by the Executive Branch following the adjournment. ARA feels that Representative [illegible in the original] may be having second thoughts on his action to halt our flying of the Panamanian flag in the Zone, and I believe the action of Governor Potter on March 1 clearly shows a significant recession from the Pentagon’s earlier position.14 It is recommended that you explore with Secretary Brucker the possibility of the Pentagon joining with State in recommending to the President that he approve in principle our regular display of the Panamanian flag in the Zone under conditions that are mutually acceptable to the Departments.15 5. Policy Decision on Isthmian Sea Level Canal The Panama Canal Company study (now on the process), which is due to be presented to a Cabinet meeting in May of this year, calls for a successor sea level Canal to replace the Panama Canal to be completed by 1980. Since construction is estimated at approximately ten years, the United States Government must during the 1960s build the politico-psychological atmosphere requisite for successfully negotiating a sea level Canal across Panamanian territory—the present preferred site. The creation of this atmosphere will require that we adopt a new Isthmian canal policy in the near future. S/P has prepared a long-range study (Tab A) which calls for medium and long-range ­policy changes additional to those mentioned above. At Mr. Merchant’s instigation, the JCB has undertaken to prepare a study of the strategic importance of the present, and future sea level canals, to be ready in about sixty days. Following presentation of the Canal Company study to the Cabinet, it seems to ARA that the President could be asked to (a) decide in principle to proceed with construction of an Isthmian sea level canal and (b) approve a new long-range Isthmian canal policy which could be discussed with the new Congress. It would also appear desirable that the Departments of Defense, Army, and State initiate discussions among themselves immediately to resolve such differences as now separate us in a frank and open-minded 14 At this point the following handwritten notation appears on the source text: “(see Mr. Merchant’s comment, Tab F, para. 3).“ Merchant, according to his memorandum of March 30, suggested that the flag issue should, for the moment, remain unresolved, but that the precedent of the crossed ceremonial flags should be repeated on every significant Panamanian and United States holiday. [illegible in the original] 15 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, Herter approved Merchant’s suggestion on April 1.
