Colombia  373
CO–35.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in 
Colombia (McIntosh)1

Bogotá, September 8, 1960.
PARTICIPANTS
President Alberto Lleras Camargo of Colombia, Under Secretary C. Douglas Dillon, 
Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann, and Ambassador Dempster McIntosh
President Lleras welcomed Under Secretary Dillon and Assistant 
Secretary Mann to Colombia.2 President Lleras then expressed optimism 
regarding results from the current meeting of the Committee of 21.
The current economic situation in Colombia was then discussed 
and both President Lleras and Under Secretary Dillon emphasized the 
necessity for carrying out social programs in addition to strictly eco-
nomic development. President Lleras in this connection referred to 
the necessity of financing projects which would have an impact upon 
the mass of people.
Assistant Secretary Mann referred to the present situation in 
Cuba and commented that, although Fidel Castro is probably not an 
actual Communist, the present government in Cuba is definitely under 
Communist control and direction, that the Communist Party is pres-
ently the only legal party in Cuba, and that Cuban Government spokes-
men are required to follow the Communist Party line in any statements 
they may make. President Lleras said he did not doubt that this was a 
correct analysis and mentioned that the Colombian Foreign Minister, 
Dr. Turbay, during the early part of the meetings at San José, Costa Rica, 
had a discussion with Cuban Foreign Minister Roa, during which Roa 
indicated a very reasonable attitude in connection with relations with 
other Latin American countries. The following day nine additional 
Cubans arrived by air from Havana, (President Lleras commented, pre-
sumably carrying guns) and apparently talked to Roa, with the result 
that when Turbay later had another discussion with him the attitude of 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 721.11/9–960. Confidential. This mem-
orandum was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 156 front 
Bogotá, September 9, 1960, not printed; 72.11/9-960. The memorandum of conversation 
was apparently drafted by Ambassador McIntosh.
2 In telegram 91 from Bogotá, August 11, 1960, Ambassador McIntosh had stated in 
part the following:
“Glad to learn EXIM DLF prepared take prompt action on loans to Colombia. We 
feel extremely important announce some tangible economic aid soonest possible because 
political situation here clouded by increasing political party bickering and pressures from 
social-­economic problems with consequent greater difficulties managing national front. 
Therefore, announcement of aid would be of great help to President Lleras. Also would 
create more favorable climate for September conference Bogotá.” (721.5-MSP/8–1160)
