Yugoslavia 791 I invited Ljubicic to visit the US sometime next year and he quickly accepted. We will use that visit as a target against which to manage plans for improving the military relationship. The next steps will be a visit to the US (now underway) by the Chief of the Yugoslav Air Force and a visit to Belgrade by US experts to explain FMS procedures. [Omitted here is Brown’s report on the NATO Nuclear Planning Group and his conversations in Rome.] 247. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, February 10, 1978 SUBJECT Tito Visit: Export License for Nuclear Fuel for Krsko As before the Vice President’s visit to Belgrade last May, the most serious issue in our relations on the eve of the Tito visit is the dispute over nuclear exports to Yugoslavia. At that time a compromise was worked out permitting the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to license the export of the Krsko nuclear reactor on the basis of, inter alia, Yugoslav agreement to negotiate with us on the conditions governing use of fuel in Krsko. The current issue involves the precise nature of U.S. approval rights over retransfer and reprocessing. Yugoslavia, which is a party to the NPT, a cooperating member of the IAEA, and a participant in INFCE, has consistently indicated its willingness to accept universally applicable safeguards which result from new international agreements. The Yugoslavs, however, have resisted what they regard as U.S. attempts to impose additional, unilateral and discriminatory conditions on existing agreements. They have also said they are unwilling to “tie their hands” with regard to a future reprocessing option. (We are aware of no current Yugoslav plans to recycle or reprocess.) Furthermore, the Yugoslavs have been extremely 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 15, Yugoslavia: President Tito, 3/6–9/78: Cables and Memos. Confidential. The memorandum was requested during an interagency meeting at the Department of State on February 7 held to discuss the status of preparations for the Tito visit. (Telegram 36703 to Belgrade, February 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780063–0954)
