Bolivia 145 call a general strike of the COB in mid-1957 failed because of this support and a split in the COB leadership. The emergence of a pro-Siles faction, headed by railroad federation leader Juan Sanjines, subsequently led to the ouster of Lechin from the Senate presidency and to congressional acceptance of the resignation of Vice-President Chavez. 16. Siles has consolidated his position in the party and in the government. Lechin and Chavez have been ousted from the MNR national political committee and replaced by labor leaders who support Siles. Paz, who has been Ambassador to Great Britain since late 1956, has refused periodic appeals primarily from the labor-­left for his return. In the 86 member legislative branch, the President commands a large working majority. Labor politicians responsive to Sanjines’ leadership, as well as moderate members of the worker-­peasant bloc which formerly dominated Congress, have aligned with pro-Siles moderates.7 In opposition are nine pro-Lechin labor leaders, several pro-Paz politicians, and a few die-­hard leftist supporters of former Vice-President Chavez. 17. Despite these gains, the effectiveness of the Siles regime is still hampered by MNR factionalism. Although the potential of Lechin and Chavez for challenging the regime has been reduced, many of their adherents continue to hold party and government posts in the departments. In Congress, the pro-Lechin minority has lost its battle against the extension of the emergency powers which permit Siles to continue the wage freeze. However, this minority may obtain greater support from other labor groups for wage increases on the basis of claims that workers are bearing the brunt of austerity measures. Other party differences revolve around labor-­left demands for increased participation in the government, for strengthening worker and peasant paramilitary forces, and for an acceleration of agrarian reform. 18. A threat to Siles’ position and to the effectiveness of his program is his dependence on the support of Juan Sanjines, who represents a somewhat unstable influence. Sanjines presently heads the majority pro-Siles labor segment in the COB. Prior to joining the MNR in October 1954, Sanjines was closely associated with both the pro-Communist Revolutionary Left Party and with the orthodox Bolivian Communist Party. Substantial numbers of orthodox Communists, Trotskyites, and their sympathies belong to the railroad federation he heads. Thus far Sanjines appears to be primarily interested in enhancing his own position and does not seem to be exploiting his now political prominence for Communist ends. We do not know whether he has in fact split with the Communist movement. 19. Labor support for the regime derives from the COB—­comprising about 250,000 members in mining, industrial, and white collar unions as 7 Federico Alvarez Plata, a trustworthy moderate, is President of the Senate and therefore successor to the presidency. Juan Sanjines, Chamber of Deputies President, is second in line for the presidency. Almost all of the congressional committees are controlled by representatives who appear to support Siles.
