1128  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
691.	 Letter 52 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 52
Washington, August 3, 1956
Dear Alex:
We hope to get the interviews with the Chinese prisoners under 
way soon through the medium of the American Red Cross. Following 
the definitive Indian refusal to participate on July 25 (copy of Amb. 
Mehta’s letter is enclosed for your files) we got to work on an alterna­
tive procedure. There was general agreement that the American Red 
Cross was the best organization to do the job following the Indian 
default.
Mr. Robertson had Ellsworth Bunker in on August 1 to put the 
proposition to him. Mr. Robertson reviewed the history of our decision 
to extend the provisions of the Agreed Announcement to the Chinese 
prisoners, the abrupt reversal of the Chinese Communist position on 
the Chinese prisoners, and the resultant Indian Embassy inability to 
act. He pointed out the obligation which rested on us to follow through 
on our initiative and outlined the reasons why he thought the Red 
Cross was the logical agency to conduct the interviews.
Mr. Bunker’s reaction was most favorable. He showed a sympa­
thetic understanding of the problem and foresaw no difficulties in Red 
Cross assumption of the role. He characterized the function as appro­
priate to the Red Cross in that it had a humanitarian purpose and was 
non-­political. He said that he would want to consult his Board as a 
matter of procedure but he felt confident that no objections would be 
raised. He felt that Mr. Robertson could safely assume that official Red 
Cross response would be affirmative.
We confirmed our request to the Red Cross by a letter dated August 2, 
a copy of which is enclosed.
I hope we can get the Red Cross under way on the interviews by 
the week of August 13. There are quite a few details to be worked out 
with the Federal and State officials. Appointments will have to be made 
through the Wardens and we will have to look into the problem of 
interpreters in the cases of the prisoners who speak no English. Some of 
them may speak only Cantonese or Toishan dialect.
Ralph Clough has sent Dave a massive document compiled in 
Defense concerning the unaccounted for 450. It is supposed to be a 
compilation of all the recently discovered evidence. We are not very 
hopeful that it has much that is new or useful to us. But it should be 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–
Informal.
