268
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3. Encourage an immediate decision by the owners to increase the
throughput of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System (TAPS)
Pro:
• Would add 400,000 barrels per day to domestic production
saving $2 billion/year beginning in mid or late 1980.
• If completed, Sohio can handle at least part of this additional
capacity.
• This is the single most cost effective option available to reduce
the underlying levels of oil imports and the balance of payments deficit
over the next 3 years.
Con:
• The additional Sohio transmission capacity will probably not be
sufficient to handle Elk Hills and Alaskan oil. Some of this oil would
have to be tankered through the Panama Canal or swapped with Japan.
• While a Japanese oil swap would not increase U.S. dependence
on foreign oil, it has been violently opposed by numerous members of
Congress. A swap would be politically difficult.
• Would reverse a previously stated policy of avoiding oil swaps
which received substantial favorable press.
COMMENT: Vance, Schultze, Blumenthal, and Schlesinger recom-
mend increasing TAPS throughput and arranging for a swap with
Japan if needed. We concur with this recommendation on the merits,
but believe that announcing or implementing such a decision should be
deferred until we have consulted extensively with members of
Congress and California officials. We strongly urge you not to even
float the idea of a swap until the energy bill passes and until there has
been adequate Congressional consultation.
Encourage an increase in TAPS throughput and swap oil with Japan
if needed. (all recommend)10
Delay announcement and implementation pending consultation. (all
recommend except Blumenthal)
Continue with current policy.
4. Direct limitation of oil imports (quotas/import fees)
Pro:
• Most direct means of curtailing consumption of oil, but would
require some sort of domestic allocation or consumer rationing. Use of
10 Carter indicated his approval of this option and wrote “No reference to Japan
swap.”
