March 27–December 31, 1979 1019 to some extent, and the PLO to a much greater extent, were suspicious of the proposals. Both were concerned that the initiative was some sort of U.S.-Israel-Lebanon scheme to produce a Lebanese Camp David. That is, having in mind another partial settlement in the Middle East in place of dealing with a comprehensive peace in which the Palestinian question would be to the fore. The Syrians were also suspicious that the initiative was designed to reduce their influence and bring about an early end of their troop presence in Lebanon. In describing the PLO position Dobrynin stressed their view that the initiative was also designed to squeeze them out of Lebanon, or to limit their presence there, before they had anywhere else to go and before the overall Palestinian question had been resolved. He said the PLO considered it important to be able to maintain pressure in and from Lebanon as a means of assuring that the overall issue of Palestine would not be forgotten internationally. In response to my counter-arguments he pointed out that he had outlined the views of the Syrians and PLO, but he did not indicate that the Soviets disagreed or had in any way sought to dissuade them. He did confirm that the Lebanese had spoken to the Soviets, seeking support for their initiative which they described in the same manner as I had outlined to him. He said he would inform Moscow of our conversation and left it that we would now await the results of the Arab Summit meeting. Comment: I came away with the distinct feeling that the Soviets are not inclined to be helpful, although to what extent they may have stimulated the Syrian and PLO reaction is unclear. On balance, I would think they did not need to be stimulated. The various aspects will have to be thrashed out first at the Arab Summit, where hopefully the Lebanese can make some limited gains. Once we know the results we can review the matter and decide what needs to be done next. I do not think we need to conclude at this point that the prospects are all bleak, although it is probable that the suspicions on all sides will be such that progress will be slow and in small increments.
