National Security Policy 509 General Aspects of the Co-­existence Policy 199. Viewed in the above context, we see the present phase of Soviet external policy as one designed to achieve certain important though limited objectives, while avoiding any substantial risks of nuclear war and providing time for the further forced draft growth of Soviet power. These objectives are: (a) to impress the world with Soviet military strength and national power, while at the same time creating a general sense of Soviet peacefulness and respectability which will further blur the image of an aggressive USSR; (b) to cause a retraction and decline of Western power, especially withdrawal of the US from its bases around the Bloc; and (c) to hasten the ejection of Western influence from Asia and Africa, while expanding Soviet influence in these areas. 200. A hallmark of present Soviet policy is its tactical flexibility in execution, in contrast to the heavy-­handedness of Stalin’s time. The prag­ matic approach of Khrushchev and his fondness for experimentation suggest that this will continue at least so long as he remains in power. The present leadership, for example, shows fewer doctrinal preconcep­ tions as to tactics, and greater willingness to modify doctrine to meet the exigencies of the time. In this category fall the ostensible accept­ance of other roads to socialism and the concept, endorsed by the XXth Party Congress, that neutralist though non-Communist governments can also serve Soviet purposes. This concept has found particular application in Soviet efforts to encourage neutralism in the Afro-Asian area. 201. The significance of these doctrinal and tactical developments is very great. The advance of Communism is designed to occur by gradual stages instead of by convulsive upheavals. Thus the USSR has not recently pursued with its old vigor the forcible absorption and Communization of other states; it even manages to pose, convincingly to some, as the champion of national independence. The lines which divide the Communist from the non-Communist world have become somewhat blurred. The result is that when crises occur (e.g. in Egypt, Jordan, Syria), the underlying issues between the Bloc and the West do not stand out with the clarity that was evident, for example, in the Korean situation. 202. We believe that the Soviet leaders foresee the likelihood of fur­ ther crises as the interests of the two great power groupings clash in such areas as the Middle East. With respect to Soviet behavior in such crisis situations, Khrushchev’s boldness and apparent impetuosity give cause for concern. But the practicality of Khrushchev, his absorption with the USSR’s manifold internal problems, and the Soviet desire to avoid undue risks of nuclear war will probably militate against hasty decisions in foreign affairs.
