678 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement ragged and very poorly timed attack we could expect to get off almost all of our available aircraft—­from 300 to 800 bombers. The disparity between these two extremes is impressive. This dis­ parity is the measure of our sensitivity. Whatever one’s private judg­ ment about where, between these extremes, reality lies, it is clearly evident that a tremendous premium is being offered to the Soviets for skill in coordinating their forces. Again, we can find no basic technical reasons for assuming that the Soviets cannot reach a high degree of coordination, particularly in the initial salvo of an attack for which they had long prepared. Sensitivity to technical excellence is similar to sensitivity to coordi­ nation. If the Soviet missile had a one mile aiming error, rather than the two to three miles assumed in constructing the chart, we would get off less than 400 aircraft in 1963. A third important feature of our position as shown by this chart is that the bulk, if not the total, of our potential retaliation is borne by aircraft. We know that the USSR has an extensive and improving air defense system. We must assume that this system will in time include nuclear weapons. It is difficult to know exactly how effective this sys­ tem will be against our aircraft, and even more difficult to guess how effective the Soviets think it will be. Therefore, it is hard to know exactly how impressed the Soviet planner will be with our ability to do him retaliatory damage. It is fairly certain, however, that if we are to do him much damage with our aircraft it will be because we have been able to get off a fairly large and well coordinated attack. One need not count the trees in order to see the outline of the forest: we are not only dependent upon aircraft for the bulk of our retaliation, but also we are dependent upon their ability to survive as a coordinated military unit. In mentioning these sources of uncertainty, we are not calling into question the value to the United States of current programs to provide warning of attack and to accelerate reaction to that warning. Indeed, the discussion of the uncertainties should serve to emphasize the presently supreme value of these measures. But, as long as the success of these measures is sensitive to factors over which the United States has little control, it is in the nature of the measures themselves to create a condi­ tion of instability. For in relying upon warning and rapid response, we offer to pay a great premium to the Soviets—­in fact, either to ourselves or to the Soviets—­for haste in reacting to a threat. To restore stability one needs certainty. To create certainty, one needs a retaliation which is inevitable, is inevitably decisive, and is clearly recognizable as such by a potential attacker. In the long run, to do this requires a force which is large enough, is so secure against attack that it neither provokes attack nor need react in haste, and is insensitive to defensive action.
