to stop the vessel in order to verify the nationality of the vessel by examining the
document authorising the flying of the flag, but no other document.
 
2. Any vessel which presents the appearance of native build and rig may be presumed
to be a native vessel.
3. For the purpose of verifying the nationality of the suspected vessel, a boat
commanded by a commissioned officer in uniform may be sent to visit the vessel after
she has been hailed so as to give notice of such intention. The officer sent on board the
vessel shall act with all possible consideration and moderation. Before leaving the
vessel, the officer shall draw up a proces-verbal in the form and language in use in his
own country. This proces-verbal shall state the facts of the case and shall be dated and
signed by the officer.
Should there be on board the warship no commissioned officer other than the
Commanding Officer, the above prescribed operations may be carried out by a warrant,
petty or non-commissioned officer at the discretion of the Commanding Officer.
The captain or master of the vessel visited, as well as the witnesses, shall be invited to
sign the proces-verbal and shall have the right to add to it any explanations which they
may consider expedient.
4. In the cases referred to in paragraph 1 (a) hereof, unless the right to fly the flag can
be established, the vessel may be conducted to the nearest port in the maritime zone
where there is a competent authority of the Power whose flag has been flown and shall
be handed over to such authority, but if such a port should be at such a distance from
the point of detention that the warship would have to leave her station or patrol to
escort the detained vessel thereto, the vessel may be taken to the nearest port where
there is a competent authority of one of the High Contracting Parties of nationality
other than that of the warship and handed over to such authority, and steps shall at once
be taken to notify this fact to the competent authority representing the power
concerned.
No proceedings shall be taken against the vessel or her crew until the arrival of the
representative of the Power whose flag the vessel was flying or without authority from
such representative.
Instead of conducting the suspected vessel to a port as laid down above, the
Commanding Officer of the detaining warship may hand her over to a warship of the
nation whose flag she has flown if the latter consents to take charge of her.
