Arms Control and Disarmament 1471 388. Memorandum From Wilcox (IO) to John Foster Dulles1 Washington, October 27, 1958 SUBJECT Telephone Conversation with Ambassador Lodge Ambassador Lodge has indicated he will call you on Tuesday to discuss: (1) the proposal for an 81-­nation Disarmament Commission; (2) resolutions on testing which are pending in the First Committee. The following comments may be useful in your discussion: 1) 81-­Nation Committee The Department has strongly opposed the establishment of an 81-­nation Disarmament Committee since it is believed that such a committee would not serve a constructive purpose. The 81-­nation committee would have the same problems that the First Committee has encountered in establishing even a moderately satisfactory nego­ tiating body since such a body would have to be both small and repre­ sentative. The enlarged Disarmament Commission would constitute in effect a continuing session of the General Assembly in which little of substance could be accomplished. It would supplant the present DC. Meetings of the 81-­nation DC would probably deteriorate into a propaganda battle. Such a group would provide an opportunity for constant meddling by a number of countries. Attached (TAB A) is a statement which the Department has previously transmitted to USUN on this point. On the other hand, it is recognized that acceptance of this pro­ posal by the US would be responsive to the small power interest in maintaining a continued UN role in disarmament and would, as Ambassador Lodge believes “have important psychological value as an overall UN umbrella.” Moreover, it is true that at such time as such Commission met it undoubtedly would have to set up sub-­groups in order to function. We agree also that it is not possible in the words of Ambassador Lodge “to dream up another truncated Disarmament Commission.” Ambassador Lodge indicated there is “widespread support” for the idea of an 81-­nation Disarmament Commission. We have been of the opinion up to now, based on information made available to us by USUN, that this proposal could be defeated if we continued our 1 Source: Proposal for 81-­Nation Disarmament Conference, nuclear testing reso­ lutions in the U.N. General Assembly. Confidential. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files,
