1955  355
6. I then referred to remainder his statement and said I wished to 
study and give detailed reply later. However I pointed out my sugges­
tion on order of discussion of subjects was designed to contribute to 
orderly progress. I defined what I meant by US personnel by stating 
this concerned American military personnel still missing from Korean 
hostilities concerning whom there was reason to believe his authori­
ties had information. Then said considered renunciation of force most 
important, therefore probably should be discussed first, and I would be 
prepared say more on subject next meeting. Then repeated arguments 
against higher level meeting stating nothing he had said this morning 
had changed my mind.
7. He replied stating question US military personnel had been fully 
covered at Panmunjom, no reason for raising it here, and if we did so he 
reserved right raise question of US accounting for personnel detained 
in Korean War. Repeated his arguments on higher level meeting as well 
as statement that if I had full authority deal with “important and out­
standing questions arising in the Taiwan area” he was ready to discuss.
8. I agreed his proposal next meeting Saturday, October 8. There 
was then considerable argument on press communique, he insist­
ing communique be confined to statement we had continued discuss 
agenda item two, and I insisting on previous communique. We finally 
agreed on simply stating we had met and give time next meeting.
Gowen
264.	 Telegram 815 from Geneva1
Geneva, October 5, 1955, 4 p.m.
815. From Johnson.
1. In spite of his efforts at today’s meeting to avoid being drawn 
into discussion of implementation Wang could not refrain from some 
replies and thus again let himself be trapped into such discussion. In 
fact outside of his opening statement probably 85 per cent of today’s 
discussion was devoted to implementation. However towards end he 
realized what he had done and is going to be much more cautious and 
difficult this regard at next meeting.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–555. Secret; Priority; Limited 
Distribution.
