3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
853
which have caused a chain reaction. There has not been a single addi-
tional fact but only hearsay.
The Acting Secretary concluded this portion of the conversation by
urging Dobrynin to see Ambassador Earle on the BW question.
Attachment
Paper3
undated
In March 1980 at the Five-Year Review Conference of the Biolog-
ical Weapons Convention, the United States Government reported that
it had initiated consultations with the Soviet Union as the result of in-
formation which raised questions concerning the compliance of the So-
viet Union with the Biological Weapons Convention. We indicated that
we were proceeding in these consultations in a cooperative spirit and in
accordance with the specific provisions of the Convention; we further
indicated our hopes that the Soviet Union would also proceed in the
same manner. At that time, anticipating that the bilateral consultations
would take some time, the USG promised to make a full report on the
results of those consultations to the Parties at a later appropriate date.
This paper constitutes that promised report. (S)
The basic obligation of the BWC, set forth in Article I, provides that
parties undertake “never in any circumstances to develop, produce,
stockpile or otherwise acquire or retain microbial or other biological
agents, or toxins whatever their origin or method of production, of
types and in quantities that have no justification for prophylactic, pro-
tection or other peaceful purposes.” The Convention also provides, in
Article V, that Parties undertake to consult and to cooperate with one
another “in solving any problems which may arise” relating to the ap-
plication of the provisions of the Convention. (S)
Early in 1980, the United States Government became aware of an
event which apparently happened in the city of Sverdlovsk in the So-
viet Union during the spring of 1979. Information concerning this event
raised questions regarding the compliance of the Soviet Union with the
obligations it had undertaken in Article I of the Biological Weapons
Convention. On the basis of the evidence then available, it was decided
that the matter would be raised with Soviet authorities pursuant to Ar-
ticle V of the treaty. The timing of the request for information from the
Soviets was complicated by the fact that, purely by coincidence, the
3 Secret.
