Afghanistan Afghans to heat up the Pushtunistan issue in the short run, unless of course, this would be viewed as helpful in assisting the regime to consolidate its control internally. 4. What will be Soviet long run objectives? If survival and consolidation are the short run imperatives, we believe that in the long run the Soviets will hope to encourage a steady strengthening of the Khalq Party’s base in Afghanistan so that the party and not individuals will provide a firmer foundation for future continuity and control. We anticipate that the Soviets will also encourage the institutionalization of state-party control mechanisms down to the grass roots level which are characteristic of all Communist regimes. As this process builds, the Soviets will tout developments in Afghanistan as a triumph of “progressive forces” and the “world revolutionary process.” In this long run perspective, the Soviets may also see Afghanistan as a regional “model” for other “progressive” forces in the region seeking to capture power in their respective countries (this is a role which Soviet party theoreticians like to attribute to Angola and Ethiopia in Africa, Vietnam in Asia and Cuba in Latin America). 5. More on the Indian angle: Embassy New Delhi is, of course, in a far better position to assess India’s sensitivities to a more direct Soviet participation in the consolidation efforts of the new Afghan regime.2 We would note that the Soviets have willingly and quickly sacrificed short term losses in relations with the U.S. and other countries to reap what they see as long term gains through direct and massive support to new “progressive” regimes in Angola and Ethiopia. It seems from this vantage point, however, that the Indians would be very irritated if Moscow attempted in the long or the short run to involve itself in Afghanistan (as it has in Angola and Ethiopia) in a way that would indicate a Soviet intention to draw Afghanistan into its own sphere of influence. It is noteworthy that the Desai government’s moves to improve relations with the U.S. and China have made nature of Indo- Soviet relations all the more delicate. By irritating Delhi through “overinvolvement” in Afghanistan, the Soviets would risk harming Indo- Soviet relations and increasing the possibility for better Sino-Indian and Indo-U.S. relations: a result which would be viewed here as most detrimental to Soviet strategic interests in South Asia and in Asia as a whole. In our view, the degree to which the Soviets directly assert 2 Reporting from New Delhi, the Embassy suggested that India was not well informed regarding the political orientation of the new regime in Afghanistan. For example, in telegram 7475 from New Delhi, May 11, the Embassy paraphrased Indian Foreign Secretary Jagat Mehta’s hope “that the new Afghan Government means what it says about non-alignment and good relations with its neighbors.” (National Archives,
