538
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Forthcoming Presidential statement on Palestinians at outset of
West Bank/Gaza negotiations. (We could repeat most of our previous
statements and hint at willingness to expand direct contacts with Pales-
tinians of various persuasions.)7 (S)
—Our willingness to lean on the Saudis now, and eventually the
Jordanians, to gain their support for the peace process. (S)
—We should frankly explain that U.S.-Egyptian relations will
be hurt if Sadat is seen in our public opinion as responsible for fail-
ure of negotiations. This is a political reality, not a threat nor a wild
reaction. (S)
Tactics for Israel (U)
Our short-term problem is with Sadat, but our more fundamental
problem is likely to be Israel’s unwillingness to agree to real powers for
the self-governing authority. Begin needs to understand: (S)
—Whatever the treaty may say, the quality of the peace between
Egypt and Israel, as well as our relations with Israel, will be influ-
enced by how the full range of commitments at Camp David are car-
ried out.8 (TS)
—We will oppose future settlement activity by reducing our aid
budget by whatever amounts the Israeli government allocates to sup-
port of the settlements. We do not intend to subsidize illegal settle-
ments and we will so inform Congress. We will also vote against them
in the U.N.9 (S)
—A positive Israeli response on the target date will be followed by
early agreement on bilateral economic assistance10 issues. Until this
issue is resolved, we cannot make decisions on aid. Disbursal of aid
will be conditional on actual progress on the West Bank/Gaza. (S)
—If Israel is seen as responsible for the deadlock in negotiations
because of a failure to honor the spirit of the Camp David agreements,
U.S.-Israeli relations will be adversely and tangibly affected. We would
not be able to continue our intermediary role and the U.N. Security
Council might be seized of the Middle East issue. (TS)
Summitry? (U)
In my judgment, Vance may be able to persuade Sadat to accept
our proposal, but I am not optimistic. In any event, Begin is likely to
7 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK.”
8 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK.”
9 In the margin next to this sentence, Carter wrote: “OK.”
10 In the margin next to this word, Carter wrote: “?”
