July (145) To the Minister in China (tel.) Feeling that the Russian Legation premises should be turned over to the Russian representative upon his request for possession; approval of stand of the diplomatic corps in refusing to transfer the property at the request of the Chinese authorities; and opinion that the Chinese Government can claim no voice in the disposition of the property beyond determining whom to recognize as representative of Russia in China. Instructions to inform the Foreign Office. 446 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419] July 12 (230) From the Minister in China (tel.) Dean’s note, July 12, to the Chinese Government expressing obligation not to return the Russian Legation premises except to a representative of the Russian Government who will give preliminary assurances of maintenance of arrangements constituting conventional statute of the diplomatic quarter; and requesting that the Ministers be informed of the name of the duly accredited Soviet representative and that he be asked to address them directly. Information that as yet neither Karakhan nor anyone else has presented credentials as Soviet Ambassador or Minister to China; that Karakhan’s credentials were for the special purpose of concluding an agreement. 446 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419] July 25 (258) From the Minister in China (tel.) Minister’s conversation, in his capacity as senior representative of protocol powers in absence of Netherland Minister, with Karakhan, the newly appointed Soviet Ambassador to China, who stated that his Government contemplated the abandonment in the near future of its rights and interests under the protocol but that he desired on entering the Legation Quarter to maintain good neighborly relations and to observe municipal regulations, agreed to submit a written record of his observations on the understanding that they were not to be regarded as a fulfillment of preliminary conditions but as a voluntary expression of his views, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 420]
