December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 567 gracious enough to give me more of your valuable time on this subject than any of your distinguished predecessors. It is indeed unfortunate that the concerted efforts, which began shortly after you assumed the responsibilities of your high office, of bringing together to the Geneva peace conference, on the one hand, all the Arab parties to the conflict particularly the Palestinians, without whose participation no solution to the Palestinian problem is logically possible or meaningful, and Israel, on the other hand, were overtaken by events and prematurely abandoned. It had been our fervent hope that the Geneva peace conference would have made headway with the assistance of its co-chairmen, the United States and the Soviet Union, and under the auspices of the United Nations would have elaborated the details of a durable peace based on the eleven year old Security Council Resolution 242 and Security Council Resolution 338. Sadly, when such a process appeared almost within reach, an unexpected series of events limited the scope of possibilities and subsequently led to Camp David. Most Arab parties, including Jordan, see the Resolutions drawn up by the United States, Egypt and Israel as successfully achieving the well-known Israeli objective of isolating Egypt from the Arab camp, and thus weakening it further, which is one of the reasons for our finding them unacceptable. Despite the inherent justice in the Arab cause, the Arab position has been weakened by Israel’s superior might, bolstered mainly by the United States championing Israel’s cause and generously accommodating her demands. Furthermore, there is a real imbalance between a process which leads Egypt to restoring her sovereignty over all her occupied lands, and the vagueness that shrouds the future of all the other occupied territories, including Arab Jerusalem. The rights of the Palestinians on their national soil have been neglected, while Israel continues to create new facts, altering the character of the entire area. It is not difficult for any impartial body to understand the Arab attitude towards the Camp David Agreements. Evidently if any Egyptian- Israeli peace is forthcoming, it will not mean a comprehensive solution to the principal issues which are left outstanding.3 Nor can autonomous self-rule for the inhabitants of the Palestinian occupied territories, whichever categories are included in it, be a solution to the problem, when the end of any process is unclear and Israeli intentions are infinitely more clear to us all. I believe the heart of the problem to be sadly clear, despite our fullest confidence in your sincerity, Mr. President, the United States, where the Zionist lobby is so strong, cannot be the champion of Israel, 3 Carter underlined this sentence.
