886 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 283. Memorandum From the Representative to the United Nations (Young) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT NSC Options Memorandum on Future Bilateral Development Assistance The National Security Council has sent you an options memorandum on alternative U.S. bilateral aid strategies and alternative funding levels through FY–1982.2 The memorandum is based on the work of AID and the Brookings Institution in reviewing our aid policies. As you consider these options, I hope you keep in mind a very promising field of economic assistance to the developing world: support for regional economic groupings. Let me point to some of the possibilities in three regions. Caribbean Basin: United States interests in the Caribbean Basin continue to be endangered by the slow pace of economic development, rising population pressures and political polarization. There are considerable opportunities for greater economic development which could do much to diffuse the potential for trouble in this strategically placed region. The nations of the region already have built regional integration mechanisms: the Caribbean Common Market, the Central American Common Market; and the Andean Pact in South America, which includes the littoral nations of Colombia and Venezuela. The democratic and forward-looking leaders of the region—Perez of Venezuela, Oduber of Costa Rica, and Manley of Jamaica—have a vision for the region which is compatible with ours. We should support them. We should be prepared to strengthen these groupings through development assistance to their regional institutions, particularly the Caribbean and Central American Development Banks. We should also begin helping to build institutional bridges among the various groupings in the region. Southeast Asia: With the collapse of SEATO,3 the importance of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) takes on new meaning as it gives 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 22, United Nations: 8–12/77. Confidential. Young did not initial the memorandum. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen.” 2 See the Attachment to Document 282. 3 The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), which was established as a result of the September 1954 Manila Pact, ceased to exist in June 1977.
