886
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
283.
Memorandum From the Representative to the United
Nations (Young) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
NSC Options Memorandum on Future Bilateral Development Assistance
The National Security Council has sent you an options memo-
randum on alternative U.S. bilateral aid strategies and alternative
funding levels through FY–1982.2 The memorandum is based on the
work of AID and the Brookings Institution in reviewing our aid pol-
icies. As you consider these options, I hope you keep in mind a very
promising field of economic assistance to the developing world: sup-
port for regional economic groupings. Let me point to some of the pos-
sibilities in three regions.
Caribbean Basin:
United States interests in the Caribbean Basin continue to be en-
dangered by the slow pace of economic development, rising popula-
tion pressures and political polarization. There are considerable oppor-
tunities for greater economic development which could do much to
diffuse the potential for trouble in this strategically placed region. The
nations of the region already have built regional integration mecha-
nisms: the Caribbean Common Market, the Central American Common
Market; and the Andean Pact in South America, which includes the
littoral nations of Colombia and Venezuela. The democratic and
forward-looking leaders of the region—Perez of Venezuela, Oduber of
Costa Rica, and Manley of Jamaica—have a vision for the region which
is compatible with ours. We should support them. We should be pre-
pared to strengthen these groupings through development assistance
to their regional institutions, particularly the Caribbean and Central
American Development Banks. We should also begin helping to build
institutional bridges among the various groupings in the region.
Southeast Asia:
With the collapse of SEATO,3 the importance of the Association of
South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) takes on new meaning as it gives
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
File, Box 22, United Nations: 8–12/77. Confidential. Young did not initial the memo-
randum. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen.”
2 See the Attachment to Document 282.
3 The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), which was established as a re-
sult of the September 1954 Manila Pact, ceased to exist in June 1977.
