Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 645 obligation to some of our people there in Iran and we should let them know that they should come out. The President had read the list of options discussed previously by the SCC and was aware of the areas of agreement.3 His own preference was to bring the thing to a head, to ask others to join with us, and if they will not to move to take forceful action later on. The Secretary of State noted that a draft announcement4 had been circulated to all participants in the meeting, and he suggested that it be made later today, possibly about 3:00 p.m., which would provide sufficient time to notify those who need to be notified, including those key congressional leaders who should be informed in advance. He noted that there had been some possible additional steps discussed by the SCC which should be reviewed in addition to those covered in the draft announcement. The President said we are no longer involved in a negotiation with the terrorists. The obstacle now is the Government, with Khomeini as the ultimate authority of the Iranian Government. Admiral Turner said he did not think it was that clear. Although that was a good line to take publicly—and it could be defended—it was not entirely clear that the militants would in fact have let the hostages go if ordered to do so by the Revolutionary Council. The President said he included Khomeini in the Government. In that sense, it was not a radical departure, but the militants had for the first time stated that they would turn the hostages over. We should get it out of our minds that we are dealing directly with the terrorists. We need to expell the Iranian diplomats from this country as quickly as physically possible. Secretary Vance said he recommended the announcement today, with the diplomats to depart by tomorrow night. Dr. Brzezinski asked if we could enforce it. Attorney General Civiletti said yes. The only difficulty would be if there was armed resistance. Dr. Brzezinski said it was his view that we should confront any armed resistance with overwhelming force. It should be crushed quickly. The Attorney General said he would argue against that approach. If there is armed resistance from the Embassy or Consulates, we should take the kind of measures which the FBI would normally take in such a situation and cut off the food, water and electricity and force them 3 See Document 236. 4 See Document 244.
