Guatemala 673 Ambassador McIntosh said he knew that many in Washington felt the DLF should not make housing loans in Latin America, because the need for housing all over Latin America was so great that the lending resources of the United States could never fulfill these requirements. He said the same argument could be used against making loans for highways, where need was also great. However, Mr. McIntosh said he did not believe this was a valid argument against making such loans, that each case should be considered on its own merits, and that in the case of Guatemala he was in favor of making a housing loan. There followed a discussion of the rubber, industrial bank, and land purchase loan applications. Except for land purchase, Ambassador McIntosh was in favor of helping Guatemala in these fields as well. Although the DLF could not lend money to the GOG for land purchase, it was agreed that it might be possible to assist in the field of rural resettlement, possibly by lending Guatemala money for budgetary relief in the public works field or for construction of facilities on the lands to be acquired. Mr. Powell said it might be possible for ICA to reprogram some $8 million of pipeline funds toward purchase of land for resettlement. Ambassador McIntosh said he thought the DLF should lend Guatemala about $16 million in the near future from funds already appropriated to the DLF, and he tentatively suggested the following allocations: Housing $6 million Industrial Development 2 or 4 million Compensatory Funds for Rural Resettlement to be determined; possibly $3 million Rubber Development 5 million Mr. Conover said that he fully recognized the political necessity for making loans to Guatemala. In response to Ambassador McIntosh’s queries as to the merits of these particular applications, Mr. Conover said that, in economic terms, he felt housing construction was less significant for economic development than prospects which more directly and immediately contribute to balance of payments improvement. Ambassador McIntosh agreed with this economic assessment, but felt, the political considerations were overriding. Ambassador McIntosh said he wished to go ahead on these loans as soon as possible. He designated Mr. Ryan to go to Guatemala within a week to look into the pending applications and to work out with the USOM, the Embassy, and the Guatemalan Government, properly drawn-­up loan applications which would meet DLF criteria. This, he said, would constitute the first step and would show the Guatemalans that we were really taking an interest in their loan applications.
