48 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 15. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated START Decisions we take on START issues over the next six weeks will affect public perceptions of the Bush Administration’s approach to arms control, prospects for reinvigorating START when NST resumes, and the outlook for ratification. This paper reviews key elements already agreed, major unresolved issues, preparations for resumption, and the ratification dimension. Elements Already Agreed with Soviets The main U.S. objectives in START have been: — to reduce ballistic missile forces which, given their short flight and warning times, pose the greatest first-­strike threat and in which the USSR has a comparative advantage, and — to enable each side to retain adequate retaliatory capabilities by adopting more permissive limits on bombers and cruise missiles which, given their longer warning times, are less destabilizing and in which the U.S. has the lead. Embedded in the heavily bracketed U.S.-Soviet Joint Draft Text are agreed elements that fully reflect these objectives: 4900 ballistic missile warheads. Key limit because it caps all fast-­ flying weapons and because all ICBMs and SLBMs will eventually be accurate enough to threaten hard targets. 1540 warheads on l54 “heavy” ICBMs. Cuts in half Soviet SS–18s which currently are the principal threat to U.S. silos. 50% cut in Soviet ballistic missile throwweight. Sharply reduces huge Soviet lead in total rocket boosting power. 6000 warheads (ballistic missile warheads and bomber weapons). If parties used full quota of 4900 missile warheads, would leave 1100 for bomber weapons. But bomber “discount” (see below) allows far more than 1100 actual bombers weapons and, therefore, far more than 6000 total strategic weapons. 1 Source: Department of State, S/S-IRM Records, Lot 93D188, Memorandum of Conversations Pertaining to the United States and USSR Relations, Baker/Shevardnadze in Moscow Copy of May 6, 1989 S/P-Ross to Baker briefing book for Moscow Ministerial. Secret. Ross sent the paper to Baker under cover of a May 6 memorandum (Ibid.). Baker flew to Helsinki on May 9 and spent the night. The following day, he arrived in Moscow, and met with Shevardnadze at the MFA Guest House from 12:10 to 2 p.m. The full memorandum of conversation is is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts.
