793.00/92 [Document 655] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State MANCHESTER, MASS., July 20, 1925. [Received July 21.] No. 702 SIR: With reference to my immediately preceding note I have the honour to inform you that the Japanese Government have suggested the following amendments to the proposed joint declaration,97 the draft text of which I conveyed to you in my note No. 683 of July 7th. After the words “as a whole” add “The Washington Conference further passed a resolution for the establishment of an international Commission to enquire into the existing conditions of the administration of justice in China with a view to the eventual relinquishment by the several Powers of their respective rights of extraterritoriality.” Before the words “have not affected” insert “and Commission”. Delete the passage in the declaration from “while the Powers themselves consider that” down to the words “earliest opportunity” and substitute therefor “and the Powers declare their willingness to consider sympathetically and to help fully the just and reasonable aspirations that the Chinese people may seek to attain through means equally legitimate.” After the words “expedite meeting of the Tariff Conference” add “and Commission on question of extraterritoriality.” Delete from “present tariff system” to “towards this end” and substitute “present tariff and judicial arrangements as will give effect to the terms and spirit of the agreement reached at the Washington Conference and will materially contribute to the establishment of those conditions of internal stability and international accord which are necessary for the assumption by China of her proper place in the comity of nations.” Delete from “anti-foreign agitation” down to the words “present government [present treaties?]” and substitute therefor “agitation threatening the security of foreign lives and property persists in China and especially so long as it expresses itself in the form of an organized movement designed to extort forcibly from the Powers the unconditional
