Human Rights
211
67.
Memorandum From the Global Issues Cluster of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 13, 1977
SUBJECT
Evening Report
Daily Activities
Tuchman started a marathon day of meetings at Rand Corporation
briefing for ERDA on nuclear fuel cycles—economic analysis of various
possible cycles.
Tuchman attended the second plenary of the human rights PRM to
hear comments on the second draft.2 Most agencies felt that this was a
great improvement over the first draft. Defense, however, hated it,
found the security assistance sections “totally unacceptable”, and the
rest of the draft “unbalanced”. I felt that most of the relatively unim-
portant things were improved, but that all the important issues remain.
I made the points that: (1) there is no discussion of objectives3 and that
is absolutely central to everything else (the PRM defines the objective
as: “to encourage the respect that governments accord to human
rights” and leaves it at that; (2) it essentially considers democracy (or
the approximate content of the Bill of Rights) as a basic human right,
which I find completely4 unjustified; (3) the strategy content of 85 pp
boils down to—“we have to do everything on a case-by-case basis”. I
see real dangers in this. Everyone makes a point of saying that some-
times “other interests” will take precedence over human rights. This
means that we will have in essence a country-by-country list of prior-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 5–7/77. Secret. Sent for
information.
2 Reference is to the second draft of the Department of State study prepared in re-
sponse to PRM–28. Under cover of a July 7 memorandum, Nimetz sent Christopher the
85-page draft, noting that he had “tried to incorporate comments and suggestions from
all of the Bureaus who submitted ideas. However, it was not possible to accommodate all
suggestions made. In addition, I have cut the draft considerably, although I believe that
little of real substance has been lost.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretary:
Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State, Under Secretary of State for
Security Assistance, Science, and Technology, Lot 81D85, Box 1, MN Chron—Official July
1977–December 1977)
3 Brzezinski underlined the word “objectives” and wrote “need” in the left-hand
margin next to the paragraph.
4 Brzezinski underlined the word “completely” and placed a question mark next to
it in the left-hand margin.
