for was made in the draft submitted to the other Governments on
April 13. From a practical standpoint it is clearly preferable,
however, not to postpone the coming into force of an anti-war
treaty until all the nations of the world can agree upon the text of
such a treaty and cause it to be ratified. For one reason or another
a state so situated as to be no menace to the peace of the world
might obstruct agreement or delay ratification in such manner as
to render abortive the efforts of all the other Powers. It is highly
improbable, moreover, that a form of treaty acceptable to the
British, French, German, Italian and Japanese Governments as
well as to the United States would not be equally acceptable to
most, if not all, of the other Powers of the world. Even were this
not the case, however, the coming into force among the above-
named six Powers of an effective anti-war treaty and their
observance thereof would be a practical guaranty against a second
world war. This in itself would be a tremendous service to
humanity and the United States is not willing to jeopardize the
practical success of the proposal which it has made by
conditioning the coming into force of the treaty upon prior
universal or almost universal acceptance.
[Paraphrase]
In the foregoing paragraphs of this telegram the position of the Government
of the United States is fully and clearly set forth; you are authorized to use
any or all of the above exposition, at your discretion, in discussing at the
Foreign Office the question of a multilateral treaty for the renunciation of
war. You may even seek an opportunity, if you think it desirable, to present
in the appropriate quarter views as outlined above. I earnestly hope that
sooner or later there may develop out of the discussions which have been
initiated among the six powers an acceptable and effective form of treaty
for renunciation of war. The important thing is to get peoples and
governments to thinking in terms of peace, and I cannot refrain from belief
that once the initial inertia is overcome a rapid spread of the treaty’s sphere
of influence will occur.
