420  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
emergency conditions; medical, food, and water requirements in shel­
ter habitation; and sanitary controls to permit tolerable occupation.
----- $1.5 Millions
“(iv) Development of architectural designs and specifications for 
new types of multiple-­use shelters which will be attractive as well as 
practical. The Committee believes that attention should be given to the 
use of grants to schools of architecture and engineering which would 
stimulate curriculum development, training of new students, and new 
concept of shelter design.
“----- $2.0 Millions”
b. A limited program of prototype construction of relatively 
small-­capacity fallout shelters, differing in design and type (includ­
ing multiple-­use) and adapted to differing conditions such as climate; 
appropriate tests by actual occupancy for realistic periods of time to be 
conducted after completion (total cost not to exceed $6 million).
c. A nation-­wide survey along the lines recommended in subpara­
graph 2–­a of NSC 5807, which reads as follows:
“2. Surveys and Pilot Studies
“a. Development of estimated availability of existing shelter on a 
sampling basis
“As a basis for national planning, definitive information is needed 
regarding the capability of existing structures to provide fallout shelter, 
particularly in large cities. The Committee recommends that a survey 
of existing structures be conducted on a sampling basis to yield such 
information. This would be handled through direct Federal contract, 
and would be completed in one year.
“----- $2.0 Millions”
d. Initiation of a program of public education along the lines rec­
ommended in paragraph 3 of NSC 5807, as modified by FCDA in the 
light of NSC discussion and as outlined below (cost estimated at not 
over $12.5 million for FY 1959; subsequent annual appropriations to be 
determined on the basis of experience) :
Outline of Proposed Coverage of FCDA
Information And Education Program
(1) Objectives
(a) Public understanding of nuclear weapons effects, particularly 
radiation.
(b) Instruction on effective measures of protection.
(2) Low-Key Characteristics
The program would avoid harmful over-­excitement of the people 
by careful treatment of the nature and imminence of the threat.
