December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
763
219.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Amman, March 18, 1979, 3:15–4:30 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
United States
Jordan
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
King Hussein
Warren Christopher
Crown Prince Hassan
General David Jones
Prime Minister Mudhar Badran
Chip Carter
Abdul-Hamid Sharaf
Ambassador Nicholas Veliotes
Abd al-Salam Majali
Michael Sterner
Hasan Ibrahim
Gary Sick
(At the beginning of the meeting there was a brief photo opportu-
nity by the press.)
Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had asked him to give the
King a personal letter.2 Dr. Brzezinski said that our countries are bound
by certain common interests and shared expectations. We have entered
a particularly turbulent situation which affects social systems and the
distribution of power. Perhaps the central choice in future international
arrangements will be whether domination will be by radical or mod-
erate forces. This is a problem that is both local and regional.
The President is seeking a just and lasting peace. No President
since 1948 has been committed as deeply personally and willing to take
risks to himself as this President with regard to this issue. If this Presi-
dent does not succeed, the next President will not try. His failure will be
taken as an object lesson that it is better not to touch the problem be-
cause of the political risks. President Carter has staked his personal po-
litical fortunes on this issue. He wished to help moderate forces prevail.
We would like to shape an Arab Middle East which is moderate in na-
ture and at peace. Our premise is that what hurts U.S. power helps the
Soviets and hurts our friends.
There are two basic threats—internal and external. The internal
threat is the rising appeal of radicalism which is rooted in many social
causes. The conflict with Israel contributes to this, particularly in the
Palestinian case. So the internal struggles are strong, perhaps growing.
The external threat is the Soviet ability to extend its power, to increase
its military strength. The Soviet ideology is not congenial to the U.S.
and does not have great appeal to very many people anywhere. But
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 33, Memcons: Brzezinski: 3–6/79. Secret. The meeting took place in the Hashemite
Palace.
2 See Document 215.
