not to be until after the expiration of the ten-year period, the constituency to which the
Parties were to appeal was manifestly that existing at the time of the plebiscite, and,
aside from the futility of such an attempt, there is no warrant for an endeavor by
artificial rules to reestablish a constituency of a past period, although it may be
appropriate to make reasonable regulations which will have regard to the position of
the Peruvians of the provinces who may have been wrongfully expelled. The conditions
of the plebiscite should be such as will be plain and practical and work substantial
justice between the Parties in the present circumstances. They have also been framed in
the light of the proposals made and views expressed by the Parties respectively in the
course of their negotiations, and the Arbitrator has not failed to consider whatever
historical precedents may be deemed to be of value.
QUALIFICATIONS OF VOTERS
In the beginning of the Jimenez-Solar negotiations it was maintained on behalf of Peru
that “the right of suffrage belonged to none except Peruvians,” while the Chilean
Minister urged that “all the inhabitants of the territory …38 had the right to declare their
will to belong either to Peru or to Chile.” However, this point was yielded on behalf of
Peru and both Peruvians and Chileans were to be allowed to vote under the Peruvian
draft protocol of February 23, 1894, submitted in the Jimenez-Solar negotiations. That
draft drew a distinction as respects residence between Peruvians and Chileans
permitting “Peruvians …38 who reside at present in the provinces of Tacna and Arica”
to vote, but only allowing “Chileans who can establish a continuous residence of two
years …38 and who live there at present” to participate in the election.
Again, in the negotiations leading to the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol of April 16, 1898
the representative of Chile maintained that “all the inhabitants of the territory” should
vote; the Peruvian representative, “that only Peruvians born in the territory or that
reside in it ought to be permitted to vote.” By the terms of the protocol, this was one of
the points to be submitted to arbitration.
In the Puga Borne-Seoane negotiations of 1908 it was contended for Chile “that all the
qualified inhabitants of the territory should be called on to exercise the right of
plebiscitary suffrage,” but it was answered for Peru that “the right of sovereignty
belongs to the natives alone” or as the Peruvian translation has it, “the right to vote
belongs to the denizens alone.”
In the Edwards-Porras negotiations of 1909-1910, it was proposed on behalf of Chile
that “all the inhabitants, Chileans, Peruvians and foreigners” should vote. It was
responded on behalf of Peru that “all the Peruvians and Chileans” should have the right
to vote that met the following requirements: “a. Twenty-one years of age, b. residence
in the territory at least from July 1, 1907. Those also may take part who, born in the
territory of Tacna and Arica may be present at the moment of the vote, if they shall
