844  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
intends to persist in way of peace. We seek now overdue fulfillment by 
your government of your undertaking that Americans in your country 
should be allowed expeditiously to return. We seek this not only for 
humanitarian reasons but because respect for international undertak­
ings lies at foundation of stable international order. We shall also seek 
with perseverance a meaningful renunciation of force, particularly in 
Taiwan area.”
2. Wang said we have spent much time in our discussions for reach­
ing agreement on issuance of declaration on renunciation of force. They 
have made very clear views of their side in all our previous meetings. 
His government had recently issued public statement in which position 
his side also very clearly set forth. This allowed no misunderstanding 
or deliberate misinterpretation by anyone.
3. Wang said at last meeting he had indicated that if there were 
genuine desire for agreement on declaration their two drafts were 
there—that is, their October 27 and December 1 drafts—and he had 
indicated any these would have served for agreement between us, 
and he asked that I make careful choice either these two drafts. Their 
December 1 and October 27 drafts were consistent and there was noth­
ing which could be termed inconsistent between those two drafts. 
Their draft did not in itself set forth any prerequisite conditions.
4. Wang said therefore as he saw it if we were to make declaration 
at all we would have to be clear on three points. First, such a declaration 
must be on equal footing and be reciprocal. Second, such declaration 
must not prejudice the sovereign rights of any of parties. Finally, such 
a declaration must be acceptable both sides. Their objections my pre­
vious drafts had all been based on grounds my drafts did not conform 
with three points mentioned above.
5. Wang said he had carefully studied statement issued by 
Department on March 7 and examined that statement in accordance 
with three principles above but fail find in that statement any reply 
their questions mentioned above. In same way they found selves dis­
appointed with my opening statement this morning because he did 
not find anything in it which could lead us forward or which could 
contribute our progress.
6. Wang said we have now come to stage our discussions in which 
not a question of setting forth respective views because these views 
been made clear in course discussion. It would be very difficult for dis­
cussions get forward if at every meeting we should repeatedly set forth 
views which been set forth before. We had in front us task of resolving 
question regarding declaration.
7. Wang said he noted I had stated desire for our disputes being set­
tled peaceful means and for narrowing down area disagreement. If this 
case, then should we not make genuine effort and get on to agreement
