1038
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
promotion programs, for example, help us to deal positively with
shifting trade patterns.
—Specific Development Problems: While we should and must con-
tinue to address reforms of the international system, debate on
North-South forums has too often focused exclusively on such systemic
reform with little reference to actual development problems. This ap-
proach has often led to confrontational rhetoric and sterile debate,
which in turn has undercut US domestic support for development
assistance and other positive policies toward the LDC’s. We want to in-
crease the attention of the North-South dialogue to specific develop-
ment problems. We want to find specific means by which such
problems can be tackled through cooperative action by developed and
developing countries in ways which will contribute to the welfare of all
people, but particularly the most disadvantaged. Over the next year,
we would concentrate attention and suggest initiatives in the fields of
energy, food, health, and the institutional and human capacity of LDCs
to link technology to their development needs.
• Energy: The energy technologies selected by developing coun-
tries, the rate by which they increase their energy consumption, and
their success in meeting their own energy needs from indigenous
sources (and in having exportable surpluses), will have a direct impact
on US citizens. If we are faced with an increasingly tight energy market
this year, both developing countries and the Congress should be re-
sponsive to proposals in this area.
• Food: Good weather in grain producing countries over the past
three years has reduced worldwide concern with ensuring adequate
food supplies and stocks. However, long-range projections, particu-
larly for Africa and Asia, point to large growing food deficits over
coming decades. US economic and humanitarian interests are directly
involved in the functioning of international food markets, food assist-
ance, and the domestic food policies pursued by developing countries.
• Health: Diseases and malnutrition in LDCs result in high infant
mortality, adult disability and lower productivity. Both for economic
and humanitarian reasons, the US and other developed countries
should be willing to continue working with the developing countries to
improve health conditions in the developing world.
• LDC Capacity To Use Technology: LDCs have taken a renewed in-
terest in the availability of technology appropriate to their develop-
ment needs, and in their institutional capacity to apply it. We want to
de-emphasize unproductive exercises on international codes on tech-
nology transfer and concentrate on building their capacity to obtain,
generate, adapt, and apply technology to development needs.
