Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Treasury C. Fred Bergsten* Commerce Homer Moyer* *Present only for discussion of items 1 and 2 **Present only for discussion of items 2 and 3 ***Present only for first ten minutes SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS [Omitted here is material on the Soviet Union and the Olympics.] 3. Possible Blockade of Iran:2 The SCC was then reduced to the small political-military group. Mr. Aaron asked whether it was the judgment of the group that to be effective, Iranian exports of oil would have to be blocked, or would it be enough to block imports into Iran? Secondly, if oil exports should be terminated either by blockade or Iranian retaliation, what would be the effect? Admiral Turner replied to the first question that, if all imports, including food, were blocked, it would have a significant impact on Iran’s economy within two weeks. Blocking oil exports, however, would take nearly a year to have a major impact since Iran has sufficient monetary reserves to do without the revenue. It would be reasonable to expect Iran to cut off oil exports as retaliation for any U.S. blockade. About 80% of Iran’s exports come in by sea, and the land and rail routes through Turkey and the USSR could not make up the difference. It would not be necessary to block ground and air traffic to have the desired impact. There were no real alternatives to seaborne trade. Mr. Aaron noted that there could be a political problem if Turkey and Pakistan actively helped Iran evade a boycott at the same time we are trying to get large sums of assistance for them. Mr. Sick suggested that we should make it clear from the outset that this was a unilateral U.S. action limited to maritime commerce, that it was not intended to interfere with other commerce, and that we believed that the naval interruption was sufficient to make the political point and to significantly affect Iran’s economy. Henry Owen commented that Iran would probably cut off oil, which would raise the level of hostility in the U.S. and elsewhere; that in turn would draw 2 This discussion was based on the papers requested at the March 11 SCC meeting (see Document 204). The CIA paper, “Economic Consequences of a Naval Blockade of Iran on Oil Importing Countries,” March 19, and its attachment, “Iran: Effects of a Naval Blockade, are in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East
