Afghanistan 837 of eastern Afghanistan. An Islamic scholar, Mojededi reportedly has good contacts in Saudi Arabia and Libya. He claims to represent the Front’s “real” leader, Prince Abdul Wali, cousin and son-in-law of King Zahir, currently in exile in Rome. Abdul Wali’s insurgent activities, however, are centered in Western Europe. —The Afghan Islamic and National Revolutionary Council (Surah-i- Melli-Inqilabi-Islami-Afghanistan), also known as the National Islamic Front of Afghanistan. It is headed by Sayed Ahmed Gailani, an important religious leader who traces his family from the prophet. He claims to have a large following in the eastern provinces. Although he is probably the exile Muslim leader with the most modern outlook, Gailani’s political strength is based on his religious following. —The Islamic Party (Hezbi Islami—Khalis Faction) is a splinter group of Hekmatyar’s organization (see below). Its tough, combative leader, Younis Khalis, is reported to be admired by other exile leaders for his courage in leading his band in cross-border operations into Afghanistan. Conservative and reputedly without political ambitions, he has prodded other groups to become more involved in the fighting in Afghanistan. —Movement of the Islamic Revolution of Afghanistan (Harakat-i-Inqilabi-Islami-Afghanistan), led by Maulana Mohammad Nabi Mohammedi, a mullah, from the Khowst area of Paktia province. Mohammedi’s base of operations is at Miram Shah in North Waziristan. The other members of the Alliance have their headquarters in Peshawar. The Islamic Party (Hezbe Islami), led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, broke away from the IALA soon after its formation. Hekmatyar is fiercely ambitious and independent and has been conducting guerrilla operations, with the aid of the Pakistan Government, since before the Marxist revolution in 1978. One report alleges that he has 15,000 guerrillas in Afghanistan. This is probably an exaggeration, but the Islamic Party is one of the best organized and most active exile organizations. Hekmatyar’s group has its roots in the area between Ghazni and Qandahar, and it is active there as well as in the Kabul area and in the eastern provinces bordering Pakistan. The Islamic Party has an office in Tehran, as well as its main office in Peshawar. Hekmatyar rejects the monarchy and is reportedly impressed by the fundamentalist revolution in Iran. The Revolutionary Council, established by the Afghan Loya Jirgah (Grand Assembly) that met in May in Peshawar prior to another Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference, is the closest Afghan equivalent to a government-in-exile. For centuries, the Jirgah has been convened by rulers to legitimize their political authority. The group that met in Pakistan in May claimed to represent all parts of the country, although it most likely did not. In late July Hassan Gailani, nephew of Sayed Ahmed Gailani, was appointed President of the Council, indicating that it will probably become little more than an arm of the IALA.
