Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II contravene legislative intent or use Congress as the culprit in advocating human rights abroad. Hopes that human rights would go away as an issue or efforts to block growing Congressional determination to promote human rights led to the frustration which, in turn, prompted legislation which may or may not be the most useful way to further human rights. Given that backdrop and present political intent on the Hill, the Executive Branch approach to the Congress on human rights should include: —Extended Contacts with the Hill. Close contact and consultation with both members of the Congress and their staffs are important. Such consultations should not be limited to human rights interest groups on the Hill and D/HA in the Department. • Each regional bureau and concerned functional bureau, in consultation with appropriate officers in H and D/HA, should work out a regularized schedule of informal contact with Congresspersons and staff in their areas to explain specifically upcoming decisions or problems. • Such consultations should cover the spectrum of members and issues. For example, as we develop our policy on human rights toward Korea, EA, in consultation with D/HA and H, should consult with interested and key members of Congress. —Top Priority Items. The following items are of particular immediate concern to the Congress and should therefore figure prominently in the Department’s six-month Congressional action plan on human rights. a. Harkin Amendment on the International Financial Institutions and Bilateral Economic Assistance. (Follow-up on productive consultations with Congressmen Reuss, Harkin, Fraser, Gonzalez, et al.) b. Security Assistance • General: Executive Branch to review all country programs before September 30, making allowance for changes in human rights performances. Specific consideration should focus on minimal programs in Latin America, especially Central America, and grant security assistance to Indonesia and Thailand. c. UN Human Rights Covenants and Conventions. (Follow up on President’s March 17 UN speech)38 d. Korea, Philippines, East Timor e. Rhodesia, South Africa, and Namibia 38 See Document 26.
