932
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
see because the other side is seizing every opportunity to be on the of-
fensive all the time.
On the other hand, enhancing our defense capabilities and raising
the standard of our armed forces is an important element domestically
as well. These forces are called upon to perform many functions for im-
proving the quality of life in Egypt. To fulfill this mission, these forces
must acquire the latest technology in many fields. We need your help in
this respect. Your assistants have been cooperative and sensitive to our
needs. They see the situation and read the consequences the same way
we do. Their Egyptian colleagues are cooperating with them fully. Ex-
haustive studies have been made and I believe that we are approaching
the final decision on the issue. I have asked Vice President Mubarak to
render you any assistance as you make the decision. He is accompanied
by competent officers representing the three branches of our armed
forces and they are instructed to cooperate fully with your officials. I
have no doubt whatsoever that you make the decision that would reas-
sure us and all your friends, not only in the Middle East, but also in Af-
rica. I need not emphasize to you the necessity for making a long term
arrangement for maintaining our military capability.
Other aspects of the bilateral cooperation are proceeding smoothly
too. In the economic field, a marked improvement has taken place.
Matters are settled expeditiously and promptly. Necessary adjustments
are being made at the request of both parties. We have requested an in-
crease of half a million tons in the amount of wheat and wheat flour we
get under PL480. Vice President Mubarak will discuss this matter with
Secretary Vance and I am certain that you would be most responsive to
this request. You are aware of the considerations which prompt us to
request this increase. It is so vital, under the present circumstances, to
fulfill our needs in this regard. Machinery and other commodities are
equally important to give our economy the shot in the arm it needs. As
you know, we have been able to keep our economy in good shape in the
face of all odds and despite tough challenges. We are determined to
persevere.
The Sudan requires your attention too. Subversive intervention,
conducted by the Soviets and executed by the Libyan unenlightened re-
gime, is confronting the Sudanese leadership with a tremendous chal-
lenge. The country is unable to cope with inflation and the scarcity of
many vital commodities. Naturally, this constitutes an element of pres-
sure on President Numeiri and his colleagues. Arab countries which
traditionally assisted that country are now withholding their aid to
force the regime to follow their line of policy. Under such circum-
stances, you would certainly give the Sudan a high priority among the
recipients of your aid.
Having said that, I would like to share with you some thoughts on
the peace efforts we have started together since we met in Washington
