84 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III unemployment among our youths. The result will be an ideological shift in favor of Eastern Europe. I subscribe to President Carter’s views on human rights. One key element of human rights is the right to employment. Third, energy is at the heart of our problem and the worst may still be before us. When we look at the projections for 1985 and 1990 there will be more difficulties. In 1974 we thought that if we broke OPEC we could cause a drop in the price of oil. But now oil is becoming a rarer substance, and other minerals as well. We must define new and wider range energy policies. For instance, the US made a very positive decision on this a few weeks ago.5 Fourth, on trade the industrialized world has gone through three years of crisis without protectionism. But there are new causes of concern with some shifts in trade terms. The share of the market of certain countries has abruptly changed, for instance in steel, shipbuilding, etc. There is also competition in high technology areas, such as aerospace and computers. We should not be compelled to forego our positions because others are stronger in these areas. Fifth, the developing countries do not like our meeting here in London. It is anathema to them. We should devote a considerable amount of time here to meeting their aspirations. For instance, their high level of debt has repercussions on us. And if CIEC fails, there will be serious consequences.6 The Canadians are particularly aware of this. We should say that we are concerned about these problems and say that CIEC should succeed. Fukuda: The world economy is in a serious situation. All of us here are capable of finding a breakthrough. I was posted here in London in the 1930s—one-half century ago. The situation is reminiscent of today. The Hoover depression in the US spread to Britain. It triggered a UK departure from the gold standard. Others followed suit. Unemployment led to social insecurity. In 1933 an international economic meeting was convened in London, chaired by Ramsay MacDonald. I was deeply involved. I recall that in the 1929–34 period there was a drastic decline in world production, by 30%, and a 40% drop in world trade. This led to great social instability. A number of countries turned to totalitarianism and fascism. The 1933 conference tried to deal with these problems but did not succeed. The meeting was recessed and never re- 5 Possibly a reference to the Carter administration’s proposed energy program; see footnote 7, Document 25. 6 The final Ministerial meeting of the Conference on International Economic Cooperation took place in Paris May 30–June 3. Telegram 16351 from Paris, June 3, contains the communique´ issued at the conclusion of the meeting. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770206–0274) The communique´ is printed in the Department of State Bulletin, June 20, 1977, pp. 650–652.
