Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
799
The Qs and As which are attached focus on more specific issues,
but are designed with the above considerations in mind.2
2 Not printed are 12 Presidential debate briefing papers on foreign policy and na-
tional security. A cover page, dated October 20 and presumably prepared by Inderfurth
and Eric Newsom, lists the titles of the papers: “Leadership,” “Military Balance,”
“SALT,” “U.S.-Soviet Relations,” “Western Alliance,” “Persian Gulf,” “Hostages,”
“Middle East Peace Process,” “U.S. Policy Toward China,” “Central America,” “Human
Rights,” and “Future Goals.”
160.
Remarks by President Carter1
Washington, November 4, 1980
1980 Presidential Election
I promised you 4 years ago that I would never lie to you. So, I can’t
stand here tonight and say it doesn’t hurt.
The people of the United States have made their choice, and, of
course, I accept that decision but, I have to admit, not with the same en-
thusiasm that I accepted the decision 4 years ago.2 I have a deep appre-
ciation of the system, however, that lets people make the free choice
about who will lead them for the next 4 years.
About an hour ago I called Governor Reagan in California, and I
told him that I congratulated him for a fine victory.3 I look forward to
working closely with him during the next few weeks. We’ll have a very
fine transition period. I told him I wanted the best one in history. And I
then sent him this telegram, and I’ll read it to you. “It’s now apparent
that the American people have chosen you as the next President. I con-
gratulate you and pledge to you our fullest support and cooperation in
1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book III, pp. 2687–2688. The President spoke
at 9:54 p.m. at the Sheraton Washington Hotel. His remarks were broadcast live on
television.
2 On November 5, The New York Times reported that with 73 percent of the popular
vote counted, Reagan had garnered 50 percent, Carter 42 percent, and John Anderson
(who ran as an independent candidate) 6 percent of the vote. Several Democratic incum-
bents in the Senate and House lost their reelection bids, including McGovern, Bayh, and
Brademas. (Hedrick Smith, “President Concedes: Republican Gains Victories in All Area
and Vows to Act on Economy,” pp. A–1, A–18)
3 Carter and Reagan spoke from 8:35 to 8:37 p.m., Eastern Standard Time. (Carter
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
