244 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I power. And our naval forces still control the sea lanes to Europe, the Middle East, and northeast Asia. There is where we would prefer to halt the military competition and begin the process of equitable arms reduction. From the standpoint of the United States, now is the time to stop the buildup—if others are willing, end the folly of nuclear proliferation, and cease the wasteful transfer of conventional arms in excess of their real needs to developing nations. But we cannot bring about those results unilaterally. If others will not cooperate, we will adapt. Certainly we will not shrink from a world that demands increased strength as well as greater justice. I realize that I have outlined a complex approach to the problems of national security. At times the approach may appear internally inconsistent. It is not. We can move toward the peaceful resolution of international differences only if the conditions of collective security are maintained. We can maintain the conditions of collective security— without excessive cost and risk—only if we move to resolve current international differences and deal constructively with long-term trends. To do both we need moral, diplomatic, and economic—as well as military—strength. We also need your understanding and support. 54. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, August 26, 1977 SUBJECT Foreign Policy: The First Six Months On vacation I read articles reviewing your first six months’ foreign policy which struck me as so silly and superficial—focusing largely on how good or bad our relations were with other governments and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 26, Foreign Policy: 5/77–11/29/77. Confidential. Sent for information. The President wrote “Good. J” in the top right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum. In his July 29 weekly report, Brzezinski offered his assessment of the first 6 months of the administration in the “form of a report card, self inflicted.” Carter added the following notation at the end of that report: “You’re too generous—We must a) have clear goals & b) be tenacious.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 125, Weekly National Security Report: 7–9/77)
