Eastern Europe Region Eastern European desires to conduct business as usual with the West. This argues for a policy of trying harder to maintain the ground we have gained recently in our relations with Eastern Europe. The area-wide measures and country-specific measures recommended in the attached paper are designed to implement this goal. The Interagency Group agreed to all of them with the following exceptions which require further consideration or policy guidance. —Export Controls.4 There was general agreement in the IG that the ability to differentiate between export licensing treatment for the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe would be a valuable foreign policy tool in encouraging ties with Eastern European countries which display independence in foreign and domestic policy. Any foreign policy controls on U.S. exports to the Soviet Union imposed in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan clearly should not automatically be applied to Eastern European countries—particularly those whose support for the Soviet action has been weak or withheld. However, it was recognized that it would be futile to try to decide on the applicability of security controls to Eastern European countries before the nature of these controls has been decided upon. One possible way of differentiating between the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe would be to maintain existing controls for them while tightening up for the Soviet Union. For some countries in Eastern Europe we might go further and institute a liberal policy of COCOM exceptions for Eastern European countries with appropriate end-user controls. In any case, our ability to gain Western European agreement to more stringent security controls on exports to Eastern Europe is bound to be strongly resisted. This issue might best be dealt with in the SCC discussion of export controls on the Soviet Union once a policy on security controls has been decided upon. —Yugoslav Military Sales. Steps are being taken to implement “a more forthcoming” military sales policy responsive to Yugoslav requests. DOD is reexamining the systems the Yugoslavs have expressed an interest in with a view to releasing more, but problems of availability and constraints against transfer of sensitive technology limit what we can do. The NSC, State and DOD will have to keep the military sales program under continuing review to insure that we respond as promptly and fully as possible to Yugoslav interests. —PL 480 for Yugoslavia. We are reviewing with Agriculture and IDCA the possibility of a modest PL 480 program for Yugoslavia which would permit it to acquire U.S. soybeans for cattle feed. Even a small grant or loan would ease Yugoslavia’s balance of payments problem 4 See Document 13.
