294 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 3. That for the time being there be no expansion of American aid programs in Iran and that requests such as jet airplanes for the Shah be refused. 4. That if Dr. Mosadeq in a dramatic manner terminates all American military activities in Iran, including aid programs, the United States give consideration to the advisability of ceasing its economic programs under Point Four as well. 5. That the United States divest itself of its intermediary role and make no further approach to the Iranians regarding the oil controversy for the time being although possible future plans for settlement continue to be discussed with the British. 6. That the United States make no active attempt to oppose the sale of oil by Iran. 7. That immediate discussions be begun with the British covering the whole range of Iranian problems. 8. That in its informational media and in its official conduct in Iran the United States insofar as may be possible maintain an attitude of detachment, neither supporting nor opposing the Mosadeq Government. 9. That the United States avoid exhibiting undue public concern over the Iranian situation. 10. That the United States, despite the tactical variations in policy it may have to follow in the light of recent developments in Iran, keep always in mind its basic objective of preserving Iranian independence. To this end the United States must be prepared, should the loss of Iran appear imminent, to alter its policies possibly in a drastic manner to make sure that Iran is not lost. 98. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, July 24, 1952. 377. Not for discussion with officials any other govt. 1. It is still too early to make sober assessment of situation here, to make estimate which wld be of any real value of effects which events of 1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified general records, Box 29. Secret; Security Information; Priority. Drafted by Henderson. Repeated to London. The telegram is the Embassy copy as approved and has no time of transmission.
