812  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
186.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Director of Central 
Intelligence Turner1
Washington, May 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Crisis Management
As you perhaps know, Bill Odom, Bob Gates, and Carl Smith con-
vened to discuss your memorandum of May 7 on improving commu-
nications and other support for managing such incidents as the recent 
rescue mission. The following improvements will be made:
—Two additional secure voice terminals will be installed in the Sit-
uation Room. One already exists.
—A program for increasing the number of secure lines into the 
White House has been in progress for some time. As it is completed in 
the coming year, the number of secure lines into the Situation Room will 
increase above the present five by several. We have recently installed a 
new dial directory with a capacity for four additional lines. In emergen-
cies we can divert circuits to use them now.
On your recommendation that an additional private circuit from 
NSA be installed in the White House, we do not have the space and 
personnel to support it in a mode separate from the present terminal 
in the Situation Room. In crises, therefore, we shall continue to use the 
present arrangement.
On maps, graphics, and other support, we shall be delighted with 
any additional resources you are willing to commit to this purpose. A 
secure video link in the Situation Room Conference Room allows us at 
present to look at maps, charts, and other graphics in the NMCC. When 
we have time, however, our procedures call for requests for actual maps 
and graphics from either CIA or DOD.
On the occasion of the rescue mission2 we did not take advan-
tage of the extant facilities in the Situation Room Conference Room, 
but I believe that was an exception, not the rule. With those capabilities 
and planned improvements, the next occasion should prove easier to 
handle.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 15, Crisis Management: 11/78–5/80. Secret. Drafted by Odom.
2 Reference is to the failed April 24 attempt to rescue the U.S. Embassy personnel 
held hostage by Iranian revolutionaries since November 1979.
