1076 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Pearson reports that this morning in the pre-brief for JAB for the Bess meeting both Dennis and Bob made clear to JAB what you wanted, and JAB was comfortable with that. All that notwithstanding, Bessmertnykh pressed hard for a very quick meeting. Dennis in the meeting with Bess made the point that JAB would want to see you in Washington (he says he did all he could to get this put off to the time frame you want). In the end, JAB told Bess you would be in Geneva Wednesday, which represents some delay over what Bess was pushing for. 4. Further on the meeting, Moiseyev will not be there, at least not at the outset. Bess said there is a clear basis to proceed—the 2 letters4—and Moiseyev is not needed at this point. JAB made a pitch for Moiseyev, citing the model in the CFE negotiations. Bess said that Moiseyev might be sent later. 5. No further meetings of Baker/Bess have been set. It was left that the next step would be your meeting with Obukhov. If a meeting of ministers proves necessary, the ministers could get together on short notice. 6. Turning to substance, Bess indicated they have some flexibility on downloading and are thinking of middle ground between our position and theirs. On data denial, Bess proposed accepting our Article 10 and putting all the details into a technical protocol which we would begin now but may not finish by signature. JAB asked him to describe how that could meet our need to know and be able to explain to Congress how the terms of the treaty would be verified. On new types, Bess indicated that the issue was now narrow and once downloading is resolved new types could be resolved. On BW, Bess was pleased with our response and undertook to set up the experts meeting early. On open skies, Bess was receptive to a bilateral effort to try to revive this for the summit. 7. We are making tentative commercial travel reservations leaving early Tuesday evening, and Lint is reserving rooms for the entire group beginning Wednesday night. When I hear back from you, I will tell the others to do the same. In addition I have asked JCS if it might be possible to get a military aircraft leaving Washington later (e.g. midnight) Tuesday night. They will let me know. 8. Added note from Dworken: At 6/20 senior staff, LSE said he wanted to talk to you and Janet about how to proceed concerning the non-proliferation aspects, in view of your “success or lack thereof.” LSE got through his 6/19 hearing with repeats of his previous testimony and a temporizing set of answers (about how you were still out there) that Rope and I talked about with Juster and that LSE and RMK 4 See Documents 218 and 224.
