Sir Cecil Hurst (Great Britain) analysed the equality basis, contending that the United States sought a privileged position in not being represented on the Council and not sharing its responsibility. He opposed the Belgian proposal on the ground that the Court and the League were too young to have a jurisprudence definitely established at this stage. (It was pointed out at the time that this opinion is very much in keeping with British tradition on common law.) He considered that the right of veto in matters requiring unanimous decision must be based on participation in Council meetings and the exercize of the right of vote in that meeting only after all the difficulties of the situation had been explained. At this juncture, Mr. Pilotti (Italy) made a proposal suggesting that the United States be asked to come in to the Court on a footing of equality. If this proposition satisfied the United States, everything would be in order. If, on the other hand, it did not, the Conference would have to apply to the Court as to whether a decision of the Council to apply for an advisory opinion required unanimity or merely a majority vote. This suggestion received the strong backing of France. On the last day on which the Conference met, much attention was devoted to the proposal, made by the Polish representative, as a solution of the problem. It was to the effect that the American Senate’s reservations should first be accepted and then a special Conference should be called to extend the Statutes of the Permanent Court to meet the situation created by the American demands. At such a special conference, the United States should be represented. He believed that the work of meeting the American demands was divided into two stages. The first was the acceptance of the reservations and the second their codification, that is the drawing up of legal formulae required to meet the reservations. Therefore, it was most necessary to meet the second stage with a special conference to which the United States should be invited. At this point, Sir Cecil Hurst (Great Britain) intervened, stating that the Polish proposal, in his opinion, was not complete. How could the United States, (he asked), denounce statutes as provided in the fourth reservation, once it had taken part in modifying them? If this happened, League
