It would appear unnecessary to refer in the Preamble to the Contention of
St. Germain and to the fact that certain powers did not ratify this
convention. It is the Department’s understanding that the convention was
not ratified by Great Britain, France, Italy or Japan, in addition to the
United States. It seems both unnecessary and ambiguous to state that certain
powers were not able “to ratify” this convention.
It is assumed that the sixth paragraph of the Preamble which relates to the
barred zone will be subject to any modification necessary to bring it in line
with the provisions of Article 10 of the Convention as finally determined,
which is to define the zone. This article will be discussed in further detail
below.
ARTICLE 1
Category I (a) of Article 1, which defines the arms and munitions to which
the convention is to be applicable includes vessels of war. This provision
taken in conjunction with Article 3 might be interpreted as sanctioning the
export under license of naval vessels and as a result a case might be
presented where there would be a conflict with the provisions of Article 18
of the Treaty on the Limitation of Naval Armament, signed at Washington
February 6, 1922.33 This point will be further considered under the
discussion of Article 3.
An obvious difficulty arises in connection with the definition of firearms
and ammunition for sport or personal defense and the distinguishing of such
arms from those essentially for war purposes. From the discussions of the
Temporary Mixed Commission it appears that this difficulty has not been
overlooked by the Commission and that the effort has been made not to
interfere unduly with the legitimate trade in sporting arms.
ARTICLE 2
The Department assumes that the reference in Article 2 to the export of
arms and munitions is designed to cover consignments of arms which may
be presented by the government of one country as a subsidy or gift as well
as the export of arms and munitions through purchase by the acquiring
government. The Department would be glad if you could ascertain during
