1977  87
1. What is the present balance of power between the US and the SU?
—All present agreed with the conclusion of the Net Assessment 
that there is a rough overall asymmetrical equivalence in military capa-
bilities and that the US remains significantly ahead of the SU in most 
non-­military aspects of national power.
—With respect to strategic forces, it was agreed that the current 
situation is one of relatively stable essential equivalence, but that uncer-
tainties exist with respect to increasing Soviet accuracy, Soviet civil 
defense, and the apparent asymmetry in the protection of command 
and control capabilities.
—On the Central Front, Warsaw Pact forces exceed those of NATO, 
but neither side can be confident that it will be able to achieve its objec-
tives in a major conflict, with the principal Soviet uncertainty being 
whether NATO will use nuclear weapons.
—In terms of naval and force projection capabilities, the US is 
superior, but uncertainties exist in the eastern Mediterranean and the 
US and the SU have about equal ability to project forces into the Per-
sian Gulf. The Soviets have also demonstrated their ability to support 
Angola-­like proxy interventions.
—With respect to non-­military capabilities, US advantages could 
even be somewhat greater than indicated in the assessment.
2. What is the direction of current trends and how significant are these 
for the balance? There was general agreement with the Net Assessment 
findings that:
—Soviet theater nuclear capabilities in Europe are improving sig-
nificantly, and only concerted Western efforts to fulfill present improve-
ment programs would halt (but not reverse) current trends in their 
favor in the military balance on the Central Front.
—The US retains a political-­ideological attraction for the Third 
World as well as the ability to provide economic and technological ben-
efits. Some uncertainty was expressed as to whether, as the Assessment 
indicates, there had been erosion in the US diplomatic standing in the 
past decade as a result of the increased autonomy and assertiveness of 
Third World countries. The point was also made that this Administra-
tion was identifying itself with a broad segment of world opinion on 
issues such as human rights and Africa.
The discussion also highlighted two dangerous trends which 
might tempt Soviet action:
—­increasing political and economic uncertainties in Western and 
Eastern Europe which could lead Soviet leaders in the midst of a suc-
cession struggle into cautious adventurism;
—­the increased dependence on the West on the Persian Gulf oil 
supplies.
