Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX by intelligence services of third countries can do great harm by fomenting violence, Kolisevski continued. 14. Vice President Mondale thanked President Kolisevski for his remark about our hostages. This has been a terrible experience for Americans. Every successful act of terrorism enhances what the terrorists seek, which is the very antithesis of civilization. Kolisevski said that the GOY has tried to do what it could in the hostage situation but it had not been much. He noted that Iranian Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh will be meeting Foreign Secretary Vrhovec in Belgrade and will raise the hostage situation. We will tell them “Keeping the hostages only shows that the revolution is still unstable, and that this undermines the stability of the region.” 15. Kolisevski asked whether the American side is interested in meeting with Ghotbzadeh in Belgrade. Vice President Mondale replied that he thought this would be inappropriate. Mr. Aaron said that it would be particularly appreciated if the Yugoslavs could learn anything at all about the physical condition of our hostages, who have now been moved out of our Embassy compound. The Vice President added that it is all the more important now that regular visits to the hostages by the Red Cross or other agencies be allowed. 16. The Vice President said that he believes Ghotbzadeh has tried to be as helpful as any Iranian leader during this situation, as to some extent has Bani-Sadr. Kolisevski observed that the pressure from the religious conservatives “on progressive and democratic elements” is enormous. Foreign Secretary Vrhovec plans to discuss with Ghotzbadeh “the entire complex of questions” in the area, and would let us know what transpires. The Vice President said that would be much appreciated. 17. Secretary Vhrovec said that he would like to add a few words more about the general subject of international terrorism. It is perhaps correct to say that we do not always mean the same thing when we use this term. Americans, he said, take the word terrorism in a narrow sense, a particular act or event, and the Yugoslavs take a broader view. Perhaps it would be good to seek a common definition of terrorism after which we could address the situation more efficiently. Vrhovec wanted to emphasize however that cooperation between the two countries in this area has gone very far indeed. He recalled discussions in Washington in 1978 between Presidents Carter and Tito, and also what the Vice President said himself personally on this subject. Former visits to the U.S. by Tito had in some sense been marred by unpleasant moments, but the last visit to Washington President Tito had cherished. Tito frequently recalled that in discussing the visit with his colleagues he felt that real progress had been made on the key issue of violence. 18. President Kolisevski observed that Yugoslavia for years has one of the world’s best records for lack of terrorist activity on its
