800.014Arctic/2
[Document 398]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, June 15, 1925.
No. 627
SIR: I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Canada have reason to
believe, from statements which have lately appeared in the press, that a scientific
expedition, commonly referred to as the MacMillan expedition, organised under the
auspices of the National Geographical [Geographic] Society with the co-operation of
the United States Navy, will shortly be leaving for the far North for the purpose of
exploring and flying over Baffin, Ellesmere, Axel Heiberg and certain other islands
within the northern territories of the Dominion.
As you are doubtless aware, posts of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police have been
established in Baffin and Ellesmere islands and other sections of the Canadian northern
territories, in addition to which Police patrols through the Arctic islands have created
depots of provisions at various centres. There are also a number of Hudson Bay
Company posts in existence at island and mainland points.
In these circumstances, and although the Dominion Government have received no
intimation from the Government of the United States regarding the route of the
MacMillan expedition or of the intention of the members thereof to carry out
explorations through and over Canadian territory, they have requested me to inform
you of their readiness to furnish the expedition with the necessary permits for an
exploring and scientific expedition entering Canadian northern territories, and possibly
desiring to fly over Baffin, Ellesmere and the adjoining islands within the boundaries
of the Dominion. Legislation formally requiring scientific or exploring expeditions to
secure such permits before entering any part of the Canadian northern territories was
enacted by both Houses of Parliament this month.
I would also take this opportunity of assuring you of the Canadian Government’s
readiness to afford the MacMillan expedition any assistance within the power of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the other Canadian officers in the north. In this
connection, I would add that the Dominion Government S. S. Arctic will sail at an early
date on her customary northern patrol, and will carry Royal Canadian Mounted Police
details and reliefs. This vessel will touch at various points and will visit the police and
trading posts on Ellesmere Island.
