Negotiating Channels
357
over to the kidnappers. In particular, the Spanish have reportedly been
told by Ghotbzadeh that he will probably be unable to resist the request
that Laingen be turned over. One way to counter this is publicity. (S)
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
Intelligence Issues:
1. Exfiltration. The restricted group briefly reviewed the status of
our people who are in hiding in Tehran. The Canadians believe that
as long as they can maintain an open embassy, our people are safe in
their custody. The Canadians are worried about the risks of an
attempted exfiltration. Much has been accomplished on the planning
side partly as the result of Peter Tarnoff’s trip to Canada. We have
prepared both American and Canadian passports for their use. The
Canadians prefer that American passports be used. The Canadian
ambassador in Tehran will have the final say on this. A message is
being sent to our people in Tehran via the Canadians.3 (TS)
2. Delta Team. There was a brief discussion of the present status of
planning and training of a possible Delta Team operation.4 General
Jones had spent most of Saturday in Fort Bragg reviewing the training.
Admiral Turner said that they had had people inside the embassy
compound but not inside the areas where the people are actually being
held. He continues to believe that all the hostages are at the embassy,
but he cannot prove it. The level of vigilance at the embassy appears
to be tapering off somewhat. General Jones felt that the risk of a rescue
operation was somewhat less today than it was before. The biggest
risk is that our preparations would be picked up before we could act.
There will be a more detailed discussion of this after the regular SCC
meeting tomorrow. (TS)
3 A copy of the note was attached to a January 3 memorandum from Tarnoff to
Vance and presumably discussed with Carter at the Friday, January 4, foreign policy
breakfast. The note states that the United States and Canada agreed that the six Americans
would be provided with Canadian non-official passports and that Canada would close
down its Embassy in Tehran right before the exfiltration to avoid reprisals. (Department
of State, Records of the Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Presidential Breakfasts
Jan/Feb/Mar 1980) Turner described the details of this and other options in a January
9 memorandum. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
gence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 14, Folder 1: C–372)
4 In its planning stages, the rescue operation envisioned a helicopter movement of
Delta force into Iran, followed by a night attack on the Embassy in Tehran. Once rescued,
the hostages would be moved to an isolated airfield southwest of Tehran, previously
secured by U.S. Army Rangers. The Delta force, the Rangers, and the hostages would
be flown by MC–130s to a third country, and the helicopters would be destroyed on
site. (Paper prepared in the Department of Defense, “Concept of Operations,” November
27; Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–07–0002, Records of
J–3 DDSO, Box 6 Iranian Hostage Crisis 1979–1984, Miscellaneous Intelligence Files
G597–605)
