364  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the Secretary of State and you and I could return to this question, if 
necessary, at our upcoming meeting.
The problem of ALCMs also remains unresolved although some 
approaches to its solution began to emerge during the last round. It 
is obvious that the issues related to ALCMs and heavy bombers must 
be dealt with as a package. In so doing it is important not to allow the 
possibility of eroding the ceiling of 6000 warheads. I think that this knot 
can be untied already in the course of this ministerial meeting.
Finally, the questions of verification. It appears that we can note 
our common desire to ensure maximum confidence of the two sides 
that the future treaty on strategic offensive arms will be observed. Your 
idea of testing verification methods prior to its conclusion appears to 
be useful. At the same time this can hardly be achieved effectively if a 
selective method is used, under which monitoring the facilities for the 
production of strategic offensive arms would apply to mobile ICBMs 
only.
Clearly, under the treaty itself verification will cover all arms falling 
within the category of strategic offensive arms, and verification obliga-
tions must be equal so as to rule out a one-­sided approach. Therefore, 
trial verification measures should be tested with regard to any kind of 
strategic offensive arms to be covered by the future treaty. This would 
provide reliable guarantees of compliance.
We advocate a similar approach to the question of data exchange 
on strategic offensive arms. We are also prepared to accept familiariza-
tion visits on the basis of reciprocity.
I believe that an agreement in principle could be reached between 
our two countries at foreign minister level concerning the preparation 
of trial verification and stability measures and their implementation as 
they become ready. In the course of the upcoming round of the NST 
talks specific parameters and procedures for carrying out such trial 
measures could be negotiated.
It would seem that an agreement on notifications regarding major 
strategic force exercises, which is virtually ready, could be signed at this 
ministerial meeting.
[Omitted here is material not related to START.]
In closing, Mr. President, I wish to express my willingness for fur-
ther exchanges on the issues addressed here and the hope that they will 
advance the cause of peace and security.
Sincerely yours,
M. Gorbachev
