1977  85
IV. Objections and Agreements to Expect
DOD/ISA
Harold Brown’s position is unclear but recent protest within both 
OSD and the JCS has apparently caused second thoughts about press-
ing ahead with the AIMS concept for the PRM–10 PRC meeting. There-
fore, Brown and McGiffert may be more reserved or defensive than we 
originally anticipated in objecting to the Net Assessment.
JCS
The JCS line will be that the Assessment is too optimistic on certain 
military judgments, especially the Central Front and in naval issues, 
but these objections are less important than their fundamental approval 
of the Net Assessment. They will probably agree that it should go to the 
President.
STATE
The State objective is to reduce the Net Assessment to ­insignificance 
and perhaps to emphasize the AIMSes of the DOD side of PRM–10. 
Their tactic is grudging approval of the Assessment as “useful” but 
complete rejection of the “outcomes and strategies” (and implicitly, the 
study itself) as being too narrowly focused on the US–SU competition. 
They will again argue the need to consider 1) other issues of global 
concern and 2) the need for more attention to US–SU cooperation. Ref-
erence to the PRM and to the TOR should put this to rest once again. 
Portions of State (PM, SP) believe that the assessment is too gloomy in 
its judgment of Soviet military capabilities and that the study may, if 
widely publicized, further exacerbate present US–SU tensions.
OMB
Basically they approve the Assessment but will probably recom-
mend that the discussion of national strategies be omitted until these 
are further developed.
CIA
They will probably approve the Net Assessment and call for fur-
ther work on the strategies.
ACDA
Warnke’s view is unclear. He is doing his own homework and 
apparently is intrigued by the methodological inadequacies of the 
­AIMSes. He should not be allowed to divert the discussion from the Net 
Assessment to a critique of the AIMSes. That is for the PRC on Friday!!3
3 July 8.
