International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 981 the US is proposing a major concerted global effort to develop for the poorest sectors in developing countries safe drinking water supplies and safe sanitation in keeping with the recommendations of the UN conference that dealt with this problem, including encouraging countries to have plans by 1980 for the accelerated development of drinking water systems. The US is prepared to join with other countries and international bodies to supply financial assistance to sound projects and to train local personnel. We are also ready to assist where we can and where we are asked, in the design of the plans now being developed. A Comprehensive Strategy to Improve the Quality and Quantity of Community Water Supplies Improvement in the availability and quality of community water supplies has a number of elements which must be integrated and understood for a successful program. The United States, within the context of its initiative and its available resources supports a carefully planned and integrated approach to community water problems. This integrated approach and our assistance should include, as appropriate, the following factors: —Assistance programs should primarily focus on encouraging local management and resource allocation to safe local water supply and sanitation. The problem will not be solved alone by outside assistance which can only be a small percentage of the total funding required. Thus strengthening and providing incentives for national and local governments to undertake their own major efforts would be the main focus for foreign assistance. —A community water program should be integrated into other related areas such as health, family planning and nutritional efforts. Also coordination with agricultural programs, especially irrigation, etc., will be necessary if rural areas are to receive maximum benefit. —An element in a comprehensive strategy to provide safe community water is that of education and communication. Very simple and limited basic information, if communicated to individuals can make a great difference in their nutrition, sanitation and disease situation. This is especially important for expectant mothers and those with young children. Thus a community water initiative should include an educational component. —In this regard, a maximum utilization of existing community structures, including schools, rural extension services, health facilities and local administration. Mass media and local schools should be utilized in providing basic hygiene information. —The interaction between large-scale water projects, community water and sanitation systems and the spread of disease should be
