National Security Policy  901
it forward, there are technical reasons to continue with research and 
development. Secretary Douglas said he did not know whether, when 
we get down the road, we will want to drop this or not. He felt it 
was very important, however, to carry forward development work on 
advanced aircraft. The program as revised calls for two prototype air­
craft. The first could fly in 1962. The President said he understood that 
research would be concentrated on metals, configuration and engines. 
Dr. York said Dr. Kistiakowsky had asked him to state as his view that 
it would be useful to continue the development of this aircraft, but not 
strictly necessary.
The President said he is not at all interested in building an aircraft 
for civilian transport purposes. The question remains somewhat unre­
solved in his mind.
The President then said that anything that weakens our economy 
weakens our defense. He believes every single individual in defense 
must weigh expenditures in terms of what they mean in weakening 
our defense through weakening our economy. He had told the Chiefs 
of Staff they must look for and weed out every expenditure of half a 
million dollars or a million dollars that is not strictly necessary. He rec­
ognized that it would be possible to ask for a tax increase if greater 
expenditures were needed. He pointed out, however, that even during 
the war, when motivation was high, there were gray markets and black 
markets and that higher taxes would begin a widening pattern of tax 
evasion.
He called on the Secretaries to formulate a national defense system 
that all could agree upon and support. Then he said he could insist on 
economy in every other field of government such as public health and 
public works.
Regarding the aircraft carrier, he said he would approve a conven­
tional carrier. He thought the carriers had value in the cold war, but not 
much value in a general war. Dr. York and Mr. Franke said that every­
one was agreed that there is no need for a nuclear carrier. The problem 
is that it is not possible to get a conventional carrier from the Congress.
The President said that the Administration has one more year to 
get the defense establishment in the best possible shape. He thought the 
best minds were assembled in the Joint Chiefs and the top leadership, 
that had ever been there. What he wanted was to get a decision that 
looked good to all, with all supporting it. There must be no undercover 
sniping at the program.
Mr. Gates said the Defense group had gone back from their meet­
ing of a day or two earlier and had taken out everything possible, leav­
ing questions on the carrier and the B–70. He is having studies started 
on continental air defense and on communications and intelligence 
activities to see if further cuts can be made.
