794
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
I thought you might be interested in Imam Jumeh’s conversation
with Howison.3 There is no doubt in my mind that the so-called “pro-
Shah” party which the Imam is organizing is not particularly friendly
to the Prime Minister. We are not particularly disturbed regarding the
warning which Ahmad Aramesh gave to Mr. Howison. There is always
a possibility, of course, that some of us might be made victims of terror-
istic tactics. I believe, however, that Aramesh has talked about this with
Howison primarily to establish a closer personal relationship with
him.4
You of course will recall Mostafa Fateh who has the reputation of
being a particularly loyal British agent. He has been extremely critical
of the United States in the past. He is one of the Iranians who has re-
peatedly charged that nationalization of oil would not have taken place
without U.S. encouragement.
Sincerely,
Loy W. Henderson
Attachment 1
Tehran, October 12, 1953.
SUBJECT
Meeting with Gen. Batmangelich on October 9, 1953
1. At the request of Chief of Staff Batmangelich, the undersigned
visited Batmangelich at his office on 9 October 1953. Deputy Chiefs of
Staff Akhavi and Deihimi were also present.
3 In a conversation of October 14 with Dr. Sayid Hasan Emami, the Imam Jumeh,
Second Secretary of Embassy John M. Howison discussed Jumeh’s intention to form a po-
litical party which “the Shah approved” but “was not sponsoring.” In another conversa-
tion that Howison had on the same day with the Imam Jumeh and Mostafa Fateh, for-
merly of the AIOC, Jumeh commented “that he did not believe Zahedi would ever come
to grips with the oil problem. Zahedi was reinforcing rather than destroying nationalistic
propaganda in order to cater to public opinion.” Both memoranda of conversation are
attached.
4 Howison reported in an attached memorandum to Melbourne, October 15, that
Minister of Labor Ahmad Aramesh had told him that “pro-Mosadeq and Tudeh elements
were planning a putsch which was tentatively scheduled for October 22. As a build up for
this effort they would resort to terrorist methods of which Americans would be primary
targets. He had learned that I ‘might be one of the people’ to be assassinated as a preface to the
uprising. . . . My assumption is that Aramesh was trying either (a) to impress me with his
usefulness to me personally in a manner which would imply that closer professional rela-
tions between us might be very convenient for me as an individual or (b) to impress me
with the seriousness of the putsch allegedly being planned. If the latter was in fact his
aim, it was a highly successful tactic.”
