208  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
statement on page 13 that the provision of airlift could present a major 
problem and the general conclusion that the U.S. has the capability of 
dealing successfully with the situation. It is suggested that conclusion 
#1 be hypothecated to some degree to account for the present lack of 
adequate airlift to move ground forces.
L.M. Stevens, II, Capt. USN for
B.A. Robbins, Jr. Capt. USN
Regional Director, Far East
Attachment
Memorandum From the Director of the Near East, South Asia 
and Africa Region, DOD/ISA (Bergin) to the Director of the 
Office of Planning
Washington, June 11, 1958
SUBJECT
U.S. and Allied Capabilities for Limited Military Operations to 1 July 1961
Reference is made to I–14298/8, returned herewith.
This Regional Office has studied the attached document and, in 
accordance with your request, desires to comment as follows:
This is a well-­constructed study and the conclusions and recommen­
dations appear to grow logically from the facts used, the assumptions 
employed, and the lines of action considered in the formulation of the 12 
hypothetical situations utilized in the development of the study.
Although this Office has been asked to limit itself to major points 
of substance, it feels obligated to comment on the methodology of 
the study, since the results flow inescapably from it and their validity 
depends directly upon it. At the outset, it is agreed that the choice of the 
method of study—­the use of a sampling of hypothetical situations—­
was a reasonable one, probably the only method applicable. The crux 
of the matter is stated in Para 5, page 10: “The military responses are 
hypothetical ... and have not been war-­gamed to develop detailed 
plans.” This is understandable, but it does not prepare one for the 
uncompromisingly self-­satisfied tone of Conclusion 1, page 2: “The 
U.S. has the capability to deal successfully ....” Somehow this is all too 
comfortable, and too comforting, and scarcely squares up with what 
might well develop in the way of “limited war”.
To cite just a single item: our performance to date in creating ade­
quate transportation capabilities for the “quick” application of U.S. 
force—­the sine qua non of a successful response—­has been anything but
