Chapter 5, May–June 1990  735
— We are ready to take note of the US statement regarding coop-
eration with Great Britain with respect to Trident. At the same time we 
believe the US doesn’t have any patterns of cooperation with coun-
tries other than Great Britain that apply to transfer of strategic offen-
sive arms, and the program of cooperation with Great Britain applies 
only to Trident. Therefore, we believe the text must explicitly rule out 
transfer of any other strategic offensive arms besides Trident to Great 
Britain, and must rule out transfer by Great Britain. Regarding the 
proposal that was made by the US in Geneva, concerning the agreed 
statement on transfer, the existing provisions of the conversion or elimi-
nation protocol do not contain provisions for transfer. This is consistent 
with paras II. 9 and VII. 1 of the joint draft text.
— For our part, we are prepared to make the following statement: 
In connection with the Treaty on Reduction and Limitation of Strategic 
Offensive Arms, the USSR is hearby confirming it does not have exist-
ing commitments or patterns of cooperation involving transfer of stra-
tegic offensive arms.
This would constitute a basis for agreement.
Burt: Do I understand you to say under the approach you are 
proposing the US would be able to follow through with the Trident 
II sale to the UK, but beyond that no further cooperation would be 
permitted?
Karpov: Future cooperation can be continued, but must be limited 
to existing practices. In making an exemption from the ban on transfer, 
we always talked about existing practices. Even in the future, that must 
be the limit, from which we are making an exemption.
Burt: So that cooperation cannot go beyond Trident II?
Karpov: Practices that exist today cannot be expanded, and must 
not apply to other strategic systems.
Burt: I am extremely disappointed and worried by what the Soviet 
side has told us today. As I have explained in Moscow and in Geneva, 
US cooperation with the UK on these issues goes back many, many 
years, to World War II. The US Polaris program with Great Britain 
did not interfere with SALT in the 1970s; the US program went ahead. 
The year we concluded SALT II we concluded the agreement to trans-
fer Trident I. The program evolved as arms control also went ahead. 
Subsequently the program evolved again, this time with Trident II. In 
December 1989 we made a detailed statement to your delegation on our 
cooperation with the UK. The UK has a legal sovereign right to main-
tain an independent nuclear deterent. The US attaches great importance 
to that right. We are committed to a broad pattern of cooperation aimed 
at maintaining and modernizing that capability.
I am amazed at this turn of events. Six months ago we made clear 
that we would help Britain maintain and modernize their indepen-
dent nuclear deterent. At the Washington ministerial we discussed 
language for article XIII. We were never told the Soviet position is
