248  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
become much harder in what was being demanded of Chile than was 
the case in the December discussions with Jones in Santiago. Figueroa 
thought this reflected a greater lack of confidence in the Alessandri 
Administration and a degree of self-­confidence brought on by the 
Fund’s success in reaching agreement with Argentina.
Figueroa took a draft reply to the Fund’s letter of December 24 
with him to Buenos Aires for the discussion. The December 24 letter of 
the Fund indicated the conditions which Chile would need to meet in 
the first quarter of this year to draw the quotas provided for under the 
current Stand-By Arrangement which expires on April 1.
The one suggestion which Chile made with respect to the ceil-
ings was that instead of a monthly quota of 8 1/3 million dollars from 
Central Bank exchange sales to importers a total figure for the three 
months be set of 25 million dollars to allow greater flexibility. Jones indi-
cated that he was in complete agreement with the draft reply except for 
Chile’s position with respect to these exchange sales. Figueroa did not 
explain why Jones considered a lump sum figure for the first quarter a 
problem, or how firm Jones seemed to be on this point. Jones indicated 
that the Fund would like to have the letter signed by someone other 
than Maschke. Vergara said that legally Maschke was the only one who 
could sign but he did not say that there was not some other way to 
meet the Fund’s requirements on this point. Although not mentioned 
in Figueroa’s memorandum, Jones indicated that the Banco Central 
should be completely reorganized, apparently with the objective of 
eliminating the Congressional members from the Board of Directors 
and possibly others. Vergara said he was already working with Radical 
Party leaders to see what could be done about changing the complex-
ion of the Bank. He thought there was a possibility that this might be 
accomplished and he was going to continue to work on it although 
there also was the possibility that he might be defeated. He also felt that 
no change in the law would be possible until after Congress had acted 
on the Administration’s economic proposals. Jones also considered that 
a change in management was essential, this apparently being aimed at 
Maschke, especially, but also at Mackenna.
As indicated in the Figueroa memorandum, Jones and Bertens 
questioned various aspects of the Administration’s stabilization pro-
gram and also indicated certain requirements that Chile would have 
to meet in reaching agreement with the Fund. They thought the wage 
increase should be less and that the idea of general and automatic 
adjustments should be eliminated as soon as conditions permit. They 
made an especial point that any housing program should be financed 
exclusively from private savings. They said that the adjustment made in 
the exchange rate from 835/837 to 989/991 was not adequate and that 
the establishment of a single exchange rate responsive to market forces
