402 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Salvador the situation looked fine to him and that the government was well in control of political conditions and definitely appeared to be stable. With regard to Honduras he believed that Villeda Morales [illegible in the original]. He said that there were two governments in existence—Villeda’s and the Army. He also remarked that as far as he could determine subversive activities were being carried on by political exiles and that apparently Villeda was not able to control them to the extent he should. In connection with Nicaragua, he said everybody was aware of the situation there, that the government was stable and anti-­ communist. He appeared to believe that Nicaragua offered no political problem. In regard to Guatemala he said that Ydígoras was getting his government well organized, that he appeared to have things under control, and was very much aware of the leftists within the country. In connection with the latter, he said Ydígoras had already expressed himself against communism and believed he would in the near future take appropriate action to curtail communist activities. With the exception of Honduras he apparently felt the Central American countries had stable governments. Attitude Towards Development of Electrical Power Mr. Echandi said that he favored the development of electric power by Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad (I.C.E.), leaving the distribution to private companies such as the American and Foreign Power’s Subsidiary. CR–6. Memorandum from the Deputy Director of the Office of Middle American Affairs (Stewart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1  Washington, May 30, 1958. SUBJECT Tax Benefit for Countries in which United Fruit Company Operates. In a conversation with President Echandi of Costa Rica on May 11,2 he stated that the Costa Rican Government’s possibility of balancing 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 818.11/5–3058. Confidential. 2 Stewart left Washington, May 5, to attend Echandi’s Inauguration at San José on May 8.
