Chemical and Biological Weapons he sensed there was some receptivity to this idea but that the first step was to talk to our allies. All agreed. The meeting ended at 10:37 a.m. (S) Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 14, 1978 SUBJECT SCC Meeting on Chemical Weapons (C) The SCC recently reviewed the U.S. chemical weapons posture. The Summary of Conclusions is at Tab A.2 An issue concerning the future of the U.S. chemical weapons stockpile requires your decision. (S) Defense argues that an improved U.S. retaliation capability is essential to the deterrence of chemical warfare and advocates the inclusion of a binary production facility in the FY 1980 Defense budget. (Binary implies that munitions are filled with two relatively harmless chemicals which when mixed after firing form the toxic agent. The advantage is improved safety in handling and storage.) Although an actual production decision would not be made for several years, the intent is to replace and increase the present U.S. stockpile with modern binary munitions. The cost in FY 1980 is only $18 million; however, the ultimate cost of the program including production could approach $2.0 billion. (S) On the other hand, State, ACDA and OMB acknowledge the deterrent role of the U.S. stockpile but maintain that because of the political sensitivities associated with chemical warfare, it is not possible to achieve a much improved retaliatory posture. All agree that in order to improve the U.S. retaliatory capability additional munitions must be forward deployed to locations in Europe. Our allies remain very negative on this issue, based not only on safety which binary munitions resolve in part, but more importantly on even acknowledging that NATO is considering the prospect of chemical warfare in Europe. In addition, Congressional attitudes are quite hostile to the idea of chemical weap- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 100, SCC
