covering the meetings of the Technical Advisers on the subject of debts will
be of especial interest.9
Much remains to be done on this question, since the disappearance of a
responsible government in Peking coupled with the uncompromising
attitude of the British Delegation made it impossible to evolve the larger
scheme of rehabilitating Chinese finances through the means of interim
Customs surtaxes in excess of those authorized by the Washington Treaty.
The portion of the funds which will be allotted for the payment of debts
from the Washington surtax revenues will afford but little relief when the
whole debt question is taken into consideration. This gives promise of being
more difficult to solve than any other problem within the scope of the
Conference when negotiations are resumed in the autumn.
Numerous memoranda, statements, pamphlets and tables prepared in
connection with this subject form enclosures under the heading of
Consolidation of Debts.9a
Washington Treaty Surtaxes.
The question of implementing the Washington Treaty arose more often
during the Conference than did any other question. A reference to the first
section of this report will reveal the oft-repeated efforts which were made to
bring into force, with as little delay as possible, the Washington Treaty, a
task which, at the beginning of the Conference, seemed comparatively
simple. On each and every occasion the Chinese Delegation would find
some reason, either real or fancied, to defer action. It was not until all hope
was abandoned of being able to negotiate, before next autumn at least, the
larger interim surtax treaty, that the necessity of agreeing upon a draft treaty
for submission to the Chinese in fulfillment of the Washington Treaty arose
in the informal meetings of the Delegates and Technical Advisers. The sub-
committee of Six Delegates appointed for this purpose, who sat in formal
session, had substantially agreed upon a draft, but the Chinese member was
unwilling to accept it. (See official Minutes of meeting of March 18, 1926).
At an informal meeting of the Delegates on May 6 it was agreed that, since
no further formal meetings had been held of the Committee of Six, and
none was in prospect, the American Delegation should produce a new draft.
