742  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
D. Mr. Lius need for continued treatment beyond his initial period 
in hospital is also fact. Between 1950 and 1951, Mr. Liu had apparently 
reached stage at which travel would have been possible. Hospital 
authorities, desiring return Mr. Liu his home if possible, communicated 
with Mr. Lius father in Hong Kong, only one Mr. Lius relatives who had 
taken trouble correspond with hospital about him. They did not say 
Mr. Liu had no further need treatment. On contrary, that was clearly 
communicated to Mr. Lius father, and father expressly requested 
­hospital continue its treatment.
E. Hospitals treatment Mr. Liu was in fact continued at public 
expense so long, and only so long, as there appeared be no responsible 
relative Mr. Lius ready and able assume responsibility providing him 
care he needed. As soon as my govt. was informed, and was able pass 
info on to hospital that Mr. Lius wife had expressed wish to have him 
return, arrangements were made and carried out for Mr. Lius prompt 
departure. Mr. Liu sailed from San Francisco Jan 8 on ship President 
Wilson, and arrived Hong Kong Feb 1.
F. These arrangements Mr. Lius departure were communicated to 
Indian Embassy, which expressed its entire satisfaction. Arrangements 
were also made known to Red Cross Society your country. Arrange­
ments were made known you here. Your govt thus knew Mr. Liu was 
arriving Hong Kong Feb 1. Your govt also knew, as I made it clear to 
you here, Mr. Liu was not fully recovered, and still required care and 
attention.
G. Why, if your govt was genuinely concerned about Mr. Lius wel­
fare, were no arrangements made by your authorities for his reception 
and care? Why did Mr. Lius wife not arrive Hong Kong until Feb 5, four 
days after Mr. Lius arrival?
H. I am afraid, Mr. Ambassador, and I say this with reluctance, 
these facts point to conclusion as inescapable as it is repugnant. Quite 
deliberately, your govt chose exploit for propaganda purposes Mr. Lius 
unfortunate mental condition.
I. This conclusion, repugnant as it is, is completely consistent with 
the recent efforts erect propaganda smoke screen behind which conceal 
stark failure your govt carry out provisions our agreed announcement 
Sept 10 with respect return Americans your country.
J. You stated at our last meeting you expected to have your atten­
tion called to names of additional Chinese in U.S., to 250, or to 2,500. 
And why not? Unhampered by any regard for facts or evidence, and 
without any consideration for desires individuals or their families, why 
could not your govt multiply these numbers endlessly?
K. Mr. Ambassador, there are 13 Americans in prison your country. 
You know they are there, I know it, and world knows it. We all know
