Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1087 — If there is a reciprocity problem here, we can add a provision that if we exempt airbases for such operations you could exempt the same number of airbases without actually conducting such operations. — We can add that if an inspection is cancelled, we will pay for the wasted trip. Where you have concerns and sensitivities, we are prepared to take them into account. We have demonstrated that. But you can’t just say no. We need an exemption for heavy bomber contingency operations. (If he suggests that provisions for operational dispersals be used:) Those provisions are for major confrontations between the US and the Soviet Union. We should not pervert them for these lesser operations. Operational dispersal provisions would cause a massive cessation of inspections. Should not use an axe when a scalpel will do. (If he proposes the US make a unilateral statement:) A unilateral statement can’t change the treaty’s inspection rights. We need something formal. PPCM/SSI At Houston we settled the question of what facilities are subject to PPCM. Last week in Geneva during the Bartholomew/Obukhov talks, a subgroup discussed a package that would deal with the remaining issues, such as the list of facilities subject to mandatory suspect-site inspection, and what size criteria will govern inspections at the PPCM portal, at declared facilities, and at facilities subject to suspect-site inspection. The problem they were not able to deal with is quota inspections—a quota of inspections at the portal to allow us to observe objects smaller than complete missiles in canisters. In our view quota inspections are essential in order to verify that what comes out of the portal are solid rocket motors and fully assembled missiles, and not stages. You say that stages don’t come out, only fully assembled missiles. We need to verify that, and the way to do it is with an annual quota of inspections. If you can accept this, the whole package will fall into place. (FYI: In Geneva, the strategy we adopted was to try to get PPCM down to one issue—quota inspections—and get stage dimensions down to one issue—how to measure length—and then consider possible tradeoffs. Until then, we would not show flexibility on either point.)
