Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
179
priate institutional arrangements for the North-South dialogue to con-
tinue. The United States believes that CIEC, itself, should continue to be
available as a forum for such discussions. In the interim, we would sug-
gest that our governments establish a group of recognized experts to
monitor the implementation of the ideas being discussed here and to
keep our governments abreast of the opportunities for further coopera-
tion. As a part of this effort, the experts might prepare for the North-
South discussions which we hope will come about by developing an
overall program to meet basic needs.
42.
Paper Prepared by the President’s Assistant (Jordan)1
Washington, June 1977
[Omitted here are the title page and the table of contents.]
REVIEW OF FOREIGN POLICY INITIATIVES
Because you have chosen to be active in many areas of foreign
policy during your first year in office, there will evolve in the near fu-
ture a number of critical decisions that will have to be made. And each
of these decisions will be difficult politically and will have domestic im-
plications that will require the support and understanding of the Amer-
ican people and the Congress.
The most significant of these decisions relate to specific countries
and/or areas of the world. As best I can determine, those decisions
which will require action on our part and/or the political support of the
people and Congress are:
—The Middle East
—SALT II
—AFRICA
—Normalization of relations with Cuba and Vietnam
—Treaty with Panama
—Withdrawal of troops from Korea2
1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,
Container 34, Foreign Policy—Domestic Politics Memo—Hamilton Jordan Memo, 6/77.
Confidential; Eyes Only. Jordan sent the paper to the President under an undated cover
memorandum in which he explained that he attempted “to measure the domestic polit-
ical implications of your foreign policy and outline a comprehensive approach for win-
ning public and Congressional support for specific foreign policy initiatives.”
2 The President underlined the topics in each point.
