Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
657
129.
Address by President Carter to the Nation1
Washington, October 1, 1979
Peace and National Security
Good evening.
I want to talk with you about the subject that is my highest con-
cern, as it has been for every President. That subject is peace and the se-
curity of the United States.
We are at peace tonight, as we have been at peace throughout the
time of my service in this office. The peace we enjoy is the peace of the
strong. Our national defenses are unsurpassed in the world. Those de-
fenses are stronger tonight than they were 2 years ago, and they will be
stronger 2 years from now than they are tonight, because of carefully
planned improvements that are going forward with your support and
with the support of the Congress.
Our program for modernizing and strengthening the military
forces of the NATO Alliance is on track, with the full cooperation and
participation of our European Allies. Our strategic nuclear forces are
powerful enough to destroy any potential adversary many times over,
and the invulnerability of those forces will soon be further assured by a
new system of powerful mobile missiles. These systems are designed
for stability and defense.
Beyond these military defenses, we are on the threshold of a great
advance in the control of nuclear weapons—the adoption of the second
strategic arms limitation treaty, SALT II.
This evening, I also want to report to you about the highly publi-
cized Soviet brigade in Cuba and about its bearing on the important re-
lationship between our Nation and the Soviet Union.
This is not a simple or easy subject. The United States and the So-
viet Union are the two most powerful nations on Earth, and the rela-
1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 1802–1806. The President delivered
his address at 9 p.m. from the Oval Office at the White House. The address was broadcast
live on radio and television. The Department transmitted the text of the speech to all dip-
lomatic and consular posts in telegram 258451, October 2. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790451–0362) Brzezinski recalled that the President had di-
rected him to begin preparing the speech in mid-September, “and I did so with special
emphasis on the wider character of Soviet activities in the Third World, stressing that
these were not compatible with a stable detente.” (Power and Principle, p. 350) In his diary
entry for the weekend of September 29–30, the President recounted: “Because the issues
were so profoundly complicated—ourselves, Cuba, the Soviets, SALT, Congress, pol-
itics—this has been the most laborious speech preparation of my life.” After the address,
he offered the following assessment: “The speech went over well, and the general result
was exactly what we wanted: to defuse the Soviet troop issue and let the nation realize
the importance of SALT. It was a quiet but good birthday.” (White House Diary, p. 358)
