876
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Also, although our State and Defense counterparts do not all agree
with us on this point, we believe that the President should be apprised
of the fact that his policy guidance has resulted in a program that is
at a significant stage of development. You might want to discuss with
Vance and Brown how the President might be informed.6 (C)
6 Carter was informed of the decision in an Evening Report from Vance. In a
July 18 memorandum from Larrabee and Kimmitt to Brzezinski recommending that no
guidance for Brown and Vance was necessary, Robert Hunter commented that the
President “Noted OK in the margin” of the Evening Report. (Ibid.)
267.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
Belgrade, September 13, 1979, 1004Z
6799. Military handle as Specat Exclusive. State for Under Secretary
Newsom. ASD/ISA for Asst Secretary McGiffert. Subject: (S) The US-
Yugoslav Military Relationship. Ref: 78 Belgrade 9176.2
1. S-entire text
2. I have, since returning from the US last month, reviewed the
progress (or better, the lack thereof) in the US-Yugoslav military rela-
tionship. It is not a pretty picture, as the case studies detailed later in
this cable will show. In fact, we have done so badly that I have come
to doubt that the USG is capable of managing the program we set for
ourselves several years ago; instead, I fear that we are on the way to
convincing the Yugoslav military either that we were never serious or
that we are incompetent. In either case, we risk damage not only to
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790418–0416.
Secret; Priority; Exdis, Noforn. Also sent Priority to DODASD/ISA. Sent for information
to CNO, CDA, CSAF, USCINCEUR, CDRUSASAC, CJCS, and USNMRSHAPE.
2 In telegram 9176 from Belgrade, December 20, 1978, Eagleburger detailed several
instances in which the costs of military equipment quoted to Yugoslav officials ended
up being significantly higher. Eagleburger wrote that “the evolving US-Yugoslav military
relationships are not at a point where ‘mini-shocks’” like the ones described in the
telegram “can be absorbed with no set-backs.” “The Yugoslavs have a healthy case of
paranoia” he continued, and “I fail to see why we have to try to prove to them that we
are both malicious and incompetent.” Continuation of the FMS programs with Yugo-
slavia, the Ambassador concluded, would hinge on minimizing any more mistakes.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780528–1027)
