36  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Planning Board Recommendation: Accordingly, the Planning Board 
recommends that the National Security Council accept the validity of 
the thesis that:
The tremendous changes in weapons technology will not, in the 
immediate future, alter the need for substantially our present overseas 
base system. Most probably for at least five years, this system will remain 
essential (a) to maintain and disperse our deterrent to general war; (b) 
to maintain tactical forces to deter and cope with local aggression; and 
(c) to support foreign policy objectives. In fact, a small net expansion of 
our base system may be required, at least initially, to accommodate new 
weapons and to meet new Soviet offensive techniques.
OTHER CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
2. IRBM’s Around the Sino-Soviet Periphery.
Statement of the Issue (Report, pp. 7–10): In view of the prospective 
Soviet ICBM capability and the resulting vast increase in the vulnerabil­
ity of the continental United States, our ability to retain the edge in the 
deterrent race requires the positioning of IRBM’s at widely-­dispersed 
bases around the Sino-Soviet periphery.
Such positioning must be carefully planned to avoid pressing the 
Sino-Soviet bloc to the point that may incline it to miscalculate our objec­
tives and conclude that our intentions have become aggressive, thereby 
making it feel obliged to react violently. Because the untested state of 
the IRBM’s prevents us from placing full reliance on them and reducing 
our dependence on the manned bomber, and because existing air bases 
will not always be the most suitable IRBM locations, the IRBM program 
will necessitate some enlargement of our overseas base system.
Planning Board Comment: With respect to NATO, the U.S. policy 
decision on this matter was taken prior to the NATO Council meeting 
in Paris in December 1957. The positioning of IRBM’s in other selected 
strategic locations around the Sino-Soviet bloc might be considered a 
logical corollary on the grounds that such positioning would represent 
essentially only a modernization of our current forward strategic forces 
and would be designed only to maintain the present strategic balance 
between the United States and the USSR. Although the stationing of 
IRBM’s outside the NATO area would probably not in itself cause the 
USSR to retaliate with actions that would run serious risk of general 
war, it might produce a strong Soviet reaction in some areas, and would 
cause the USSR to step up its efforts to persuade host nations to restrict 
our freedom to use bases.
Planning Board Recommendation: Accordingly, the Planning Board 
recommends that the National Security Council agree that:
In view of the prospective Soviet ICBM capability and the result­
ing increase in the vulnerability of the continental United States, our 
continued ability to deter general war will be better ensured by the
