154
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
40.
Draft Text Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for
Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)1
undated
A FRAMEWORK FOR PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST
AGREED AT CAMP DAVID
Anwar al-Sadat, President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, and Me-
nachem Begin, Prime Minister of Israel met with Jimmy Carter, Presi-
dent of the United States of America, at Camp David from September 5
to
, 1978, and have agreed on the following framework for peace
in the Middle East. They invite other parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict
to adhere to it.
Preamble
The search for peace in the Middle East must be guided by the
following:
—After four wars over thirty years, despite intensive human ef-
forts, the Middle East, which is the cradle of civilization and the birth-
place of three great religions, does not yet enjoy the blessings of peace.
The people of the Middle East yearn for peace so that the vast resources
of the region can be turned to the pursuits of peace and so that this area
can become a model for coexistence and cooperation among nations.
—The historic initiative of President Sadat and Israel’s warm re-
ception of his mission have created an unprecedented opportunity for
peace which must not be lost if the peoples of the Middle East are to
spare this generation and the generations to come the tragedies of war.
—The provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration of Principles of In-
ternational Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
Among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
and the accepted norms of international law and legitimacy now pro-
vide accepted standards for the conduct of relations among all states.
—The only agreed basis for a peaceful settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict is United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 sup-
plemented by Resolution 338.2 Resolution 242 in its preamble empha-
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 11, The Secretary Camp David [Briefing Book].
Secret. Drafted by Saunders on September 9. For Vance’s discussion of the drafting
process for this document, see Hard Choices, p. 220.
2 For the full text of United Nations Security Council Resolution 338, adopted una-
nimously on October 22, 1973, see The Quest for Peace, p. 40.
