266  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
DISCUSSION
I. THE GENERAL SINO-SOVIET MILITARY REACTION
A. Factors Bearing on the Initial Communist Decision to Attack
7. In our view the crucial determinant in any Sino-Soviet decision 
to initiate local aggression, or subsequently to respond in kind to US 
use of nuclear weapons in countering such aggression, would be the 
Sino-Soviet estimate of the resultant risks of general war. We continue 
to estimate that respect for US nuclear power will remain such that 
neither the Soviets nor the Chinese Communists are likely to pursue 
courses of action which in their judgment seriously risk general war. 
Largely for this reason, we do not believe that any of the four hypothet­
ical cases of Communist aggression considered in this estimate is likely 
to occur through mid-1961.
8. We must assume, however, for the purposes of this estimate, that 
such aggression has taken place. Several consequences flow from this 
assumption. Most important, the Communists would have launched 
this aggression only after careful calculation of the likelihood of US 
intervention and of the resultant risks of general war. Both US state­
ments and the general posture of the US forces in the Far East would 
almost certainly lead them to calculate that US intervention with 
nuclear weapons would be the only immediately effective US response.
9. The most likely calculations, therefore, under which the 
Communists would decide to launch local aggression in the Far East 
would be that the chances that the US would be deterred from even a 
local nuclear response were sufficient to justify taking the risk and that 
even if the US did respond, their own capabilities were sufficient both 
to cope with this reaction and to deter the US from broadening the con­
flict to general war. This circumstance might arise in the case of a sub­
stantial increase in Communist capabilities vis-­á-­vis those of the US, 
especially in the Far East—­as for example by the possible stationing of 
nuclear weapons and advanced delivery vehicles in Communist China. 
Particularly in this situation, the Bloc leaders might estimate that the 
US would be unwilling to accept the risks and the adverse Free World 
reactions involved in responding with nuclear weapons to Bloc attacks, 
and being unable to respond effectively in any other manner, would 
choose not to do so at all.
10. We believe it most likely that any Communist aggression in the 
Far East would be undertaken only in full consultation with Moscow, 
since the Chinese, North Koreans, or North Vietnamese would almost 
certainly insist upon certain guarantees of Soviet support in event of 
US retaliation beyond their capabilities to counter. However, we cannot 
exclude the possibility of unilateral action on the part of the Chinese 
Communists, based on their calculation that despite Soviet reluctance
