Romania
697
219.
Editorial Note
On October 12, 1979, the Department of State informed the Embas-
sies in Romania and Yugoslavia that Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
was happy to accept the standing invitation to visit the two countries
and planned to do so in December. (Telegram 267704 to Bucharest and
Belgrade, October 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790469–0222) Romanian Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei had
transmitted the invitation through Counselor of the Department of
State Matthew Nimetz during their May meeting in Bucharest. In a June
5 memorandum to Vance, Nimetz recommended a visit, suggesting it
“could be very useful in coaxing the Romanians to reform some of the
bureaucratic practices that lead to continuing human rights difficul-
ties.” Vance approved the recommendation on June 7 and wrote “OK.
In the fall” in the margin. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the
Secretariat Staff, S/S Memoranda for 1979, Lot 81D117, Box 1, Principal
Memo File, Apr–May–Jun)
In the early morning of November 4, Iranian supporters of Ayatol-
lah Khomeini occupied the grounds of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran
and took U.S. citizens there hostage. Initially organized as a protest
against the Carter administration’s decision to allow the Shah of Iran
to enter the United States for cancer treatment, the protest quickly
evolved into a political tool used by Khomeini to secure and expand
his control over the revolution. Vance, convinced that the release could
be secured via diplomacy, focused on coordinating the diplomatic
efforts to secure the release of the hostages.
Official reaction in Romania to the taking of the hostages was
initially muted. According to Embassy reports, the government-con-
trolled press ran only two stories in November on the hostage situation.
The low-key statements, the Embassy suggested, were typical of Roma-
nia’s way of dealing with difficult issues in the press. (Telegram 7719
from Bucharest, November 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790537–0083) In telegram 302493 to Bucharest,
November 22, the Department reported on the November 20 meeting
between Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Rob-
ert Barry and Romanian Deputy Chief of Mission Boris Ranghet. Barry
told Ranghet that given Romania’s desire to continue to improve
relations with the United States, “it was difficult to understand why
Romania had not taken any steps to express publicly its condemnation
of the events in Iran.” Barry also stressed that “this was a case in which
Romania would be expected by the US public and US Government to
take a stand.” Failure to do so, Barry told Ranghet, “would be inter-
preted by the United States as inconsistent with the GOR’s oft-
