1184  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
(b) Such exercise shall be considered to be completed as of the date 
and time specified in the notification provided in accordance with para-
graph 17 of Section II of the Notification Protocol.
(c) The air bases for heavy bombers and air bases for former heavy 
bombers specified in the notification provided in accordance with para-
graph 16 of Section II of the Notification Protocol shall be considered to 
be involved in such exercise.
(d) Such exercise shall begin no more than one time in any calendar 
year, and shall be completed no later than 30 days after it begins.
(e) Such exercise shall not be conducted during the entire period of 
time provided for baseline data inspections.
(f) During such exercise by a Party, the other Party shall not have 
the right to conduct inspections of the air bases for heavy bombers and 
air bases for former heavy bombers involved in the exercise. The right 
to conduct inspections of such air bases shall resume three days after 
notification of the completion of a major strategic exercise involving 
heavy bombers has been provided in accordance with paragraph 17 of 
Section II of the Notification Protocol.
(g) Within the 30-day period following the receipt of the notifica-
tion of the completion of such exercise, the receiving Party may make a 
request for cooperative measures to be carried out in accordance with 
subparagraph 1(c) of Article XII of this Treaty at one of the air bases 
involved in the exercise. Such a request shall not be counted toward the 
quota provided for in paragraph 2 of Article XII of this Treaty.
ARTICLE XIV
1. Each Party shall have the right to conduct operational dispersals 
of deployed mobile launchers of ICBMs and their associated missiles, 
ballistic missile submarines, and heavy bombers. There shall be no limit 
on the number and duration of operational dispersals, and there shall 
be no limit on the number of deployed mobile launchers of ICBMs and 
their associated missiles, ballistic missile submarines, or heavy bomb-
ers involved in such dispersals. When an operational dispersal begins, 
all strategic offensive arms of a Party shall be considered to be part of 
the dispersal. Operational dispersals shall be conducted as provided 
for below:
(a) An operational dispersal shall be considered to have begun as 
of the date and time specified in the notification provided in accordance 
with paragraph 1 of Section X of the Notification Protocol.
(b) An operational dispersal shall be considered to be completed 
as of the date and time specified in the notification provided in accor-
dance with paragraph 2 of Section X of the Notification Protocol.
