3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
168
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
—Without directly mentioning the President, Politburo member
Romanov reportedly also mentioned to a visiting West European that
the US SALT proposals were “the greatest display of cynicism imagin-
able” because they traded on European nuclear vulnerability while
guaranteeing the US immunity.
—At a Bastille Day reception in Moscow, senior Soviet military of-
ficers complained about the administration and one contrasted Presi-
dent Carter unfavorably with his last four predecessors, saying the
President did not seem to want to strengthen ties with the Soviet
Union.
—A Soviet Foreign Ministry official complained to a visiting
American that President Carter is not prepared to deal with the Soviets
as equals and termed his stance on human rights as “a well-thought-
out, well-planned campaign of psychological warfare, as a special in-
strument to be employed in the struggle against the socialist
countries.”
Early Hopes and Doubts in Perspective
The Soviets apparently calculated initially that the President
would move quickly to revive detente momentum which they viewed
as having slowed to a virtual standstill during the US election cam-
paign. To this end, Brezhnev on the eve of the inauguration volun-
teered assurance to the new President that the Soviets would not put
him to a “test of nerves.” In his January 18 speech at Tula, Brezhnev ex-
pressed the mood of the moment when he said: “We are prepared
jointly with the new administration in the United States to accomplish a
new major advance in relations between our two countries.”
Nonetheless, Soviet apprehensions about the new administration
were evident. President Podgorny told Ambassador Toon two days be-
fore the inauguration that while he was hopeful the President would
move quickly to strengthen ties with the Soviet Union, he and his col-
leagues were somewhat disturbed at the “negative noises” of the elec-
tion campaign. He made clear “negative noises” meant how much in-
fluence proponents of a harder policy toward the Soviet Union would
have on the new President. Pravda January 15, for example, had ac-
cused President Ford in his last days in office of yielding to pressures
from the military-industrial complex in approving higher military
spending and in trying to saddle the new administration with this
policy. Similar wariness was reflected in Mezhdunarodnaya Zhizn
(signed to press January 19) which warned that toughness, “haggling
stubbornly” or exerting pressure on the Soviet Union “to obtain the
maximum from it” was an approach without prospects, and that “any
attempts to exert pressure and to test our country’s will and the sta-
bility of its positions on particular questions will be resolutely
rebuffed.”
