680
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
President’s sharp sense of urgency, I am moved to express my concern
that our message to the Allies on Iran is not getting across in a blunt
and unambiguous way. In his Wednesday meeting with the Allied
Ambassadors, Secretary Vance declined to speculate on military
options open to the United States if current sanctions proved insuffi-
cient. But, according to the reporting telegram, “he did make clear
that there remain additional economic steps as well as non-economic
measures.”3 Following this meeting I received several calls from Euro-
pean Embassies which indicated that they had interpreted Vance’s
remarks to mean that we were not seriously considering the use of
military force and that the Allies had some time in which to decide
what additional measures, if any, they should take against Iran. This
later point was reinforced in the Aide Mémoire that we sent out on
Tuesday4 which said “we also strongly urge that Allied Governments
give serious consideration to a complete break to relations in Iran in
the weeks ahead, if Iranian authorities continue to reject efforts to achieve
a peaceful solution.” (S)
I worry that Vance’s comments to the Ambassadors, which were
quite different from those of the President, may have contributed to
the vapid statement by the Nine yesterday in Lisbon.5 If we have in
our own mind a clear deadline for European action against Iran (the
President told Stobbe we had only a few days in which we could
continue to act in moderation), we should so inform the Allies immedi-
ately. If we do not, and if we act militarily, they will certainly charge
that they were surprised again by an Administration speaking with
more than one voice and that they had been led to believe that more
punitive steps on our part were not imminent. Such a straightforward
message from us would also, of course, increase the likelihood that the
Allies will come around. (S)
3 As reported in telegram 93885 to selected diplomatic posts, April 10. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800179–0127)
4 April 8. See Document 246.
5 See footnote 3, Document 247.
