1955  89
for third party representations. I said I would expect any statement 
from his side to include whatever action they had taken with regard 
to Americans and that I would hope and expect I would include cate­
gorical statement similar to that we have made concerning departure 
Chinese together with arrangements for third party representation. I 
said this was my tentative thinking at the moment not a formal pro­
posal but that I would embody my thoughts into a specific proposal at 
our next meeting. Wang strongly resisted concept saying it would show 
we had not been able agree. I pointed out that need not be case, that 
he had perhaps misunderstood my concept which was that the unilat­
eral statements of which the other would take note would be released 
by joint agreement. He would not agree to concept, pushing hard for 
“joint announcement” along lines July 25 statement and our agreement 
on agenda. I said rather than discuss further would give him concrete 
suggestion next meeting.
I shared Wang’s concern over amount of time spent agenda item 
one pointing out it could have immediately and expeditiously been 
resolved by release all Americans in China. This would have “laid 
sound basis” upon which we could enter into mutually acceptable 
agreement on third party representation and permit fruitful discussion 
other practical matters.
Next meeting Tuesday, August 16, 10 am. Comments follow.
Gowen
78.	
Telegram 452 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 13, 1955, 6 p.m.
452. From Johnson.
At sixth meeting, August 13, 10 a.m., Wang led off reading pre­
pared statement. Said at last meeting he had advanced draft agreement 
concerning return civilians both sides to their respective countries, 
based on arrangement I had suggested. He considered that although 
arrangement could fully meet requirements American nationals in 
China could not fully meet those of Chinese nationals US. Nevertheless 
in interest reaching agreement he had basically accepted my proposal. 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1355. Confidential.
