1955  611
in the talks. This problem has been given very serious consideration 
here. The consensus is that on the one hand the time has come when we 
must adopt a more forceful position with respect to Chinese ­Communist 
failure to implement the Agreed Announcement and on the other the 
Communists are not in a favorable position to break off the talks. These 
are the considerations which led to the decision to undertake tactics 
possibly involving greater risk of a break. The matter was discussed 
with the Secretary himself and he agreed that the time had come to 
take a stiffer attitude. I know that you have felt in the past that your 
basic instructions to keep the talks going frequently prevented you 
from taking as strong a line as you would have liked. The feeling here 
now is that we have in the talks accomplished a good deal up to this 
point toward our objective of making it more difficult for the Chinese 
­Communists to resort to force and that we can now take greater risks 
than heretofore.
How useful to you are the FLDNP and ALDLP figures sent each 
week? I notice that you have not used them recently in the meetings, 
and that in any case, the Chinese do not pay much attention to them. 
Their compilation requires a considerable investment in time by I&NS 
and CA. Unless you feel otherwise we plan to discontinue this work.
With regard to the details in the cases of missing US military per­
sonnel, we have tracked down some of the Chinese newspapers in 
which there are probably references to some of the 450 men on your 
list. It will require a lot at work to go through the papers and find the 
names. Therefore, we do not plan to undertake it until such time as it 
appears you may be called upon to take up this matter again in Geneva.
I am enclosing a copy of a speech made by Nehru September 6 
which you may wish to refer to next time you discuss renunciation of 
force with Wang. You will note on page I–2 that Nehru has explicitly 
renounced force with regard to Goa.
We have received a request for the original Chinese version of 
Wang’s letter of September 16. If any of your staff has the time we 
should appreciate your sending us copies both of this letter and of the 
Chinese draft Agreed Announcement on the renunciation of the use of 
force in Chinese.
Mr. Hoover and Mr. Robertson believe that we have been sitting on 
the story of the mistreated Americans about long enough. The time may 
have come for us to release some accounts of the outrageous treatment 
experienced by these people. We are now working on an account of the 
experiences of a number of people. It is still an open question how we 
will use this material. The main objective would be to show foreign coun­
tries which may have some influence in Peiping what we are confronting. 
No final decision to use this material immediately has been made. The
