1148
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said that if we can agree on 40 representatives for the
West Bank, a date for elections, and voting for residents of East Jeru-
salem, would the PLO encourage Palestinians to participate in the
election?
Mr. el-Baz said that de facto, yes.
The President asked whether the word would get out.
Mr. el-Baz said yes. Hikmat el-Mazri saw Arafat, and got this point.
President Sadat said that Hikmat el-Mazri had at one time been
speaker of the Jordanian parliament.
The President said that there is a problem with Begin in East Jeru-
salem on voting. Ambassador Linowitz told him (Begin) that they had
the right to vote in Jordanian elections. Begin was surprised, and
checked to see whether it was accurate. It is illogical for them to be able
to vote in Jordan and not in the West Bank. This is a difficult issue.
Ambassador Linowitz said they had only touched on settlements.
Begin agonizes about this—even two months of a moratorium is a lot,
and he (Begin) rejected his (the Ambassador’s) appeal.
The President asked whether there was more to discuss on Begin.
President Sadat said no.
The President joked that Osama (el-Baz) has really mellowed!
Mr. el-Baz joked that he (the President) should wait until the
drafting!
Minister Butros Ghali joked that it is age!
The President joked that he (el-Baz) always agreed with him in gen-
eral but not in the drafting! He continued that Camp David was a mir-
acle. He talked with Mrs. Carter at noon—and said look at what has
been done; it is a miracle. He asked whether President Sadat is running
water under the Suez Canal for the Sinai.
President Sadat said it would be done this month, but only opened
in October.
The President asked if this tunnel is for traffic.
President Sadat said yes, and room for a pipeline. He had a feasi-
bility plan to send water from the Nile done by Bechtel. The water will
be for Ma’adi in the Eastern Desert, and for Suez. The tunnel is near
Suez. A man from Bechtel visited him recently, and is doing a feasi-
bility study, for free.
The President asked whether they needed water on the Cairo side.
President Sadat said yes, that they have lots of land in Sinai—and
need water for agriculture and drinking, and for use inside.
The President asked whether there were any difficulties in turning
over Sinai on time. Did they get good cooperation?
