Arms Control and Disarmament 1623 underground and at high altitudes when controls adequate to detect such tests become technically available. Research to develop this more extensive control organization might well be made a responsibility of the control organization itself. If our decision is to proceed in this direction, it is important that we make an early technical analysis to determine what we mean by the “atmosphere.” In view of the present discussion about fallout from the stratosphere, it seems clear that a system to limit testing to the tropo­ sphere will neither solve the fallout problem nor alleviate public con­ cern about this problem. Some radioactivity will return to earth from tests conducted out to a distance of many thousands of miles. The limit of the “atmosphere” will probably be difficult to establish. It is also possible that an agreement not to test in the atmosphere might be accompanied by an agreement to conduct explosions in outer space only under internationally-­supervised conditions, or alterna­ tively, it is possible to define somewhat sharply the outer limits of the atmosphere and assume that unilaterally-­planned testing will take place beyond that altitude. There are other kinds of technical prob­ lems that would need to be resolved, such as the conduct of explosions lightly covered with earth, or explosions under water. It is reasonably certain, however, that these technical matters can be satisfactorily resolved from the U.S. point of view and that it would be possible to suggest a monitoring system that would be relatively simple and that would greatly reduce, if not eliminate, the requirement for inspection teams and the fear that they would be used for purposes of espionage. However, before proposing such an agreement, I believe we should know, more clearly than we do now, the effect of this type of agreement on our own weapons program. Specifically, estimates should be made as to the additional costs involved and the usefulness of data obtained if our test program were to continue at its present rate and all tests were conducted either underground or in outer space. In addition, we should examine carefully the effect of an atmosphere test ban on our anti-­intercontinental ballistic missile weapon system testing. Sustained Disarmament Studies The complexities inherent in understanding the monitoring of arms limitation agreements and the great importance of our achieving a thorough understanding of what is to our advantage or disadvantage suggest the importance to the United States of undertaking systematic and sustained studies of the technical, military, and political aspects of arms limitation. Our experience in the Geneva Conference on Reducing the Hazards of Surprise Attack pointed up the deficiencies of ad hoc and hurried preparation for such negotiations.
