Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 Your perceptions, philosophies and objectives for America can be explained only in the public role. I think you do too little of it. If there’s one element of your Presidency that cries out for correction, in my judgment, that is it. Limited Range of Advice I know you get all kinds of advice, but I’m afraid that much of it comes in a way that is not always helpful. I think you should have informal meetings—perhaps bi-weekly—with some of the wise and experienced people in this town and elsewhere, people who want nothing from you and who have no axes to grind. Getting together periodically with small groups of these people—preferably in the evening, away from the press and off the record—could be invaluable. I can think of people who would be candid with you in such meetings, who would not talk about them afterwards, and with whom you could try out new thoughts and ideas. Several who come to mind are Jim Rowe (Roosevelt, Johnson), Clark Clifford (Truman), David Ginsberg (Truman), Ted Sorensen (Kennedy), John Gardner (Johnson), but there are others. Nearly anyone you wanted would be very flattered to be asked and very willing to help. Foreign Policy I think there has been inadequate strategic political thinking in the development of our foreign policy. Most of our foreign policy initiatives do not enjoy the same kind of congressional and political appraisal when they are being developed that their domestic counterparts do. You tend to get too personally identified with foreign policy initiatives whose chances of success are slight. I can think of many such instances with which the Secretary of State is closely and personally identified, and others with which you are as well. I have long sensed an attitude among the foreign policy advisers that there is something suspect about looking at a foreign policy problem in the context of the political environment in which it must be fought. I couldn’t disagree more profoundly with this attitude, and I think we must do everything possible to reverse it. I don’t believe, for example, that the option you finally selected on the neutron bomb issue—which I think is a good one—ever appeared in the options paper given you. Rather, the paper simply dealt with absolutes and it was only after a broader public debate that the option that you ultimately settled on emerged as the sensible answer. Also, I think you get too personally and too deeply involved in too many minor foreign issues. I have talked repeatedly about the number of foreign visitors. But it is hard to think of any issue—whether it is Belize, Cyprus or Namibia—in which you don’t become deeply im-
