260 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement Then PRC “should notify UK and US GOI extending their agreement to respective third powers being entrusted assume functions stipulated” in agreed announcement. Wang instructed inform me that after US “has formally entrusted UK” PRC “will notify UK of its agreement to latter’s being entrusted by USG to offer Americans who desire return various assistance specified” in agreed announcement. 2. My notification to him at Sept 14 meeting US has invited GOI assume functions can only be interpreted USG aware PRC “has previ­ ously indicated its readiness to GOI entrust India extend assistance in matter concerning return Chinese nationals residing in US” during talks. “I again indicated to you on many occasions that PRC would entrust GOI extend assistance to Chinese nationals residing in US who desire return; hence notification of USG to GOI means former’s agreement to GOI being entrusted by PRC and PRC interprets and understand as such Sept. 11 notification of USG to GOI”. 3. “It must be pointed out that our side has taken into account of difficult position in diplomatic relations in which USG finds, and has acceded to your proposed text on entrusting of third powers in its pres­ ent form in agreed announcement. However, on concrete content with regard to PRC’s entrusting GOI and USG entrusting UKG both sides cannot have any other interpretation”. 4. “After publication agreed announcement American press including USIS invariably made distorted interpretation at variance with actual fact of text agreed announcement regarding entrusting of third powers alleging PRC would entrust UKG on one hand and USG would entrust GOI on other. USG ought not agree to such distorted interpretation”. 5. Desire know “if USG has formally entrusted UKG and will appreciate confirmation” by letter if done so will be able report his government which will inform UKG of “its agreement to latter’s being entrusted by USG”. 6. Comments follow. Shillock FE Duty Office notified 9/17/12:53 p. m. EMB (CWO)
