640  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
conventional roles, would pose a significant air threat to the other side. 
It was one thing if older heavy bombers carried conventional loads, but 
quite another if new types, which were more effective and had larger 
weapon-­carrying capability, were used.
Wheeler noted that the principle behind the START Treaty was to 
deal with nuclear weapons. He asked whether the Soviet concern was 
that conventional bombers could be converted to carry nuclear weap-
ons, or whether the concern was that air defenses might be ineffective 
against them even if they were used in conventional roles. Peresypkin 
said he was not saying that air defenses should be equally effective 
against both types of planes—­only that over 1600 they should be both 
numerically limited and not permitted to be contemporary types.
Curtin said the U.S. side agreed there should be a ceiling on such 
aircraft. Peresypkin pointed out that in Moscow the U.S. side had pro-
posed to expand the list of convertible types beyond the B–52 and the 
TU–95, and added that criteria must be worked out so that what consti-
tuted an “older” type did not become a disputed question.
Wheeler noted that the START Treaty would have agreed proce-
dures for converting heavy bombers from a nuclear to a non-­nuclear 
role. Peresypkin merely replied, “I know convertibility.”
Tactical Aviation
Wheeler asked Peresypkin whether the Soviets were concerned 
over the ALCMs that would be carried on heavy bombers, or whether 
they were concerned over conventional weapons that would be carried 
on aircraft that were not heavy bombers. He recalled Akhromeyev’s 
mention to Powell of aircraft on the borders of the USSR—­i.e, tactical 
aviation. Peresypkin declined to elaborate on this subject, which he said 
would be a diversion, but stated his personal opinion that the subjects 
were closely related.
Personal Note
In introducing himself, Peresypkin said he was a Major General in 
the Soviet Air Force serving on the General Staff, working on arms con-
trol and air force issues. During a lunch break, he said his background 
was as a pilot, and that he had switched to the General Staff with regret.
