Panama 949 for the Ambassador, it is not considered appropriate that he serve on the board.6 It is recommended that you seek Secretary Brucker’s concurrence that a joint State/Army recommendation be made along these lines to the President.7 2. Civilian Governor of the Canal Zone The February 16 memorandum suggests that the next Governor of the Canal Zone, to be appointed in May of this year, “be a different man from the President of the Panama Canal Company and a civilian selected partly for qualities of tact and diplomacy”. He should sit with the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal Company, the memorandum adds. The United States military plays a triple role in the Zone and vis-avis Panama: it supplies the governor of the Zone, manages the Panama Canal Company, and protects the Canal. The Corps of Engineers, which has a brilliant record in operating the Canal, has traditionally furnished the governor, who by statute serves also as ex officio president of the Company. There seems to be no compelling reason today, as opposed to the conditions of 1903, 1917, or 1941, why the Canal Zone should be under a military governor. The presence of foreign military government is offensive to peoples who consider the governed territory to be their own. A military organization operates on the basis of command rather than persuasion. Military officers grow accustomed to obedience, and are concerned primarily with matters of their internal command rather than with those of external interests. Accordingly, a military command is seldom an instrument for civil administration under which civilians and foreigners can comfortably live or work. An individual commander may avoid arbitrariness but his military status projects to foreign peoples more of an aura of colonialism than would adhere to a civilian. The Panamanian press campaign against the “military mentality” of the present governor suggests that the Panamanians would welcome civilian governance of the Zone. It is believed that the Zone’s government should be civilianized by the appointment of a capable civilian governor. He should in his dual 6 At this point, the following handwritten notation appears on the source text: “(see Mr. Merchant’s comment, Tab F, para. 1).” Apparently Tab F, which is not attached to the source text, was a memorandum dated March 30 from Merchant to Herter, in which Merchant took exception to Rubottom’s recommendation relating to the rank of the State Department’s representative serving on the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal Company. Merchant believed the Under Secretary of State or the Under Secretary for Political Affairs should represent the Department. He maintained that high rank was necessary to make the Department’s influence effective. (719.00/3–3060) 7 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, on April 1 Herter concurred with Merchant’s recommendation regarding the rank of the State Department’s representative.
