532  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
sublimits because of the ongoing debate on the issue in the U.S. The 
Bush administration had proposed a strategic modernization program 
including both a rail and a road mobile system. The issue had not been 
resolved with the Congress and there could be no resolution in Geneva 
until it was.
Inspection of Early Warning Radar Sites
11. Danish Permrep Bierring expressed satisfaction that the Baker-
Shevardnadze meeting had produced agreement on reciprocal inspec-
tions of early warning radars. He asked if the U.S. knew when the 
Soviets would want to visit Thule. In reply, Ambassador Burt empha-
sized that the U.S. had agreed to the radar inspections on the basis of 
close consultations with the UK and Danish governments and on the 
understanding that the Soviet side would permit inspection of two of 
their radars. Ambassador Burt stated, however, that the U.S. did not yet 
know when the Soviet side would want to visit Thule.
ABM/START linkage
12. Several Permreps wondered whether the problem of linkage 
between START and ABM Treaty adherence had actually been settled. 
French Ambassador Robin, for one, suggested that the Soviet threat 
to withdraw from START if the U.S. violated the ABM Treaty would 
constitute a “Sword of Damocles” hanging over the START Treaty. In 
response, Ambassador Burt noted that the START Treaty contained a 
standard clause permitting the parties to withdraw if supreme national 
interests were at stake. Whether, in the end, the U.S. would have to 
accommodate desires by some in the Senate for greater clarity on per-
mitted and prohibited ABM activities was a decision the President 
would have to make in consultation with the Senate. Smith agreed and 
said he thought the Soviets had given their bottom line—­they had a 
preference to resolve the permitted-­prohibited issue, but would not fall 
on their swords.
13. Burt added that within seven years of START ratification 
the Soviets would have already destroyed 50 percent of their heavy 
ICBM’s, reduced their throw weight by the same amount, and cut their 
overall strategic forces by about 35 percent. Having done all that, it was 
“very, very unlikely” that they would then withdraw from the treaty 
in response to U.S. moves in the area of strategic defense. The politi-
cal costs would be too high, particularly after START reductions. The 
Soviets are trying to save face on the linkage issue, but they lost. We 
should declare victory and move on. Smith added that the Soviets had 
backed down because they want a START Treaty
14. On the substantive merits of the issue, Burt said that the U.S. 
would not agree that exercising our rights under the ABM Treaty would 
justify Soviet withdrawal from START. Smith said that delinkage was
