1198 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tion for dividing Jerusalem, we should be able to draft something to take care of that. But Prime Minister Begin seems to feel viscerally that the right to vote leads to a divided Jerusalem. Prime Minister Begin said: yes. Ambassador Linowitz said he was sorry: he would like to assure Prime Minister Begin. Prime Minister Begin said that it is not a matter of assurances. What could Israel want? What does it need? This is not religion or sentiment. It is a fact. Jerusalem is sacred to the three monotheistic religions. Israel does not interfere with the religions. The Copts and the Abyssinians ask Israel for help. Egypt can now get in and help if it wants—though it has problems with its own Copts. Minister Burg said that the Egyptians would like Israel’s Copts! Prime Minister Begin asked what the Christians have to complain about? The President said that this is not at issue. Prime Minister Begin asked why the Muslims should complain. El Aqsa is there—despite the fact that it is on the Temple Mount, where there are two mosques. Jerusalem is sacred to Jews, Christians, and Moslems. But that is history: in our time, what is Jerusalem? It is the heart of the Israeli nation for 3000 years. The Moslems conquered it. King Abdullah10 did so, again. He desecrated the Mount of Olives cemetery. He destroyed the Hadassah Hospital and the Hebrew University. Israel rebuilt one city. Should it suggest that Copts in Cairo vote for other governments? It is incomprehensible. It is one city. Teddy Kollek could be reelected for 3 elections more. It will still become a divided city if Israel permits voting for the Administrative Council. Minister Burg said he would add a footnote. The President had mentioned absentee voting. They live in Jerusalem. It is their capital— though the U.S. does not recognize it. Does the U.S. want to give Israel a mortgage? It is too difficult. Ambassador Linowitz said that no one here wants to divide Jerusalem. He would try an idea. Suppose that there were elections in the West Bank and Gaza, and the elected officials then selected from Jerusalem 8 or 10 people to serve with them as members. Prime Minister Begin said that he doesn’t think this would be possible. It is difficult. He speaks about the heart of the Israeli nation. Why play around? It has been the central issue of their lives for 3 millenia. The Eastern part is the real Jerusalem—West Jerusalem is an addition. He is now told that they should vote in the Judea and Samaria Admin-
