International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
79
that Summit decisions had some effect on what happened in the real
world.10
10 On May 4, Brzezinski gave Carter a 2-page paper on U.S. objectives at the
Summit, as well as talking points based on the Summit briefing book. (Memorandum
from Hormats to Brzezinski, May 4; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Trip File, Box 1, President, Europe, 5/5–10/77: Memos and Cables, 4/29/77–
5/4/77)
26.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 6, 1977
SUBJECT
Confidence is the Theme
On the eve of the second debate you decided that leadership was
the theme. By focusing on it, you gave your presentation a coherence
that your opponent lacked.
The underlying mood of the forthcoming Summit meetings is one
of anxiety. That anxiety pertains to the quality of leadership, to the via-
bility of the social systems, and to the West’s staying power particu-
larly in the East-West competition.
In that context, I think you should very deliberately project two
roles:
(1) By showing command of the issues, by displaying a genuine fa-
miliarity with the key problems, you will assure your colleagues that
you are capable of dealing realistically with complex dilemmas;
(2) By projecting a sense of confidence about the future, you can
both reassure and infuse your colleagues—as well as the publics at
large—with a greater degree of optimism, something which they des-
perately need and something which only America can provide.
By suggesting that confidence be your underlying theme, I do not
wish to suggest that you ignore the need for concrete action. Far from it;
without concrete proposals the stress on confidence would become just
“happy talk.” I do feel, however, that there is a danger of becoming ex-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 1, President, Europe, 5/5–10/77: Memos and Cables, 5/5–20/77. Confidential.
