950 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement role as governor of the Zone and president of the Company be responsible to the Ambassador on all matters affecting the Republic. A civilian governor should not report to the Department of the Army but to the Department of State or to the White House through the Department. It is our understanding that the appointment of a civilian governor could be effected by the President, subject to confirmation by the Senate, without further legislation. It is our Legal Advisor’s opinion that there is no legal impediment to naming a civilian governor but the statutes call for the governor and the president of the Panama Canal Company to be the same person (Tab D).8 Mr. Brucker, in a discussion with Mr. Merchant, indicated his view that by statute the governor and the president of the Company must be an (Army) engineer. In the event a civilian governor, reporting to the president through the State Department or directly to the Department, is named, it would be desirable to have the stock of the Panama Canal Company transferred to the Secretary of State. At present, the President has delegated the Secretary of the Army on sole stockholder.9 It is recommended that you seek Secretary Brucker’s concurrence that such a joint recommendation be made to the President.10 3. Primacy of United States Ambassador over the Canal Zone. The termination of military administration of the Zone is directly related to the question of United States representation in the Republic of Panama. Part of the Canal problem is that the governor of the Zone (president of the Company) is responsible to the Secretary of the Army, and that CINCARIB is responsible to the JOS, notwithstanding that a wide variety of decisions made by each affect Panama and Panamanians in some way. The coordination of the actions of the governor (president) and CINCARIB with those of the Ambassador now depends solely on the working relationship and goodwill existing between the three men. It would be prudent to assure a greater degree of formalized coordination by establishing the primacy of the Ambassador. It is not recommended that CINCARIB’s Panama responsibilities be affected except in regard to the primacy of the Ambassador on 8 Not attached to the source text, but see Document PM–35, footnote 5. 9 At this point, the following handwritten notation appears on the source text: “(see Mr. Merchant comment, Tab F, para. 4).” Merchant, according to his memorandum of March 30, was uncertain of the soundness of recommending to the President that he transfer the stock of the Panama Canal Company to the Secretary of State. (719.00/3-3060) 10 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, on April 1 Herter disapproved this recommendation and suggested that the Secretary of the Treasury should hold the stock. (719.00/3–3060)
