Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
343
policies, as well as policy on “human rights”, are guided by a concern
with the impact of all we do on the welfare of individuals.
We are embarked on a long term endeavor. Progress must be
measured over the long run. This Administration will probably not see
the full results—successful or not—of our efforts in this field. Nor can
we claim credit for many decisions made by sovereign foreign gov-
ernments. But we have contributed to an international climate in which
tangible progress was made in 1977:
—Thousands of prisoners have been freed.
—Some political systems have become a little more open. States of
siege have ended and elections have been scheduled in a number of
countries.
—International human rights commissions have been permitted to
visit countries formerly closed to them.
The world was not transformed by such events. But many indi-
viduals were better off at the end of 1977 than at its beginning.
This is a sound beginning, but our experience has shown us that
there are sometimes even better ways to proceed:
—In this first year we have most often reacted to human rights vio-
lations by reducing or ending economic or military assistance pro-
grams. We wish to increasingly emphasize positive actions to help gov-
ernments which are trying to improve the lot of their own people. We
are working to find ways to use our assistance affirmatively, to pro-
mote human rights, rather than in ways which are primarily punitive.
—We must work even more closely with international organiza-
tions and foreign leaders to find the most constructive ways to advance
human rights in cultures and political traditions different from our
own.
In our dealings with other nations and people we must recognize
human rights problems of our own. The President’s plans for welfare
reform, urban renewal, more jobs for disadvantaged youth, are all
part of a commitment constantly to improve our own human rights
performance.
In sum, there has been a perceptible change in the international
view of what the United States stands for in the world. Our most dur-
able source of strength is the symbol of individual liberty and opportu-
nity that we represent to others.
[Omitted here are sections III. Peace and IV. Individual Economic
Well-Being.]
V. CONCLUSION
One year ago, we decided to give new priority to several complex
longer-term issues that are becoming increasingly important to our na-
