International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1103 projects of the multilateral development banks well in advance of their presentation to their boards of directors. This will enable the United States to make its views known at a time and in a manner likely to be most effective. To achieve these results will require understanding that the most effective assistance techniques depend upon the level of development and the particular problems in each country. Careful program design will insure that maximum use will be made of the private sector, both profit and non-profit, and of our own employees. A final word about IDCA’s responsibilities—under your Reorganization Plan—to speak to the American public, as well as to Congress. It is commonly urged that development assistance should be given in spite of public opinion that is indifferent at best and hostile at worst. Although many Americans certainly share this view, we believe that an effective public case can and should be made for financial support to developing countries. This case is partially rooted in humanitarian concerns for poor people in those countries. The public and Congressional responses to your leadership in increasing U.S. aid to Kampuchean refugees16 show how deep is the compassion of the American people, and how effectively it can be channeled into action. But as I vividly saw17 on a recent trip to South Asia, the seldom-reported plight of millions of poor people in Dacca and elsewhere is fully as grim as that facing the refugees. If the tragedy of their lives is honestly presented, public support for increased assistance should also grow. It is sometimes argued that Americans oppose help to developing countries because “charity begins at home.” But development assistance serves basic United States economic and political interests, as well as charitable concerns. As you well know, our international trade and investment, our energy outlook, our security concerns in many areas, and our overall objectives on scores of different fronts, all depend on our relations with developing nations. We should make clear the direct benefits to the United States of development help. Your initiative in establishing the International Development Cooperation Agency will help the United States be a constructive and creative leader in the dialogue on development at home and abroad. The programs and policies recommended here were selected not only because they address important and challenging issues of concern to developing countries but also because they are feasible. They will be on IDCA’s agenda for 1980 and beyond. 16 See Document 261. 17 The reference is to Ehrlich.
