Arms Control and Disarmament  1533
TVA and Bonneville systems. Mr. McCone thought that by having this 
program with the President’s support it would be possible to head off 
this tendency. He said he had talked to Mr. Stans about the matter, and 
that Mr. Stans had no objection.
Mr. McCone next recalled that the President had pushed the IAEA 
from the outset, and had offered them 5,000 kg. of U–235. A price had 
never been set; however, the law provides that it cannot be less than the 
domestic price. The Soviets, who have made no offer of their own, have 
been doing a great deal of criticizing on the grounds that we are seeking 
to make a profit. Mr. Cole wants the price to be no more than the domes­
tic price. Mr. McCone recommended that the matter be settled by fixing 
the price at the domestic price, which meets the law and also meets Mr. 
Cole’s suggestion. The President said he saw nothing wrong with that.
Mr. McCone next told the President he wanted to demonstrate to 
him a technical breakthrough in the production of power from atomic 
sources. At this point he had General Keirn, Colonel Armstrong and 
Colonel Anderson set up a device for the generation of electricity, by 
means of thermocouples, from heat provided by an alpha-­emitting 
radioactive isotope (of polonium, although cerium is planned for 
future models). This device, weighing five pounds, was operating at 
the level of five watts of power. The output would drop to one-­half of 
this figure in 138 days for a polonium source and approximately 280 
days for cerium, these periods being the “half life” of these radioac­
tive elements. While the production of the current model cost $15,000 
for the device, plus approximately $30,000 for the polonium, the future 
practical models are expected to decline in cost to approximately $200 
for the device and $600 for the cerium power source; weight can be 
reduced from five pounds to approximately three pounds.
The immediate application of this device is as a power source in 
a satellite. The best possible batteries to provide a similar amount of 
power over a similar period would weigh 300 times as much as this 
device. However, one of the most striking features is that these ther­
mocouples, employing different “doped” telluride compounds, have 
attained an efficiency of 8–10% in converting heat to electric energy 
with no moving parts. Any other heat source could also be used and 
small atomic reactors, as little as six inches on a side, are being devel­
oped as power sources for future applications.
The President was extremely interested in all of this. After thor­
ough discussion of the matter, photographs were taken, and at the 
President’s request Mr. Hagerty arranged for General Keirn and his 
associates to meet with the press and explain the device to them.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
