3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 805 277. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency to the Director of the National Security Agency (Inman)1 Washington, May 12, 1980, 2218Z COUNTRY USSR/Afghanistan/Italy SUBJECT Comments by Georgiy Arbatov on Soviet perceptions on Afghanistan and possible scenario for Soviet withdrawal [less than 1 line not declassified] SOURCE [1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified] 1. According to Georgiy Arbatov, head of the USSR’s Institute of the U.S.A. and Canada (IUSAC)—Soviet perceptions about the dangers of the internal situation in Afghanistan in December 1979 had been distorted, and he implied that there had been a serious debate within the Soviet Politburo on the advisability of intervening militarily in Afghanistan. Arbatov said that at the time the “hardliners” in the Politburo had been successful in pointing out that there was little of benefit to the USSR that could be obtained by continuing to exercise restraint in Afghanistan, but Arbatov commented that now there was beginning to be a reflection in the Politburo of a perception that the Soviets had suffered a greater propaganda defeat over the intervention than had been anticipated prior to the Politburo decision to move troops into Afghanistan. [14 lines not declassified] 2. Arbatov described some of the atmosphere in Moscow that preceded the intervention decision. Arbatov noted the decision of the U.S. Government to exaggerate the presence of a Soviet combat brigade in Cuba and then back away from the issue as one of the initial factors contributing to a Soviet perception of American inconsistency and weakness. The second factor was the 12 December 1979 decision of the NATO governments to permit the basing of modernized theatre nuclear forces (TNF) in Europe,2 a decision that Soviet hard-liners viewed as an attempt to create a disequilibrium in the balance of strategic forces. The third factor, and the one that Arbatov cited as the predomi- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Afghanistan, Box 10, 5/9–14/80. Secret; Sensitive; Noforn; Nocontract; Orcon. Sent to the Departments of State and the Treasury, DIA, White House, NSC, and CIA’s Office of Current Operations. 2 On December 12, 1979, a special meeting of the NATO Foreign and Defense Ministers convened in Brussels and determined that theater nuclear forces could be based in Europe.
