National Security Policy 39 6. Postwar Stockpile in Australia. Statement of the Issue (Report, p. 28): Because of her remote geo­ graphical position, consideration should be given to transferring to Australia a portion of our “moth-­balled” merchant fleet, and to estab­ lishing stockpiles of surplus grain and other provisions there. If, as seems likely, the aftermath of an atomic war involving Europe, Russia, and the United States would be characterized by acute shortages of food and transport, it would seem prudent to develop now a reserve stockpile of both in a place relatively secure from the immedi­ ate consequences of a global atomic conflict. Planning Board Comment: In the preparation of NSC 5713/2, the Planning Board rejected last May a similar but broader idea. The stock­ piling of food and a portion of our “moth-­balled” fleet in Australia would be of only marginal value to the United States in the event of nuclear war and therefore not worth involving the expense and over­ coming other difficulties in implementing the proposal. The policy on continental defense (NSC 5802/1, paragraphs 3 and 23) recognizes the desirability of “appropriately organizing, pro­ tecting and placing in a condition of readiness the resources of the country essential to national survival”. Planning Board Recommendation: Accordingly, the Planning Board recommends that the National Security Council agree that: The United States should not [now]4 transfer to Australia a por­ tion of our “moth-­balled” merchant fleet or establish stockpiles of sur­ plus grain and other provisions there. However, studies under NSC 5802/1, paragraphs 3 and 23, should be made on placing a portion of our “moth-­balled” merchant fleet and stockpiling surplus grain and other provisions in areas outside the continental United States. 7. The Organization of American States. Statement of the Issue (Report, p. 46): Greater use should be made of the OAS and its military organs to provide a collective security frame­ work for U.S. bases in Latin America. In this connection, it is further recommended that early consideration be given to the desirability of bringing the now-developing West Indies Federation into the OAS. While it does not seem practicable at this time to consider the adoption of an infrastructure program for the OAS (similar to that in NATO), nevertheless the establishment of a framework of hemispheric defense in place of the present framework of unilateral U.S. interests would do much to relieve the U.S. of such difficulties as those recently encountered with Brazil in securing a small area for use in the guided missile testing range, and those presently involved in the efforts to obtain from Panama a limited amount of real estate for radar facilities. 4 State-Defense-JCS-ODM proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
