868
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
326.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, October 3, 1980, 11:10–11:50 a.m.
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, President of Pakistan
General K. M. Afir (Notetaker)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
[President Carter:] We share a common concern over the Soviets in
Afghanistan. And it is important for the UN to maintain its condemna-
tion. The foregoing, together with the fall of the Shah, has caused us
to increase our presence in the region. We now have two carriers in
the area. We have pre-positioned military cargo. We are developing
the Rapid Deployment Force. We are conducting exercises with some
of the countries in the region. We have acquired facilities in Oman and
Kenya, and we are determined to keep the Strait of Hormuz open.
Moreover, we have recently deployed AWACS to Saudi Arabia. We
want to contain the conflict, and we have discouraged the Saudis and
Omanis from becoming involved.
In my State of the Union message, I stated the region was vital to
our national security and that we would act to protect that security. I
wanted Brezhnev to know we would feel our vital interests are engaged
if there was a Soviet intrusion. They might have moved into Poland
if not for the world reaction to their invasion of Afghanistan.2 I see no
possibility of business as usual while the Soviets are in Afghanistan.
Again, let me say how much we admire your courage as well as your
support for the refugees.
I am disappointed and regretful that we did not have an adequate
communication in the past on an economic/military package.3 The
public/press exchanges were mutually embarrassing. I understand that
you do not want military assistance, but we will continue to be helpful
in modest ways with regard to the refugees. We also understand your
aversion to U.S. military aid, which in any case is forbidden by Con-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 38, Memcons: President: 8–11/80. Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office.
In the top right corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “OK” and initialed “J.” Zia
was in the United States to attend the UN General Assembly session.
2 The mention of Poland is a reference to the crisis caused by workers’ strikes and
the Solidarity trade union movement in September.
3 See Documents 151 and 171.
