722
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
mediately. The corn loan rate is being increased from 1.75 dollars to
2.00 dollars per bushel with other feed grains set in the proper relation-
ship to corn. This change, which is being done under existing authority,
is consistent with recent congressional actions and will return the loan
rate for feed grains to its appropriate relationship to the loan rate for
wheat.
The 1977 wheat loan level of 2.25 dollars will remain unchanged.
We would anticipate no change for 1978 in the loan levels announced
today, though they are subject to change. Holding loan rates at these
levels will allow market forces to operate more freely and help main-
tain U.S. competiveness in the world markets. End quote.
Christopher
226.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Hunger Initiative
At a meeting today on the hunger initiative, Jerry Fill presented his
latest draft of a memorandum from Peter Bourne to the President.2 Al-
though this version still tends to confuse policymaking and the drafting
of a message on hunger, it is an improvement over earlier versions.
Specifically, it provides for full participation by interested agencies and
can, if redrafted along the lines discussed this afternoon, allow for the
preparation of, and decisions on, policy options prior to the drafting of a
message.
1 Source: Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box HE–6, Execu-
tive, 1/20/77–9/29/77. Limited Official Use. Sent for information. Copies were sent to
Hormats, Thornton, Denend, Owen, and Schecter.
2 Presumable reference to the Working Group on World Hunger’s efforts to pro-
duce a memorandum for the President outlining various policy initiatives for an ex-
panded world hunger program. An August 5 draft memorandum from Bourne to the
President with an attached “Potential Goals of U.S. Food Policy” outline is in the Carter
Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—Peter Bourne Files, Subject
Files, Box 34, International Health, 8/1/77–8/31/77. The final version of the memo-
randum is printed as Document 227.
