870  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
NI–20.	
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge 
of Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1

Washington, March 31, 1960.
SUBJECT
NICARAGUA; Courtesy call of Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa and Dr. Quintana, 
­Minister of Government.
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua
Dr. Julio C. Quintana V., Nicaraguan Minister of Government
ARA – R. R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary
OAP – Henry L. Taylor, Officer in Charge, Nicaraguan Affairs
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa said he had called with the Nicaraguan 
Minister of Government, Dr. Julio Quintana, in order that the lat-
ter could pay his respects and personally express his appreciation 
for the medical treatment he had received at Walter Reed Hospital. 
Dr. Quintana then expressed in warm terms his thanks for the medical 
treatment he received. He said that had it not been for the excellent 
attention he received, he would have lost his left arm. He said that he 
would be returning to Nicaragua on Sunday. Mr. Rubottom expressed 
pleasure over the satisfactory manner in which Dr. Quintana had 
responded to the medical treatment. He expressed the hope that his 
arm would continue to improve.
The conversation then turned to the recent remarks made by 
Secretary Herter before the Foreign Relations Committee on last 
March 22,2 in which it was reported that the Government of Nicaragua 
was alluded to as a dictatorship. Mr. Rubottom said that he hoped 
the amplification of the Secretary’s remarks made by Link White at a 
press conference on March 28 clarified the meaning of the Secretary’s 
statement. Mr. Rubottom told Quintana that we were well aware of 
the ­democratic measures President Luis has placed into effect and 
stated they clearly evidenced a trend away from the dictatorial type of 
Government carried on by his father. Mr. Rubottom then said we had 
instructed our Ambassador to deliver a note in reply to that received by 
our Embassy from the Nicaraguan Foreign Minister, and that he believed 
this in addition to the above statement of clarification, would remove 
any misunderstanding. Mr. Rubottom added that it was regrettable 
1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom-Mann Files, Lot 62 D 419, “Nicaragua.” 
Official Use Only. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 The Department conveyed the text of Herter’s statement regarding Nicaragua to 
the Embassy in telegram 249, March 24, not printed; 717.00/3–260.
