1956  1229
739.	 Letter from Osborn to McConaughy1
Geneva, October 25, 1956
Dear Walter:
From your note on the slip transmitting Fr. McCarthy’s latest let­
ter, I got the impression there may have been some misunderstanding 
back there about the nature of the proposed statement mentioned in the 
Ambassador’s last comment telegram. As will have been made clear by 
the Ambassador’s letter No. 47, this statement is proposed for release 
only in case Wang breaks or comes close to it, and was not intended as 
a recommended draft of the statement on implementation. I hope no 
delay has been occasioned in the release of the Department’s statement.
As to why the Chinese Communists allowed the McCarthy incident 
to happen, it seems only to make sense (and even then not good sense) 
if it is remembered that the Chicoms have their own interpretation of the 
Agreed Announcement, which differs from ours—or from any rational 
man’s. In the light of their distorted interpretation, the McCarthy corre­
spondence documents, not a case of infraction of the Announcement, but 
a case of fulfillment of its terms. They maintain that the Announcement 
applies to imprisoned Americans, so far as the right to contact the UK 
Charge is concerned; however, they say the Americans’ right of expedi­
tious return can only be exercised after their cases have been “settled”. 
Accordingly, the Chicoms maintain that there can be no question of 
“obstruction” until after settlement of a case. Further, they insist that nei­
ther the Announcement nor the third power arrangement has any rela­
tion to the sentences or the treatment of imprisoned Americans.
Another element in the picture is the fact that Wang was so obvi­
ously not briefed on the details of the McCarthy incident. If the whole 
thing had been carefully planned, Wang would surely have been briefed. 
Accordingly it seems reasonable to suppose the incident reflects neither 
a calculated maneuver nor a significant change of policy. It probably 
occurred as an unforeseen development in the carrying out of existing 
policies.
I would guess at a sequence of events something like this:
1. The Chicoms allowed McCarthy to send his September 1 letter 
because they did not want to have McCarthy, after his eventual release, 
charging them with having denied him this elementary right under the 
Agreed Announcement, a right which they have acknowledged, even 
under their strained interpretation of the Announcement.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–
­Informal.
