Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX reading the last sentences of Secretary Brown’s letter10 after Camp David to Minister Weizman. Begin noted in passing that the letter in the present negotiations on the exchange of ambassadors is satisfactory, and then he returned to the airfields. What happens, he asked, if it takes longer than three years to complete the airfields? He wanted an agreement that Israel would operate the two remaining airfields in the Sinai until the new ones could become operational. He felt this should be written as a protocol to the treaty. Secretary Vance responded that he could not at this point agree that there will be such a protocol which would change the basic agreement. The Secretary said he could tell the Prime Minister that the United States will work with Israel and we have confidence that the airfields will be completed in time. The Prime Minister responded by asking again, “But what do we do with our planes if the airfields are not completed? Where will we put them?” Secretary Vance again quoted from the Brown letter the portion that states U.S. understanding for the special priority which Israel attaches to this and Israel’s position that it cannot leave the Sinai until the new airfields are completed. The Secretary said he could not commit the United States to any more at this point. Weizman suggested that the problem might be helped if Egypt were to acknowledge its understanding of the Brown-Weizman letter. The Secretary noted that the Egyptians had already received a copy. Turning to the subject of aerial surveillance, Secretary Vance said the United States is prepared to continue providing such surveillance for three years. If there is to be any extension, it would be agreed by all three parties. The Secretary said the United States side would take up this subject with Egypt and noted that this was being done in response to an Israeli request. He summarized by saying that the United States is committed for three years. Beyond three years, the issue remains open. The Secretary noted to the Prime Minister that the United States had given the Israeli Delegation a draft letter relating to the UN Forces. The Prime Minister said the letter is satisfactory and the Israeli Government accepts it. Secretary Vance indicated his desire to move ahead quickly to complete Annex I to the treaty and suggested trying to do so in the next 48 hours. Dayan reminded the Secretary that we had also agreed to review commitments under the disengagement agreements. The Secretary suggested that we wait until after completion of the work on the treaty. 10 See Document 57.
