158
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
54.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
[paper number not declassified]
Washington, July 1979
[Omitted here are a title page, cover page, and security informa-
tion page.]
Afghanistan: A Regime Besieged ([classification marking not
declassified])
Key Judgments
The localized tribal fighting that erupted in the eastern provinces
when the pro-Soviet coup group seized power in late April 1978 has
since grown into a countrywide insurgency. Faced with the hostility
of the devoutly Muslim and traditionally independent population, the
regime of President Taraki and Prime Minister Amin has no better
than an even chance to complete its second year in power.
Taraki will survive only as long as the loyalty of the military, the
security services, and the party remains intact under the heavy pressure
being brought to bear by hostile forces. The prevailing instability por-
tends a highly fluid political situation in the next 12 months. A number
of outcomes are possible.
The most likely successor regime would be led by, or at least have
the backing of, leftist military officers, who are now considered loyal
but who might become disaffected. Coup plotters might seek Moscow’s
tacit approval to seize power and in any case would retain strong ties
with the Soviet Union.
Despite the loss to the insurgents of more than half of the country,
the government’s control of Kabul, the other major cities, and the main
lines of communication equates to political control of the country.
Tribal forces, lacking a centralized command and deficient in material
support, do not appear capable of challenging the Soviet-equipped
army’s control of the main population centers.
The insurgents’ prospects would be enhanced if Pakistan were
to provide substantial material support, tactical advice, and training.
Barring an improvement in the insurgents’ military capabilities, the
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Job 06T00412R:
Intelligence Publication Files, Box 1, NESA Research Paper—Afghanistan: A Regime
Besieged, July 1979. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. A
statement on the cover page reads: “The author of this paper is [less than 1 line not
declassified] Office of Political Analysis. The Office of Strategic Research contributed to
the report.” Another statement on the cover page reads: “This report has been coordinated
with the Office of Economic Research, the Directorate of Operations, and the National
Intelligence Officer for the Near East and South Asia.”
