Afghanistan 719 There are a few bureaucratic pitfalls. You and the President may not want this to appear as a big Muskie initiative to correct past mistakes— which it could, since Muskie sounded positive on neutralization in his SFRC hearings.3 Muskie is probably going to pick this one up and run with it anyway though, so the issue for you is how best to shape what he is doing. Obviously, this whole thing should be discussed and coordinated at the highest level. (S) RECOMMENDATION: That you raise this subject with the President and Muskie.4 If you do, please ensure that there is feedback to me so that I can push this in Brement’s committee. (C) 3 Muskie’s confirmation hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee was held on May 7. 4 No record of a meeting covering this subject was found. 269. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, undated OVERVIEW —The Pakistani and US intelligence appraisals of the Afghan war are remarkably similar. Both sides believe the Soviets have encountered unanticipated difficulties, or as General Akhtar said, “the Russians are stuck.” The identity of views is particularly noteworthy because we arrived at our conclusions by different routes. Much of the US judgment is based on sensitive signals intelligence not available to the Pakistanis. The Pakistanis have based their judgment not simply on appraisals we have provided them but on intelligence they received directly from Afghan rebels. The Pakistanis conclude that the Afghan “Freedom Fighters”—as they call them—are doing surprisingly well and will in all likelihood continue to do so. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For President or Brzezinski Only File, Box 88, PA—Very Sensitive: 1–6/80. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. The author of the memorandum is not identified. In a May 15 covering memorandum to Brzezinski, Turner noted that he was following up on the meetings between a CIA officer and Pakistani ISID Director Akhtar, which he first reported May 13. (See footnote 2, Document 259.) In the upper right corner of the covering memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig, p. 3” and initialed “C.”
