340
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
question the viability of the treaty if the broader framework were not to
be implemented. The President said that this was not a new concept.
The Sinai framework itself was predicated on the acceptance of the gen-
eral framework.
Barak said that Israel’s problem was that any mention of the gen-
eral framework as the basis for the Egyptian-Israeli treaty would seem
to make the Egypt-Israel treaty conditional upon the implementation of
the broader framework. If this is mentioned, somewhere in the treaty
there must be a sentence that the treaty stands on its own. If that is in-
cluded, then Israel does not care how much reference is made to the
broader framework. Rosenne suggested language which would make
the treaty completely separate from the broader framework agreement.
Barak said that this would balance off any reference to the general
framework. If this were included, the Egyptians could even add lan-
guage in the preamble referring to the comprehensive peace. But if this
sentence were not in the treaty, then no reference could be made to the
broader framework. The President said that he did not believe that
Sadat could agree to the Israeli language. He insists that there is some
tie between the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the comprehensive peace.
The Sinai agreement was meant to be part of a general framework. This
is why he was able to agree to it at Camp David. He needs to be able to
make some specific reference to the broader framework. It seems to the
President that the Israelis were moving backwards.
Barak said that whatever connection existed between the two
frameworks still remained, but out of the framework agreement on
Sinai there was not going to be a specific treaty, and it should stand on
its own. It is a contract between two parties. Rosenne said that the
United States had made reference to the treaty standing on its own. The
Israelis do not want to point to a separate peace with Egypt, but in legal
terms the Egypt-Israel treaty should not be dependent upon anything
else. Israel will still adhere to the broader framework agreement, but Is-
rael needs some guarantee that the language in the preamble will not
pose any conditions.
The President said that if the Israelis could convince Sadat, it would
be okay with him. But he would personally not try. He would not pro-
pose this language to Sadat. He would not say that there was no con-
nection whatsoever. Two framework agreements were negotiated at
Camp David. Everyone knew it at the time that they were linked. Sadat
only signed the Egyptian-Israeli framework on the premise that the
West Bank and Gaza framework was viable and agreed upon.
Rosenne said that there was a difference between a political link
and a legal link. The President said that the Israelis were wasting time
on this issue with him. He would not propose a completely separate
agreement. Rosenne said that this caused a serious problem. The Presi-
