Guatemala 647 GT–3. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, February 24, 1958. SUBJECT Visit of President-Elect Ydígoras Fuentes on Vice President Nixon. PARTICIPANTS Vice President Nixon President-Elect Ydígoras of Guatemala Other present who did not participate in the conversation: Assistant Secretary of State Roy R. Rubottom, Jr. Chief of Protocol Wiley T. Buchanan, Jr. Ambassador Join Davis Lodge (invited by Vice President Nixon at time of call) Chargé D’Affaires Asensio-Wunderlich Señor García Bauer Señor Bapez Herrarte Señor Alejos ) ) ) ) Members of President-Elect Ydígoras’ Party. The Vice President expressed his great pleasure at being able to receive the President-Elect in his office in the United States, recalling his happy and unforgettable experience in visiting Guatemala in 1954 [1955].2 General Ydígoras responded with a warm greeting and expression of pleasure at being in the United States. The Vice President inquired as to what the President-Elect considered to be his number one problem in Guatemala. The President responded promptly, “communism”. He said that his country, after ten years of rule by Arévalo and Arbenz, had been hurt by communism and that he was going to attack it by trying to offer the people better work opportunities, better food, better housing and better clothing. The Vice President interjected that that sounded like a positive, straightforward campaign which should produce results rather than the usual campaign of being simply “against” something. The President-Elect referred to Guatemala as being like a young lady who has been ill with smallpox and is left with her skin pitted by scars. He said that Guatemala had many small scars left from the Arévalo-Arbenz regime and that these would take time to heal. He said that Castillo Armas had 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 714.11/2–2458. Confidential. 2 Vice President Nixon visited Guatemala, February 12–15, during a good will tour of Central America and the Caribbean area, February 6–March 5, 1955; see Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. VII, American Republics: Central and South America, Document 24.
