National Security Policy 1009 that the US will be prepared to use chemical and biological weapons to the extent that such use will enhance the military effectiveness of the armed forces, the decision as to the use of such weapons being made by the President. Mr. Gray also referred to the view of the Director, Bureau of the Budget, expressed during the review of Basic Policy in July 1959, that we were spending too much money on chemical and biological weapons if we did not intend to use them and too little money if we did intend to use them. Mr. Gray noted that NSC Action 2105 adopted at that time called for the presentation which was about to be made by Dr. York and General Lemnitzer. Dr. York said that one of the important fields of chemical and bio­ logical warfare was controlled temporary incapacitation. Research and development in this field might open up a new dimension of warfare in which incapacitating agents would be used in situations short of all-­ out war and in situations where the use of nuclear weapons was not possible or feasible. In the term controlled temporary incapacitation, the word “controlled” meant that the time of onset, the duration and the severity of incapacitation could be regulated; the word “temporary” meant that persons subjected to incapacitating agents would eventu­ ally completely recover from the direct effects, although minor indirect effects might persist permanently; the word “incapacitation” referred to a variety of effects including extreme irritation, black-­out, lethargy, paralysis, discoordinated actions, temporary illness and lack of a will to fight. Dr. York then displayed a chart on chemical incapacitating agents indicating that tear gas (CN–CS) was available now, an anesthetic agent (SN) which caused temporary paralysis would be available soon and a discoordinating agent (K), which would make a cat afraid of a mouse, would be available in the future. A chart of biological incapacitating agents was displayed indicating that an agent causing Q-­fever (OU) was available now and NU (VEE) agent would be available soon. A Rift Valley fever agent (FA) and tailored variants of the other agents would be available in the future. Dr. York then reported with the aid of a chart that chemical incapacitation agents had about the same efficiency in the field as tactical nuclear weapons inasmuch as a 10,000 pound missile, 5 per cent of which was chemical agent, could cover one square mile. It was hoped that by 1965 a 10,000 pound missile could cover 10 square miles. Dr. York displayed charts on technical advances and potentials of biological warfare agents indicating that agent concentration and agent storage (now one year; soon to become 3 years) would soon be improved. Charts also showed that the biological decay rate was several per cent per minute and the efficiency of dissemination of biological agents depended on the fraction of the munitions which consisted of the agent. Turning to weapons systems Dr. York indicated that biological and chemical agents might be disseminated by means of manned aircraft
