688
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Secretary Brown: (Outlines possible strike at a TV-power station
installation in Tehran.)
The President: It is important that all casualties be limited and that
we do not engage in wanton killing.
Zbigniew Brzezinski: We should also avoid Kennedy’s mistake at
the Bay of Pigs of so limiting the military operation that its chances of
success were reduced.
General Jones: We will not engage in wanton killing—we will only
do so if it is necessary to avoid U.S. casualties. We will stay in the
compound for one hour and search thoroughly the four buildings.
(Discussion between Turner, Vance, and Brzezinski about the com-
pound—how it is fortified, how it is guarded.)
The President: My inclination is not to launch any other attacks. We
need a clean operation. We should not blow up other buildings in
Tehran and I am doubtful about taking prisoners.
Zbigniew Brzezinski: It may be desirable to have prisoners as coun-
ter-hostages in the event the Iranians take new ones. (Brown and Clay-
tor agree.)
The President: I want it clean and simple.
Zbigniew Brzezinski: It is an asset. We can always send them back.
Warren Christopher: Taking prisoners would be more complicating
than helpful.
Jody Powell: I agree with Christopher. What would we do with
them ultimately?
Hamilton Jordan: I agree with the above. If we grab someone, it
should be someone important.
General Jones: I would take prisoners only as far as Mansuriyah
and then let them go. I would want the Commander to have the option.
Secretary Vance: This will simply complicate the situation.
The President: Talk this over with the Commander. Basically, I do
not want the prisoners. If need be, take them to Mansuriyah and then
release them.
Zbigniew Brzezinski: We should also consider what to do if the
operation fails. We should consider retribution if things go badly or
more hostages are taken. Our options are mining or an attack on a
refinery.
Secretary Brown: (Favors more than that if the failure is large.) The
question is, when to react if the operation fails?
Admiral Turner: We should react the same day so it looks like a
single operation. Then it looks less like a failure.
Secretary Vance: What would be the consequences for other
Westerners?
