1138 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement generally accepted principles international trade—rather my coun­ try carrying on policy international blockade and embargo in order pursue national political objective. Implementation these policies has prejudiced interests other countries. In fact these policies preju­ dicial to everybody concerned. That reason why he stated this pol­ icy of embargo unreasonable, should therefore be abolished. Matter of fact this policy already provoked extreme dissatisfaction of peo­ ples every country. That made it all more necessary discuss this subject. That was reason why this subject one of matters at issue between two countries. In raising this subject it was their demand that policy of embargo be lifted. Lifting of embargo would help in improvement of relations between China and US. Lifting embargo not only in interests Chinese people but also in interest American people. He had stated he hoped I’d put forward my concrete views with regard lifting embargo but my last statement still had not con­ tained reply to statement he had made. He continued hope I’d con­ sider this matter and if I found not able do so this morning, do so next meeting. 12. I replied he had often spoken of necessity these talks being mutually advantageous. Negotiations between two countries such as ours could not be one sided. However seemed to me thus far in these talks results and efforts of his [garble—side] had been directed toward solely unilateral advantage. He had presumably raised question of what he termed “trade embargo” because he considered it advanta­ geous his side. I had explained to him reasons US didn’t consider it advantageous under present conditions. On other hand renunciation force something that clearly mutual and advantageous to both of us. If threat of force could, as I had so often proposed, be removed it could open door to fruitful discussion of other subjects. Trade policies of my country were not cause but rather effect of threat force that continues exists. If that threat could be removed by unequivocal renunciation force, it would remove one of causes this policy. His govt had it within its power remove that cause. 13. I continued at outset these discussions I pointed out another cause seriously affecting our relations was detention of American citizens in his country. I pointed out at time this also could only be removed by action his country. This another case in which his side had sought unilateral advantage. I’d thought last Sept. we’d agreed upon course action that would be of mutual advantage. Yet things appeared be going backward as far as any advantage to US concerned. Not only had Americans been released from his country at what is apparently rate considerably slower than even before we entered into agreement but any policy of what he had termed leniency appeared even been dropped. Pattern now apparently being established persons in prison being required serve full sentence. I noted that of last three persons
