1114 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 348. Article in the National Intelligence Daily1 Washington, March 17, 1980 SPECIAL ANALYSIS SYRIA: Assad’s Prospects President Assad has committed his minority Alawite government to a risky course with his reported decision to use the military more freely to crush civil unrest in Syrian cities. This may intimidate his domestic opponents in the short run, but unless Assad is able to reestablish order quickly, it will also further erode his domestic support and could eventually bring about his ouster. By committing the military, Assad is playing his last major card to keep his regime in power. Army discipline may well collapse in the face of widespread riots. This could lead to a bloody war between Sunni Muslim and Alawite units. The Alawites, however, may choose to topple Assad before such turmoil develops in order to keep their position secure. [handling restriction not declassified] The latest round of antigovernment activity began late last month in Hamah, a conservative Sunni stronghold and a center of Muslim Brotherhood dissidence. Demonstrations soon spread to Aleppo, Syria’s second largest city, and to several other important towns in northern Syria. Damascus remains relatively quiet despite terrorist bombings of some government stores and calls by the extremists for sympathy strikes. [handling restriction not declassified] In Aleppo, the Army’s elite Special Forces failed to force shopkeepers to reopen in the face of intimidation by armed extremists. Violent street rioting resulted. The commandos reportedly suffered substantial casualties, prompting Assad to order armor and infantry into the city. [handling restriction not declassified] [less than 1 line not declassified] religious leaders and government officials in Aleppo arranged a cease-fire last weekend to give the Assad regime time to consider the dissidents’ demands for greater political freedom and release of prisoners. The religious leaders gave the government until today to meet their demands, but threatened to renew their calls for antiregime activity at noon prayer meetings if the government did not respond. Assad clearly has no intention of meeting the religious leaders’ demands. [handling restriction not declassified] 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services, Directorate of Intelligence, Job 82T00466R: Intelligence Publications Files (’80), Box 2, Folder 1, National Intelligence Daily—National Intelligence Daily Intelligence Sourced Copies—National Intelligence Daily Cable—FLS. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
