3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1977 73 new SALT Agreement.2 Today, if this suited Secretary Vance, and if the Secretary had no additional considerations to add to what he had said yesterday, Gromyko would suggest that they take up other political questions which in their common opinion required discussion. These were the Vienna negotiations and the Middle East. He would suggest to take up the Vienna negotiations first, because the exchange of views would undoubtedly be shorter than on the Middle East problem. In suggesting that the Middle East problem be discussed here in Moscow, he did not intend to preclude the special meeting that he and the Secretary had agreed upon, to be held in Geneva for the specific purpose of discussing the Middle East. In this connection, they could perhaps take up other disarmament issues and questions of mutual interest. The Secretary said that would be fine with us; he would be happy to discuss these two items and thought it was appropriate to take up the Vienna talks first. He suggested that Gromyko start off. MBFR Vienna Negotiations Gromyko said that the Soviet Union continued to believe that it would be useful to reach agreement on an equal reduction by both sides of their armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. A successful solution to this problem would constitute a major contribution to achievement of military detente on the European continent, and would be an important component of the efforts aimed at strengthening peace and security. Gromyko wished to point out directly and clearly that throughout the more than three-year history of the Vienna negotiations3 the East had done a great deal and had gone a long way to bring them to a positive result. The principal factor in the Soviet approach, and this pervaded all the specific proposals tabled in Vienna by the socialist countries, was that reductions should not harm the security of either party. Any agreement reached must not give either side any unilateral advantage. In other words, what was to be accomplished was a reduction of the levels of military confrontation in Central Europe, but without disturbing the correlation of forces in that area. The level would be reduced, but the existing correlation of forces would remain the same; that was the only solution to this question. Naturally, it would please either side in the negotiations if the other were to give up some of its forces, but this would not be a realistic approach. Gromyko did not really believe that those responsible for preparation of these negotia- 2 See Document 18. 3 See Department of State Bulletin, November 26, 1973, pp. 657–661, and Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIX, European Security, Documents 346, 348, 351, 357, 365 and 367.
