Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
765
306.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Conventional Arms Transfer (CAT) Talks (U)
(S) On March 6, 1979 a mini-SCC meeting was held2 to determine
an appropriate response to the Soviet proposal that the Conventional
Arms Transfer (CAT) Talks be reconvened.3 At that meeting it was de-
cided to explore alternative approaches for establishing an agreed
agenda for the next round of negotiations. The following consider-
ations reflect the views of the Department of Defense on that subject.
(S) The Department of Defense has been supportive of conven-
tional arms transfer (CAT) restraint to the extent that it promotes col-
lective security by seeking to limit unrestrained and potentially desta-
bilizing transfers. In this regard, Defense has consistently held that
concrete regional application is essential for any meaningful CAT re-
straint regime. Moreover, it is the DOD position that an appropriate
means be found to test the willingness of the Soviets to commit them-
selves to concrete restraint without establishing the legitimacy of
Soviet-proposed regions.
(S) Defense believes the approach offering the best prospect for
success is one that would allow the talks to proceed with the under-
standing that each side would be allowed to nominate regions for re-
straint but that actual restraint proposals could not be presented until
both sides agreed on the appropriateness of a candidate region. Given
the exemptions and exclusions previously identified by each side, these
ground rules would most likely lead to a discussion of Africa, if discus-
sion of any region is in fact possible.
(S) Defense views sub-Saharan Africa as the best prospective re-
gional candidate, as US and Soviet interests are not as directly engaged
there as they are elsewhere. There are practical advantages in seeking
restraint in Africa, given both existing legal and political constraints on
1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 78,
1977 Arms Transfer/FMS Policy. Secret.
2 No minutes or summary of conclusions for this meeting have been found.
3 McGiffert informed Brown that the Soviets had proposed that the CAT talks be re-
sumed on March 20 however the “United States put them off temporarily, but the Soviets
are expected to raise the issue at the summit [in Vienna scheduled for June].” (Memo-
randum from McGiffert to Brown, April 13; Ibid.)
