844
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Since the conclusion of CIEC, several G–77 members have advo-
cated the establishment of a UN mechanism to conduct a general over-
view of progress on North/South issues along CIEC lines. No con-
sensus
has
emerged
on
the
location
of
this
mechanism.
The
Venezuelans have advocated a new, restricted-membership committee
attached to the UN General Assembly for this purpose, and the Presi-
dent has indicated our support for this concept.5 However, Venezuela
has not been able to garner substantial LDC support for this idea and
has stopped pushing it. Developing countries are considering other al-
ternatives, including assigning the overview function to the current
Second Committee of the UN General Assembly6 or the UN Economic
and Social Council (ECOSOC).
THE OPTIONS
A. UN General Assembly treatment of specific North/South
issues.
1. Seek to begin steering UN General Assembly North/South dis-
cussions toward broad issues of global economic interdependence and
responsibility and gaining greater international support for human
rights, basic human needs, equity in income distribution, and the im-
portance to all of global growth. Avoid negotiations though not general
discussion of the specific issues being treated in functional fora.
This option would not prejudice negotiations on the specific issues
in fora most conducive to progress. It would mobilize support for our
positions on human rights and other global development issues and
allow us to regain to some degree the moral offensive in the North/
South dialogue. It could contribute to a more pragmatic and mutually
cooperative dialogue in the future. The developing countries may not
favor this approach because they hope to use the General Assembly to
impose guidelines and timetables on the negotiations in the functional
fora. Some developing countries will resent and question our motiva-
tions for raising the broader issues of human rights and human needs.
2. Permit UN General Assembly either to reopen the CIEC negotia-
tions on the individual issues or help pre-determine the results in the
5 During a June 29 meeting with Pe´rez, Carter stated “that he was willing to accept
Venezuela’s proposal to set up a group of representatives from 30–35 nations, including the Soviet
Union and the People’s Republic of China, as well as industrialized and developing countries, to
work within the U.N. on North-South economic issues.” Carter also expressed his hope “that
the US and Venezuela would work closely in this forum to develop proposals, but it was
President Carter’s preference, in general, not to set up new organizations if one already
existed to do the job.” (Memorandum of conversation, June 29; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 35, Memcons: President: 6/77)
6 The Economic and Financial Committee of the UN General Assembly was also
known as the Second Committee.
