Uruguay 1177 There was an exchange of amenities during which the Foreign Minister expressed the hope that the personal relationship which had been developed with the Secretary beginning with the Santiago FM Conference would be considered as evidence of the friendly and cooperative relationship which the Uruguayan Government wished to have with the United States. The Secretary then brought up the question of Cuba which he had touched upon briefly with the Foreign Minister in the motorcade earlier in the day. The Secretary pointed out that the Cuban situation poses a very serious problem for the United States, but that it is not just a problem for the United States but one for all of the American Republics. The Secretary said he would appreciate having the Foreign Minister’s views of the situation. The Secretary said that since the withdrawal of our Ambassador from Cuba there had been a lessening of attacks on the United States; on the Secretary; on Assistant Secretary Rubottom and on Ambassador Bonsal. Nevertheless, the Cuban Government had continued to place in important positions within the Government persons who were known to be of the extreme left, if not Communists. This is of concern to the United States because it may indicate that the Cuban Government is likely to follow on extremist course and take extremist actions which will further complicate our relations, despite a reduction in criticism of the United States. The Secretary said that it would be hard to predict just where such a course might end. The Secretary made it very plain that we are not concerned with Cuba’s Agrarion Reform Law. He said that this is a domestic matter for the Cubans to determine. All that we ask is that there be just, adequate and prompt payment to any Americans whose property is taken. In this convection, the Secretary pointed out that the Cubans have just announced that all further foreign capital investment will be prohibited. This might be a further indication of a trend which is developing within the Cuban Government. Such a law would, of course, be of concern not only to the United States but to all other foreign countries. The Secretary also explained that the Cubans are desirous of negotiating with us on certain matters, and had recently proposed such negotiations but with conditions which were one-­sided and completely unacceptable to the United States. We have replied to the Cubans that we would not be able to negotiate on this basis. The Secretary pointed out that the unrealistic and unilateral approach of the Cubans on the question of negotiations might be a further indication of the trend of events in Cuba, and certainly will have a hearing on our relations with that country. The Foreign Minister at this point, after indicating surprise at the news of this new Cuban action of foreign investments, said he understood completely that the Cuban situation presented a very difficult
