182
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Human rights include economic and social as well as political
rights.
C. Treatment
Human rights are an integral part of Agency information output,
not the subject of a separate “public relations” campaign.
Programming will be reasoned rather than strident. It will empha-
size human rights achievements but will not hesitate to address repres-
sive practices by foreign governments.
In coverage of U.S. human rights developments, our case will ben-
efit in the long run by balanced reporting of both achivements and con-
tinuing problems.
Posts will evaluate local perceptions of human rights and take
these factors into consideration in their programs on this subject.
While bilateral efforts will be made to foster human rights in spe-
cial cases, multilateral approaches may stand better chances for
success.
In USIA programming, care will be taken to assure that human
rights are considered in the overall context of U.S. political, economic
and social goals.
USIA will be sensitive to the fact that, in some instances, human
rights can be advanced more effectively through quiet diplomacy than
through appeal to public opinion.
The following are specific responses to the subject raised in
Deputy Secretary Christopher’s May 30 memorandum to Director
Reinhardt:
a. Proposals for providing information and guidance on human rights to
all USIS field offices.
We shall use a multi-media approach in explicating U.S. policy
and promoting human rights. This includes a full range of print and au-
diovisual materials, together with speakers. Guidance will be tailored
to statements and actions by U.S. or foreign officials, and to significant
events (e.g. CSCE developments, UN Human Rights Commission
meetings, etc.).
We shall periodically explore with field posts their perceptions of
local human rights situations, and then develop supplemental pro-
grams which are responsive to these conditions.
b. Recommendations of specific steps USIA might take in particular
countries to promote human rights.
The following specialized projects will be proposed to support
USIS posts in individual countries on the human rights issue. These
proposals are illustrative, not exhaustive, of the possibilities open to the
Administration via USIA’s programming potential abroad.
