Human Rights eign policy considerations as well as the possible utility of an outside review of this area of policy.8 Attachment Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)9 Washington, December 14, 1977 SUBJECT Armacost’s Memorandum on Human Rights I disagree with virtually all of the specifics Mike cites and believe they should all be seen in a different light. For example: —Mike says that “We appear to the public and Congress prepared to withhold shipment of commodities of such basic importance to human welfare as food in order to advance our concepts of political and civil rights”. In fact what we are doing is precisely the opposite— adopting new procedures to try to insure that the food aid goes to the people who are really hungry, and not to speculation or to balancing trade deficits. Several talks on the Hill with both members and staff lead me to believe that (after the brief scare that our surpluses might not be shipped at all) Congress both understands and supports what we are doing. —The decision to avoid defining precise and clear standards of what constitutes “a consistent pattern of gross violations” of human rights is not the result of sloppy procedures, but was consciously taken after much thought, including consideration at the Cabinet level (as well as an explicit directive from yourself). The reasoning was that global standards for such a thing would have little meaning and would overly rigidify our policy. —Mike’s concern that the PL–480 list will become a de facto hit list for other programs has little grounds, since none of the other programs in which actions have been taken have acquired such standing. Why should this one? 8 Brzezinski did not indicate his approval here, but wrote at the top of the first page of the memorandum: “RI Set up requested meeting. ZB.” 9 No classification marking. Copies were sent to Armacost, Thornton, and Oksenberg. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Denend saw it.
