120
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
D) We will seek implementation through multilateral agencies as
well as in bilateral relations. Secretary specifies that it is not our pur-
pose to intervene in the internal affairs of other countries, but as the
President has emphasized, no member of the United Nations can claim
that violation of internationally protected human rights is solely its
own affair. Our policy is to be applied within our own society as well as
abroad. We welcome constructive criticism, at the same time as we
offer it. Declassify upon receipt.
Christopher
40.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, May 2, 1977
Procedure for Implementing Human Rights Policy in the
International Financial Institutions (IFIs)
Issue for Decision
The existing inter-agency procedure for reviewing individual IFI
loan proposals does not provide adequate lead time to implement a
consistent coherent human rights policy in the IFIs. In our judgment a
new procedure is required. I recommend you write Mike Blumenthal
expressing concern about the present procedure and suggesting a new
one be established.
Background/Analysis
The National Advisory Council on the international monetary and
financial policies (NAC) reviews each IFI loan proposal from an eco-
nomic policy perspective before the Secretary of the Treasury provides
instructions to the Executive Director. This review occurs approxi-
mately one week before formal Board action although informal Board
discussions may take place a day or two after the review. As we saw in
the case of the recent export credit to Brazil, this review often occurs too
late for us to give thorough inter-agency consideration to human rights
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, P770108–1972. Limited
Official Use. Drafted by Winder. Handwritten notations on the first page of the memo-
randum read: “OBE” and “6/28.”
