94
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
5. Khlestov’s next question referred to Buchheim’s statement
(ASAT Two 015 Bern 665)4 that the U.S. envisioned the two sides
would, prior to expiration of the 12-month text suspension, meet to
discuss these matters further and take appropriate decisions. He re-
quested clarification of the U.S. views on this matter with respect to the
two possible interpretations: Does the U.S. believe that an agreement
which would be in effect for a specific period of time would lapse when
that period was over; or does the U.S. have the view that the agreement
would only lapse if the two sides met and agreed not to extend it?
Buchheim responded that the U.S. had no fixed views on the matter. He
said the U.S. side was talking about an initial undertaking on testing
lasting for 12 months during which time the two sides should decide
whether to continue, to extend, or to change the agreement, and that we
favored maximum flexibility in consultations during this 12-month pe-
riod. He said further that he believed that an initial agreement should
be case in terms that envision further discussions or agreements by the
parties on these matters, and that it should provide as much flexibility
in consultations as seems reasonable. He noted that Khlestov’s ques-
tion envisions the possibility that an article might specify that a text
suspension would continue or lapse depending on what the parties in
consultation agree concerning the text suspension or any other matters
or undertakings. He then asked Khlestov’s views on whether the sus-
pension should automatically lapse if the parties don’t agree to con-
tinue it or would the suspension continue until the parties do agree to
terminate it. The U.S. has no fixed views on this, he said. Khlestov said
that he had drawn two conclusions from Buchheim’s presentation:
First, that a mechanism for further consideration of this matter had
been more carefully worked out by the U.S. side than by the Soviets,
and second, that the future fate of a test suspension following the
12-month period must be more precisely formulated. Buchheim said
that a perfectly acceptable mechanism to consider the matter further is
these two Delegations. Khlestov asked for Buchheim’s thoughts on
paper. Buchheim agreed to do so but said the thoughts would not be
complicated; they would be that the parties consider the matter during
the one-year period under whatever mechanism the two sides prefer.
4 Telegram 665 from Bern, February 2, reported on a two-hour plenary session held
a day earlier at the Soviet embassy. The two sides discussed “possible prohibited actions;
expressed view that potential agreement should cover those launch vehicle states and
component parts which go into orbit; and agreed that a potential agreement should cover
objects on surface of moon and other celestial bodies.” The Soviets also “requested list of
specific actions U.S. would favor prohibiting” and expressed the need for “provisions”
that would “cover inadvertent actions and to take into account of changes, advances in
technology.” Buchheim in return suggested a “one-year all-altitude test suspension.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790050–1268)
