Afghanistan
605
propaganda barrage aimed at proving external aggression, duty-to-
treaty obligations, and threats to the USSR’s own security. But for the
Party faithful, domestically and in the Communist Parties abroad, more
important is the need to understand how the invasion comports with
Marxist-Leninist ideology. Despite this obvious need, we find, how-
ever, that Soviet leaders—perhaps because of Moscow’s awareness of
the anxieties generated abroad by the Brezhnev Doctrine—have so far
made only a few stabs at rationalizing their action in ideological terms.
No general theory has yet been articulated. Prompted by reftel, which
suggests the existence of an “Afghan corollary” to the Brezhnev Doc-
trine, we have reexamined the post-Afghanistan Soviet leadership state-
ments as well as current and earlier theoretical journals. Thus far, the
ideological linkage between the Brezhnev Doctrine—which applies to
“socialist states”—and the Afghan invasion has not yet been made,
though one prominent ideologist does hint in a pre-invasion article at
the need to act when the gains in countries with a “socialist orientation”,
such as Afghanistan, are in jeopardy. If Washington analysts agree
with our analysis of the ideologist’s article, it may be worth flagging
to interested scholars or the media for their consideration and possible
exploitation. End summary.
3. Since the invasion of Afghanistan, there has been speculation
about the emergence of a revised or extended Brezhnev Doctrine to
explain the Soviet action (e.g., USICA 7395). The speculation is based
on the conclusion that the Brezhnev Doctrine, as imputed to the Soviets
following the Czechoslovak invasion, falls short of providing a plausi-
ble ideological explanation for the latest Soviet invasion, and therefore
one needs (leaving aside for the moment why the “need” arises) a
revised formulation of the original doctrine or an “Afghan corollary”
to it.
4. In what way does the Brezhnev Doctrine fall short of explaining,
in Marxist-Leninist terms, the invasion of Afghanistan? Following the
August 1968 invasion, students of Soviet ideology relied on various
official statements—but especially one by Brezhnev at the Fifth Con-
gress of the Polish United Workers Party on November 12, 1968—to
make the case that a new ideological doctrine had been fashioned.
Brezhnev stated at the Congress that:
When internal and external forces, hostile to socialism, seek to
reverse the development of any socialist country whatsoever in the
direction of the restoration of the capitalist order, when a threat to the
cause of socialism arises in that country, a threat to the security of the
socialist commonwealth as a whole—this already becomes not only a
problem of the people of the country concerned, but also a common
problem and the concern of all socialist countries.
Because Czechoslovakia was a Warsaw Pact country, “any socialist
country” as used by Brezhnev was mainly viewed at the time as encom-
