662 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 455. Telegram 1402 from Geneva1 Geneva, January 19, 1956, 8 p.m. 1402. From Johnson. 1. Wang opened 33d meeting today with visibly hastily drawn pre­ pared statement saying that at our last meeting he already made some remarks on my proposed amendments to draft announcement. This morning he going make further comments. 2. Wang said at last meeting I stated that China and US confront each other with policies that in conflict but it need not lead to hostili­ ties. If so, solution to disputes should be brought about through nego­ tiation and that exactly specified in their draft. If however it intention US side in making announcement to maintain status quo of occupation Taiwan then as he had long ago pointed out his side would absolutely not agree. 3. He said I had repeatedly stated China not required to renounce policies she has laid down. However, policy of China is exactly to liberate Taiwan. My draft requires them to recognize right of US to individual collective self defense in Taiwan area. That aims to require his side recognize US-Chiang treaty as well as recognize US occupa­ tion Taiwan. 4. Wang said furthermore my draft attempted confuse exclusively internal issue of China with international disputes between China US. This would require his side give up legal sovereign right over Taiwan. As he had long pointed out this what his side absolutely will not do. 5. Wang said I had stated use of force does not accord with accepted standards of international conduct. However it exactly US which using force and threat against China in Taiwan area. 6. Wang said, in spite this his side still maintains that disputes between China US be settled through negotiations. As to question in which manner China will settle internal issues, as he had pointed out long ago, that exclusively matter Chinese internal affairs and permits no foreign country’s interference. 7. Wang said again I had stated that issuance agreed announce­ ment does not involve any third parties. However in draft put forward by me I raised question of so-­called individual collective self defense in Taiwan area. That exactly an attempt to bring Chiang clique into matter. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–1956. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution.
