Afghanistan
15
10. Nevertheless, we cannot identify any significant leftist candi-
dates who might replace Daoud, either in the near or long-term. While
large numbers of Afghan military officers have been exposed to Soviet
training in the USSR or have had contact with Soviet military advisors
in Afghanistan, it is unknown how many may have become Marxist
or pro-Soviet. Given the government’s anti-Communist leanings, they
are not likely to express left-wing views at the present time. However,
one or more of these offices could emerge from obscurity with remarka-
ble rapidity in an unstable political environment, and we, therefore,
believe that any post-Daoud succession, which is not quickly resolved
in favor of “centrist”—military or civilian—leadership, could lead to
a situation wherein the forces of the Left could play a strong role.
11. Impact on United States interests. A prolonged or violent contest
for power [would] adversely affect our interest in regional stability by
threatening the independence and cohesion of Afghanistan. Con-
versely, a quick succession by a moderately centrist leader, such as
Naim, or Rassuli—the most probable eventuality at this time, would
likely pose no problems for U.S. interests. (The Soviets could possibly
also live with such a solution.)
12. Conclusions: Given the traditional and conservative make-up
of Muslim Afghanistan, as well as the facts of Afghan political life
since the 1973 coup and [garble—the elimination?] of the monarchy, the
ultimate successor to Daoud will probably emerge from the politically
“centrist” groups, such as the military, or the civilian “establishment”
(i.e., the Mohammadzai clan). The inherent power of the military—
many of whose leaders are also Mohammadzais—not surprisingly
gives the military the inside track, although other pressure groups
could conceivably field solid contenders, provided they could elicit
some military support. Were General Rassuli to make an immediate
move to seize power, following Daoud, we question that he has the
qualities that would enable him to remain in power. A long-term leader
will, in our view, emerge only after a period of pulling and hauling
among the many interest groups here.
13. The potential levels of violence which might explode following
Daoud’s departure could well be determined by actions and choices
which Daoud himself takes during the unknown time left to him. An
orderly succession will thus depend on Daoud’s ability to convince
competing groups that the direction in which he has set for Afghan
development takes into account the interests of all segments of society,
and that violent internecine conflict should be avoided at all costs.
Eliot
