World Hunger and Food Policy 843 • that massive increases in food production will be required in coming years, as incomes rise and the world population continues to grow; • that hunger is a political problem as much as a scientific and technical problem; • that hunger has extremely complex and interrelated global causes and consequences but that its elimination is not beyond the available technical and financial resources of the world community; • that the attainment of long-term solutions will depend on firm commitments by the countries attending the Summit, by other donor countries, by international agencies, and by the food-deficit countries themselves. The Commission believes it is particularly fitting that issues dealing with hunger are now being addressed at the Summit by those nations whose own resources enable them to offer assistance to others. II. The Major Focus: Strengthening the Commitment of the United States and Others to Overcome Hunger The U.S. commitment to overcoming hunger is based upon the belief that this problem represents the most fundamental issue of human rights and that it also represents one of the greatest potential threats to international peace and stability. This commitment includes the following elements: • Current U.S. foreign assistance programs and other relationships with developing countries have a number of important—but sometimes conflicting—objectives, emphases and motivations. The Commission recommends that the President announce that he is prepared to make the elimination of world hunger the first priority of America’s interactions with developing countries for the decade of the 1980s. The Commission considers such an approach to be a major investment in national and international security and recommends that the other Summit nations also give first priority to this same goal. In particular, this priority can be reflected both in design and funding of foreign assistance programs as well as in the broad range of political and commercial relationships between the developed and developing countries. • The establishment of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger is evidence of this government’s resolve to strengthen and accelerate its own efforts to assure an adequate diet for all. The Commission is examining U.S. policies and actions to determine which of those activities enhance efforts to overcome hunger, and which may, in fact, inhibit the progress of such efforts. The U.S. believes that global endeavors to combat hunger would be significantly enhanced if other
