1036
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
strengthening international support for our global non-proliferation
efforts. In addition, such adherence could increase the likelihood of a
Soviet pledge not to deploy or store nuclear weapons anywhere in
Latin America and a commitment by Argentina, Brazil and Cuba not to
acquire nuclear weapons or permit them to be deployed on their
territories.
We favor option two of the options listed in the decision memo-
randum.2 Announcement of our decision to adhere in a major Presiden-
tial address on April 14 would maximize the favorable impact of that
decision on US relations with Latin America. Equally important, in our
view, such an announcement would be a valuable means of strength-
ening international support for the Administration’s non-proliferation
policies. Nonaligned recipients of nuclear technology, whether or not
located in Latin America, would welcome US adherence to Protocol I as
demonstrating our willingness to bear our fair share of responsibility
for curbing proliferation and as balancing an approach to non-
proliferation that has been criticized by some as requiring recipients to
make the greatest sacrifices, especially in terms of foregoing access to
nuclear technologies.
We also regard option two as a more promising means of
achieving corresponding restraints by the USSR, Cuba and Argentina
than if we made US adherence conditional on acceptance of restraints
by those states. Making our adherence conditional on actions by others
would, in effect, place us in a bilateral negotiation with each of them,
with the risk that the Tlatelolco issue would get entangled with unre-
lated matters of bilateral concern and the strong likelihood that, forced
to view the situation essentially as a bargain with the US, the other
states would be reluctant to accept a bargain that clearly requires
greater concessions by them than by the US. The result might well be
continued impasse.
On the other hand, US adherence without conditions can be ex-
pected to stimulate Latin American proponents of the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco, who would be encouraged by enhanced prospects for early com-
pletion of the Treaty regime, to apply pressure on the remaining
holdouts to accept their respective obligations. While there is of course
no guarantee that such pressure will succeed, we feel that it will be
more effective than the modest, and perhaps counterproductive, lev-
erage we could bring to bear on the holdouts directly.
If the President decides to announce a new Protocol I position on
April 14, we believe it would be important to brief key Congressmen in
advance and to consult with the Governor of Puerto Rico. In addition,
2 See attachment to Document 406.
