Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II III. Congressional Attitudes and Prospective Human Rights Legislation There is broad support in Congress for giving human rights concerns a high priority in our foreign policy. A growing coalition of liberals and conservatives is prepared to push new human rights initiatives. The liberals have a concern for human rights and basically support the IFIs and foreign aid. Some of the conservatives, while also concerned about human rights, are essentially anti-IFI and anti-foreign aid and many see human rights legislation as an indirect means of reducing aid. There are no signs that Congress is having second thoughts about the Harkin Amendment which requires that the U.S. oppose IFI loans to governments engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights, unless such assistance is directed specifically to programs which serve the basic human needs of the citizens of such country. At the same time, there has been some confusion in Congress as to the Administration’s efforts to carry out this legislation and as to the Administration’s human rights policy generally. A common criticism on the Hill is that the Administration has been inconsistent in applying its human rights policy, giving harsher treatment to small countries where we have little security or economic interests, while applying a different standard to those countries which are important to us. Another argument heard on the Hill is that our human rights policy is jeopardizing “more important U.S. interests.” Some members have argued that moral suasion and arousal of world opinion are more effective in achieving human rights progress than “sanctions,” including opposition to IFI loans. Others are troubled about how our human rights policy is applied to a particular country or region, even though they support its application elsewhere. In connection with these criticisms, many questions have been raised as to the mandate and functions of the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. In response to this situation, we have in recent weeks made a concerted effort to explain our human rights actions more fully to the Congress. We have sent to large numbers of interested congressmen and senators a detailed memorandum on the Interagency Group. This memorandum sets forth the statutory framework within which the Group operates, explains the mandate and composition of the Group, and describes the Group’s proceedings.3 Congressman Zablocki has had this memorandum printed in the Congressional Record and, in general, we have had a very favorable response to it. In addition, we have
