456
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
III. Congressional Attitudes and Prospective Human Rights Legislation
There is broad support in Congress for giving human rights con-
cerns a high priority in our foreign policy. A growing coalition of lib-
erals and conservatives is prepared to push new human rights initia-
tives. The liberals have a concern for human rights and basically
support the IFIs and foreign aid. Some of the conservatives, while also
concerned about human rights, are essentially anti-IFI and anti-foreign
aid and many see human rights legislation as an indirect means of re-
ducing aid.
There are no signs that Congress is having second thoughts about
the Harkin Amendment which requires that the U.S. oppose IFI loans
to governments engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations of
internationally recognized human rights, unless such assistance is di-
rected specifically to programs which serve the basic human needs of
the citizens of such country.
At the same time, there has been some confusion in Congress as to
the Administration’s efforts to carry out this legislation and as to the
Administration’s human rights policy generally. A common criticism
on the Hill is that the Administration has been inconsistent in applying
its human rights policy, giving harsher treatment to small countries
where we have little security or economic interests, while applying a
different standard to those countries which are important to us. An-
other argument heard on the Hill is that our human rights policy is
jeopardizing “more important U.S. interests.” Some members have ar-
gued that moral suasion and arousal of world opinion are more effec-
tive in achieving human rights progress than “sanctions,” including
opposition to IFI loans. Others are troubled about how our human
rights policy is applied to a particular country or region, even though
they support its application elsewhere. In connection with these criti-
cisms, many questions have been raised as to the mandate and func-
tions of the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign
Assistance.
In response to this situation, we have in recent weeks made a con-
certed effort to explain our human rights actions more fully to the
Congress. We have sent to large numbers of interested congressmen
and senators a detailed memorandum on the Interagency Group. This
memorandum sets forth the statutory framework within which the
Group operates, explains the mandate and composition of the Group,
and describes the Group’s proceedings.3 Congressman Zablocki has
had this memorandum printed in the Congressional Record and, in gen-
eral, we have had a very favorable response to it. In addition, we have
3 See footnote 3, Document 132.
