1038 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II AID’s internal reorganization takes the foregoing into account, as does Section 104(d) of the Foreign Assistance Act,11 enacted last year, which requires that all appropriate development assistance programs be developed with a view to “building motivation” for smaller families. AID is also ensuring that service delivery programs will be organized increasingly around low-cost village and community-based systems, including training of paramedics and auxiliaries in family planning techniques, distribution, and ways to motivate people to practice contraception and otherwise to lower fertility rates. Since the need and demand for voluntary sterilization is widespread, AID will be training doctors in new surgical techniques so that medically safe, voluntary sterilization programs can be undertaken by governments and private agencies. Also, in response to mounting requests, AID will be increasing support for developing country voluntary sterilization programs through improved biomedical research, chemical testing, training, equipment, and related services. Continued research, carried out in the U.S. or in developing country institutions, whenever feasible, to create simple, but effective, diagnostic procedures and contraceptive techniques, is needed to improve the quality of health and family planning services. Clinical testing of research results will be done in developing countries to be sure that the new or modified methods are adapted to country-specific circumstances. Research and tests of improved IUD’s, better male and female sterilization procedures, and an early, simple, and accurate pregnancy test are among the problems to be pursued. The collection and analysis of fertility and other demographic data are essential tools for the design of better family planning services and the assessment of a country’s population program. Trained, objective analysts and designers of data collection systems are needed to evaluate program progress against demographic goals. AID plans to continue support to a number of data collection and evaluation programs which are producing useful statistical materials and are training developing country personnel to carry out these tasks in the future. AID will continue to give priority attention to those large, populous developing countries which contribute most to the growth of the
