1038
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
AID’s internal reorganization takes the foregoing into account, as
does Section 104(d) of the Foreign Assistance Act,11 enacted last year,
which requires that all appropriate development assistance programs
be developed with a view to “building motivation” for smaller families.
AID is also ensuring that service delivery programs will be orga-
nized increasingly around low-cost village and community-based
systems, including training of paramedics and auxiliaries in family
planning techniques, distribution, and ways to motivate people to
practice contraception and otherwise to lower fertility rates.
Since the need and demand for voluntary sterilization is wide-
spread, AID will be training doctors in new surgical techniques so that
medically safe, voluntary sterilization programs can be undertaken by
governments and private agencies. Also, in response to mounting re-
quests, AID will be increasing support for developing country volun-
tary sterilization programs through improved biomedical research,
chemical testing, training, equipment, and related services.
Continued research, carried out in the U.S. or in developing
country institutions, whenever feasible, to create simple, but effective,
diagnostic procedures and contraceptive techniques, is needed to im-
prove the quality of health and family planning services. Clinical
testing of research results will be done in developing countries to be
sure that the new or modified methods are adapted to country-specific
circumstances. Research and tests of improved IUD’s, better male and
female sterilization procedures, and an early, simple, and accurate
pregnancy test are among the problems to be pursued.
The collection and analysis of fertility and other demographic data
are essential tools for the design of better family planning services and
the assessment of a country’s population program. Trained, objective
analysts and designers of data collection systems are needed to eval-
uate program progress against demographic goals. AID plans to con-
tinue support to a number of data collection and evaluation programs
which are producing useful statistical materials and are training devel-
oping country personnel to carry out these tasks in the future.
AID will continue to give priority attention to those large, pop-
ulous developing countries which contribute most to the growth of the
11 Congress, in the 1973 Foreign Assistance Act (P.L. 93–189; 87 Stat. 715), amended
the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (P.L. 87–195; 75 Stat. 424) to include Section 104, which
outlined U.S. assistance activities in the areas of health and population. The International
Development and Food Assistance Act of 1978 (P.L. 95–88; 91 Stat. 537), further amended
the Act by adding Section 104 (d), specifying the integration of assistance programs with
population planning efforts. Public Law 95–88 additionally authorized $167 million for
population programs. See Congress and the Nation, Volume V, 1977–1980, pp. 37–38.
