local authorities could be relied upon to protect the foreign concessions steps were taken for defence in the event of trouble. Barricades were constructed on the back bund facing the native city and machine guns were placed at strategic points. The volunteer corps was also called upon to stand by. The procession appeared about 2:30 p.m. It was orderly and at first consisted only of students, Boy Scouts, laborers, et cetera. For about half an hour it continued to pass Shameen and as there was no sign of trouble onlookers began to breathe with more ease, feeling that the danger of an outbreak was over. It was then observed, however, that soldiers were bringing up the rear of the procession and that they were armed. These troops consisted of Whampoa Cadets and ordinary Cantonese contingents. No actual count could be made but it is estimated there were more than a thousand men in line. Just as the first of the troops reached a point in front of the Victoria Hotel near the British bridge the procession stopped, probably because of some congestion ahead. The troops began to show signs of nervousness and the students and civilians nearby seemed to increase their yelling and waving. Suddenly the soldiers were seen to break their formation and a shot rang out. This was followed by several more in rapid succession, and then a perfect din of rifles and machine guns began. It is impossible to say from which side the first shot was fired. The British and other foreigners are practically unanimous in declaring that a Chinese fired first, but the Chinese assert that the shot came from Shameen. At any rate the firing spread rapidly along the bund and the French were hotly engaged almost immediately after the British. Heavy firing lasted about fifteen minutes, bullets smashing into houses facing the canal and striking the trees and roofs of buildings all over the two concessions. The mystery is that more Europeans were not killed or wounded. A large motorboat from the U. S. S. Asheville happened to be lying off the front bund when the shooting commenced and it was soon filled with refugees who were taken out to the ship. A wounded Japanese civilian was also picked up and carried over to a Japanese destroyer lying off the concessions. Other refugees kept crowding on the front bund and soon the boats from the warships were busy transferring people to the river steamer Honam which had been anchored nearby with this very purpose in view.

The Honam sailed early the next morning with several hundred refugees for Hongkong. In the afternoon another steamer left with many women and children so that all who wanted to leave were able to get away. The Chinese section of the Honam’s crew had struck and a detail of twelve men from the U. S. S. Asheville assisted the European officers on the run down to Hongkong. All American and British women have left
