Chapter 4, February–April 1990  659
weapons. Karpov: I can look into this, but this exchange would be con-
fidential. We are not talking about publishing this or making it public.
Bartholomew: Let me tell you, “capable of deploying” is broader 
than “equipped for.” Karpov: And a lot more diffuse. Bartholomew: If 
I say to you this type of ship is capable of deploying I could technically 
include a type of ship that is not actually equipped for but is capable. 
This is not something to settle here, but I want to alert you there may 
be an unnecessary problem here that can be avoided by careful choice 
of words. Karpov: Ambiguity may cause a problem or uncertainty in 
the future.
Bartholomew: But we propose the most inclusive definition. 
Karpov: Take for example a Soviet ship. Does the US side consider it 
capable of? But suppose it is not equipped for and will not be equipped. 
We could get into unnecessary arguments. Equipped for is very clear. 
We are not going to publish or make public the information. And we 
are not talking about a specific ship but a type. I ask you to think about 
it. Bartholomew: I asked you first.
Bartholomew: In para 5 you refer to an exchange between the par-
ties before the first exchange of declarations. I have difficulty under-
standing the relationship between the declarations in para 3 and the 
prior exchange in para 5. Karpov: This is not a ruse, or a catch. We 
are talking about exchanging data not only for a five year term but 
assurances relative to the overall number that will exist throughout the 
whole period of 15 years. We need to assure that if the first five years 
are X, the next five years are not 2X, and the third five years 10X. We 
need to establish a number throughout the whole 15 year term. Prior 
to the first declaration, the sides unofficially and informally exchange 
data which would have for each side an obligatory nature.
Bartholomew: So, unofficially and informally, before the first 
exchange of declarations, I would tell you and you would tell me that 
in the fifth year the number of nuclear SLCMs will not exceed X, and in 
the tenth year it will not exceed Y, and in the fifteenth year Z? Karpov: 
There would be an overall limit that would not be exceeded at any time.
Bartholomew: That is simple. What you are saying is that before 
we exchange declarations each side says the number will not exceed 
X, and for you X is 600. Are you saying anything more than each side 
says, whatever happens, there will never be a number that in your case 
exceeds 600? Karpov: That is the sense, the rest is entourage.
Bartholomew: What does “on the understanding” mean? Karpov: 
You say, and Secretary Baker mentioned this just this morning,4 that 
4 No memorandum of conversation was found. Baker’s talking points and notes 
from the morning meeting with Karpov and Omelichev are in Department of State, 
Executive Secretariat, S/S-IRM Records, Lot 93D187, Secretary James A. Baker III’s 
Classified Papers, JAB Papers April 1990.
