North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 813 The US Congress might not like the notion of joint ventures, especially with Cubans. It might be well to begin by adding LDC needs to the agenda of ongoing US-Soviet exchanges on, for instance, agriculture, housing, and medical subjects. Probability of success: unknown. (b) Bilateral Aid The process of assisting developing nations to higher levels of economic and social development has been and still remains primarily a task undertaken by the industrial West. Assistance from the Communist countries has been small ($1.7 billion in 1975 from the USSR and Eastern Europe); repayment terms are frequently stiffer than those asked by the West; there are fewer outright grants; most of the poorest countries are not included; the emphasis is on showcase heavy industrial projects at the expense of light industry and agricultural programs; all aid is totally tied to procurement from the communist states; and aid is highly concentrated in a few countries in which communist nations have strong political interests. It should not be hard to heighten Third World consciousness of the fact that the Eastern impact on the fundamental development process has been negligible, or to stimulate Third World spokesmen to make demands upon the Soviet bloc that will only be met with rejection. Probability of expanding Soviet bilateral aid in a way harmonious with US interests: nil. Prospects for exposing Soviet shortcomings: moderate. (c) Participation in Multilateral Development Efforts Soviet contributions to the South via the UN system have almost invariably been in non-convertible rubles. A major part of the recent UNDP funding crisis was due to the unusable supply of rubles held by the organization (a point successfully exploited by the US delegation). We could give strong public encouragement of greater Communist contributions to those UN multilateral assistance programs such as the UNDP and UNIDO where the Bloc wields influence not commensurate with their financial participation. Probability of success: low. Prospects for exposing Soviet shortcomings: moderate. (d) Membership in the IMF While the IMF plays a large and rapidly growing role in lending to the LDCs, the question of Soviet participation goes well beyond the North-South dialogue (conditionality of loans to Great Britain and Italy, stability of the international financial system). Unless one were to relax the conditions of membership drastically, the possibility of Soviet membership would seem remote: members of IMF are generally required to refrain from imposing restrictions on international payments, to avoid discriminatory currency practices, to make their currency convertible, and to furnish the Fund with information on international reserves, trade, payments, exchange rates, domestic production and price of goods and services, and the production and import and export of
