Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission man said he would put that at 80%. He said the place is so relaxed, so without authority, so without leadership, so without organization, that he felt the likelihood of interception was small. Dr. Brzezinski said the political advantage lies with the rescue over a mining option. Mining would drive the Iranians towards the Soviets. Rescue would not, unless it failed in which case retribution and retaliation become necessary. Secretary Vance said that mining also increased the likelihood of the hostages being killed. He was concerned, moreover, about the effect in the Middle East generally. He thought there was a likelihood of a strong reaction on the part of the Middle East countries to a mining operation. Finally, he agreed it would push the Iranians toward the Soviet Union. He felt these were substantially negative considerations to be weighed when deciding on the mining option. The President said the blockade had the same disadvantages. The Secretary of State agreed and thought that a blockade was even more complicated. Dr. Brzezinski said that a rescue was politically more desirable than mining, but considerably riskier. The President said that what sticks in his mind is the bloodshed, the deaths. He said we cannot do it without deaths. The Chairman commented that the principal casualties would be Iranians and not Americans, with the exception of those who may be down in the vaults and being closely guarded in the basements of some of the buildings in the Embassy compound. He thought the operation at the Foreign Ministry would not be too difficult. Dr. Brzezinski said there was no way of avoiding the fatalities, including Americans. Indeed, we have had reports that some of the militants would try to kill the Americans even if Khomeini had ordered them released. Admiral Turner thought the probability of Americans being killed was less than that we might not be able to find them all. He has been examining reports concerning the location of the hostages, but it was his conclusion that, with the recent arrival of the visitors, all the Americans had been moved back into the compound; however, he did not have hard evidence to that effect. But even if they are all there, the Delta force has to go through five buildings and count 50 heads, and they have to do this running around in the dark; therefore, under those circumstances, it is likely they would leave some behind. Admiral Turner went on to say that surprise is the sine qua non of a successful operation. He thought there were elements of possible prior detection in the actions that would be announced this afternoon. He said these actions will increase the alert of the Iranians. The longer we wait: the more tense things become, and the more likely the possibil-
