780
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
ertheless hoped that Zahedi would somewhere find untainted person-
alities to fill seats of responsibility.
Attitudes Toward the United States—Although most Iranians recog-
nize the fact that truly popular forces manifested themselves spontane-
ously in the uprising of August 19, they seem equally convinced, how-
ever illogically, that the United States was somehow responsible for
Zahedi’s success. The United States’ prompt grant of aid, although
smaller than many had hoped, served notice to the public that Zahedi’s
Government had our full support. America thus gained part of the
credit for saving constitutional government in Iran, and her prestige ac-
cordingly soared. The consensus was that the United States had at last
begun to fulfill her moral “responsibilities” to the Iranian people. The
idea that the United States has such “responsibilities” is hardly ques-
tioned by Iranians, even by ardent nationalists. The fact of our being a
great power in itself implies obligation in their minds, and they have
never forgotten Western promises to repay Iran for her “cooperation”
during World War II. In the Iranian view, we have now recognized
these responsibilities by our backing of Zahedi, which act directly obli-
gates us to “see Iran through”. Iranians of almost every political per-
suasion are now advising us that Zahedi, or at least the forces which he
represents, must succeed, else the United States will “go the way of
Britain”. Failure to “make the Zahedi Government succeed” would be a
blow of the first magnitude to the American position in Iran.
The “American support” which Iranians are seeking does not con-
sist solely, perhaps not even primarily, of economic aid, although that
is an essential factor. “Guidance” and political support within the
country are considered a second basic aspect of American aid to Iran.
We are told that we must supply ideas as well as finances to the new
Government; the more cynical version is that we must “lead the new
Government by the hand”.
Although the attitudes described in the above paragraphs are
widely held among the public at the present time, it must be kept in
mind that the Government itself, as is usual with Iranian Governments
receiving support from abroad, can be expected to seek a maximum of
aid for a minimum degree of policy control from outside sources. The
same can be said for the Shah, whose confidence in his own ability to
rule as well as reign has doubtless been strengthened by recent devel-
opments. Regardless of these factors, and regardless of the validity of
Iranian imputations to the United States of “moral responsibility” for
effective government in Iran, the fact remains that a breakdown in such
effective government would entail grave consequences to the United
States’ position in Iran.
General Attitudes on Foreign Relations—Overt manifestations of Ira-
nians’ innate xenophobia have declined markedly since Zahedi came to
