Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
237
Paul Seabury into radio activities last spring.3 This curiously dialectic
process may in the long run turn out to be more effective than the
solution we aimed at and failed to bring about.
Attachment
Memorandum From Paul Seabury of the University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley, to Monroe Browne of the Ronald Reagan Transi-
tion Staff4
Berkeley, California, November 4, 1980
RE
U.S. OVERSEAS BROADCASTING
The new Administration should establish a Presidential Commis-
sion to review and report on the state of U.S. overseas broadcasting
activities. Priority should be given to broadcast stations targeted on
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe: Radio Liberty and Radio Free
Europe.
These stations play an enormously important role by conveying
to people in those areas a continuous and objective view of political
and social reality which their Soviet rulers seek to deny them. As
an earlier Presidential Commission on this subject reported in 1973,
the Radios
. . . by providing a flow of free information and interpretation,
have enabled the people to whom they broadcast to remain informed
and to judge for themselves which policies may contribute to . . .
genuine improvement of peaceful relations.5
Such a review should focus upon three topics: budget, program
content, and administrative oversight. Of the three, the latter is the
most urgent and immediate.
Budget. While the stations maintain a high caliber performance,
they have been seriously injured by budget cuts at a time when inflation
and the declining value of the dollar on international exchange have
severely constrained them. This issue is all the more acute if one
assumes the need for a significant expansion of broadcast activities,
3 Henze and Brzezinski contacted Seabury and Cherne about serving on the BIB
Board in the spring of 1980. See footnote 2, Document 76.
4 No classification marking.
5 Presidential Study Commission on International Radio Broadcasting Report (1973).
[Footnote is in the original.]
