1955 131 promptly US. I stated I have tried make it as clear as possible I was here to discuss return all US civilians but we are no closer to reso­ lution that problem than when we started three weeks ago. I hoped statement made by Chou meant situation different now from last year but apparently not. I emphasized I had been frank and hoped he would be equally frank because not in interest either party keep this matter dragging on. Simple, straightforward solution problem of civilians was permit them to return. 13. Wang returned previous line argument by saying my remarks deviated from discussion wording proposed announcement. He stated when last year he asked US rescind all restrictions Chinese nationals I had said US laws could not be changed. He said I should not now demand Chinese Government change their law governing civilians involved cases. Said 1,523 Americans left China since 1949, 38 left this year and review of remaining cases are additional indications his gov­ ernment’s lenient policy within framework Chinese law. He added if anyone had tried force his government release 11 American airmen they would not have been freed. They were released only to improve relations two countries. Attitude PRC toward Americans in prison is to help them leave as soon as possible. He said they had agreed to changes in text joint announcement and could not see reason for further delay. They had made their best effort and Americans could not object or con­ sider arrangement unjust. 14. I replied again [garble] was not text of announcement but the return of the Americans. Phrase “preventing departure” seemed describe action Chinese regarding American civilians but maybe Wang knew better word. Any solution arrived at must make clear beyond doubt that question return of ­Americans had been resolved. I empha­ sized we not attempting dictate how problem should be handled nor ask changes laws or procedures and hoped, in view Chinese statement, PRC able reach solution in accordance their laws. 15. Wang replied agreement is like key and we have only to take it to open door to see results review cases Americans. He said efforts reach agreement should come from both sides but he saw no compro­ mises being made by US. 16. I said hoped he would find it possible next meeting open door wider and tell us whether results his review would be release of all Americans. I added if his reluctance do so was a matter of timing I was sure that could be worked out. The one and only request I had made was the release of all Americans and I would accept changes in word­ ing of text to achieve this objective. I had told him exactly what we prepared to do and expected him reply equally frankly. 17. Wang completely ignored my suggestion that question of timing could be worked out. Instead he replied if we not willing take
