Chapter 2, January–June 1989  109
24.	
Memorandum From Richard Davis and William Tobey of the 
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy 
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Gates)1
Washington, May 30, 1989
SUBJECT
Deputies Committee Meeting, Wednesday, May 31, 1989, 11:00 a.m.—START 
Fundamental Limits, and Defense and Space
This Deputies Meeting will be your first of three meetings to review 
the specifics of our START and D&S positions before the negotiations 
resume June 19. We have worked on the presumption that given the 
short time available before negotiations resume, options for consider-
ation should meet one of two standards. Proposed changes to our posi-
tion should either: (1) be necessary because our current position is not 
consistent with our interests (in other words we could not take “yes” 
for an answer); or (2) be an opportunity to advance the negotiations 
(and/or put a Bush imprint on them), consistent with national secu-
rity. In certain cases, options not meeting these standards have been 
included, either because an agency favors the option or in order to offer 
the President a real choice.
Defense & Space. Two papers (at Tab A) are on the agenda: DST 001, 
which discusses options for ensuring U.S. ABM testing rights during a 
period of non-­withdrawal from the ABM Treaty, and DST 002, which 
discusses options for protecting a right to deploy defenses after a non-­
withdrawal period.
Our current D&S position is based on the Washington Summit Joint 
Statement. In essence, it trades a commitment not to withdraw from 
the ABM Treaty for a specified period of time, in return for freedom to 
deploy defenses at the end of that period. During the non-­withdrawal 
period, the U.S. claims the right to conduct ABM tests in space, under 
the broad interpretation of the ABM Treaty. Other outcomes in D&S, 
such as simply not having an agreement, or alternative quid pro quo 
are theoretically possible. They could, however, run afoul of congres-
sional requirements for specificity of treaty obligations during ratifica-
tion debates, and would back away from an agreement worked out by 
President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev.
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, H-Files, NSC/DC Meetings Files, OA/ID 90010–007, NSC/DC 028—May 31, 
1989—NSC/DC Meeting on NSR–14/Defense and Space/Start Fundamental Limits. 
Secret. Sent for action. Sent through Kanter. A stamped notation indicates Gates saw the 
memorandum.
