The Attorney General of the United States in an opinion dated February 8, 1918, (31 Opinion, page 216) regarding the extension of sovereignty over the Swan Islands, whose status appears to be similar to that of Swain’s Island, stated in part as follows: “These facts and circumstances are sufficient in my opinion to warrant the statement that no other country has any proper claim to these islands, and that the United States Government may at any time assert its sovereignty over them by appropriate action. As to the form which that action should take, that is a matter for the consideration of the executive and of the legislative branches of the Government, as a political measure relating to acquisition of territory (see Foster v. Neilson, 2 Peters 253 (1829); Garcia v. Lee, 12 Peters 511 (1838); United States y. Lynde (1870), 11 Wall., 632), and not a proper subject upon which this Department should give an opinion.” Under the circumstances, I am of the opinion that it would be desirable to have Congress indicate its desire or willingness to extend the sovereignty of the United States over Swain’s Island and to place it under the jurisdiction of the administrative and judicial authorities of American Samoa. It is believed that the purpose might appropriately be accomplished by a Joint Resolution of Congress along the lines of the attached draft. This draft has received the approval of the Secretary of the Navy. Respectfully submitted, CHARLES E. HUGHES WASHINGTON, May 22, 1924. [Enclosure] Proposed Joint Resolution Extending the Sovereignty of the United States over Swain’s Island and Making the Island a Part of American Samoa52 Whereas Swain’s Island (otherwise known as Quiros, Gente Hermosa, Olosega and Jennings Island) is included in the list of Guano Islands appertaining to the United States, which have been bonded under the Act of Congress approved August 18, 1856; and Whereas the Island has been in the continuous possession of American citizens for over fifty years and no form of government therefor or for the inhabitants thereof has been provided by the United States: Therefore, be it Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the sovereignty of the United States over American Samoa is hereby extended over Swain’s Island which is made a part of American Samoa and placed under the
