1162 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement cases. This resulted in reducing the differential from 5% to about 3-1/2% An attempt to reduce it further by including the various import taxes in the calculation failed on the ground that the Treasury Department had already made its formula known and that this formula did not include any provisions for taxes as an element in exchange rates. Inclusion of this factor would have brought the differential down to 1%. After having discussed with Lacarte the bad news of the Export- Import Bank’s letter, I let him know about our unsuccessful attempts to get action this month on the countervailing duty. I inquired whether it would be possible for the Uruguayan Government to change the rates on a sufficient number of import items to eliminate the differential. Lacarte stated that it would not be possible since the government could not see its way clear to raise import rates until after the elections. He confirmed, in response to my inquiry, that his government would prefer to wait for the complete elimination of the countervailing duty than to go along with a reduction at this time to 3 or 1%. The net result of the conversation was to leave his feeling that we really wanted to do something but could not because of our laws and their inability to act. That was all to the good as I assume he will report this to his government. We have been working overtime to get action this month on the three meat items. We have succeeded thus far to the extent that the Trade Agreements Committee voted last Friday to promulgate the concessions on the three items. Only Agriculture voted against such action. The atmosphere at the TAG meeting which I attended to present the political problem involved was most sympathetic. The matter is being considered today by the Trade Policy Committee. Our representative will be Tom Mann who is sympathetic to our position and who can be counted on to make a good fight to hold the line against Agriculture’s opposition. Although formal promulgation may not be feasible because of red tape prior to the end of this month, we expect to get the information informally to the Uruguayans for the psychological effect. We had hoped for completion of the PL-480 negotiations by this time. Unfortunately the dispute over the exchange rates has prevented that. We have discussed this matter with all of the other agencies concerned as well as with E and find that the issue is too fundamental in our over-­all PL-480 program for us to yield. A yielding on this point would, according to our E advisers, result in the necessity to make similar concessions to other countries and perhaps even to renegotiate agreements already made. In this day of depreciating currencies that would just be too costly. I am hoping that the phone call which Clare Boonstra will make to you today will clarify this point sufficiently for a meeting of the minds with the Uruguayans. I can only repeat that the general atmosphere in Washington toward Uruguay, thanks to Dick Rubottom’s unremitting efforts, is most sympathetic. In these cases where it is not sympathetic there is
