Chapter 5, May–June 1990  745
Our objectives for this paragraph are straightforward:
— D&S will continue without interruption after signature of 
START.
— The sides will discuss the offense/defense relationship.
— The sides should express some sense of urgency in concluding 
an agreement.
When we began our work on this statement in Moscow, we had 
two entirely different paras. In Geneva, we reached compromises:
— D&S would continue, but clearly within the existing framework.
— We would use the phrase ABM and space to describe D&S, as 
the Soviet side wanted.
— We would express a sense of urgency, but not mention a specific 
date.
So coming out of Geneva, we had a carefully drafted compromise 
text with only one bracket. That one bracket went back to how to charac-
terize the objective of the discussions on the offense/defense relationship.
Yesterday, I understand the Soviet side bracketed the entire Geneva 
compromise. This leaves us in doubt about what happens to defense 
and space when START is signed, and subordinates D&S to START. 
Burt and Smith are ready to offer a formula to resolve the one bracket 
in a manner favorable to the Soviet side. But Nazarkin was unable to 
agree to the rest of the para that had been previously agreed.
The para we propose is clear, simple, and a good balance on a dif-
ficult subject.
— D&S would continue within the NST framework—­no more and 
no less independent than today.
— Our approach accepts the Wyoming phrase “ABM and space” 
which the Soviet side wanted.
— It uses Soviet language to characterize the offense/defense 
talks, in particular by droppping the reference to a cooperative transi-
tion. The fact we are prepared not to insist on these words is a measure 
of our effort to resolve this.
Why can’t we resolve this paragraph on this basis?
Karpov: Maybe we should let Burt and Nazarkin have some more 
discussion about that. They have some formulas to offer each other.
Bartholomew: I’ll be frank. There is a limit to how many times I 
want to do the same work twice. Why look at alternatives to this para-
graph, why not settle this now?
Karpov: It does not reflect our understanding of what we are going 
to discuss on the relationship between offensive and defensive arms. 
We should look for another formulation.
Bartholomew: The paragraph says we will discuss the relationship 
between offensive and defensive arms, as you just said.
