1955  403
he insists, but he will have to do the talking and our Delegation would 
only listen.) We expect to present a recommendation to the Secretary 
on Monday for coordination of the direction of the talks while the Con­
ference is going on. We are passing on to the Secretary your expression 
of hope that he may be able in some way to use Molotov during the 
Conference quietly to bring some pressure on the PRC to release the 
detained Americans. We don’t know yet what if anything may be pos­
sible along this line.
You will have noted the conspicuous absence in our telegram of 
any response to your suggestion that we not rule out the introduc­
tion of procedural questions near the end of the talks. We appreciated 
that this might look like “a pot of gold” which could help to keep the 
talks going. But there is no inclination here now to take a position on 
this in our telegrams. The Secretary was quite specific in his talk with 
Foreign Minister George Yeh on Oct. 4 (a copy of the memorandum 
of conversation is being pouched to you), and on other occasions as 
to his aversion to the idea of a higher level Conference, his intention 
to avoid it, and his belief that there is nothing appropriate for discus­
sion which cannot be handled in your conversations. Of course this 
does not preclude us from keeping the Chinese Communists guess­
ing a little, but on principle there are arguments against seeming to 
equivocate.
Incidentally the Secretary was quite frank with George Yeh in 
spelling out to him the extent to which the continuation of the talks is 
in the interest of the GRC. I think it may tend to soften the criticism of 
the talks which has been coming out of governmental quarters in Taipei 
although I doubt if the tone of the Taiwan Press will be changed much.
We have noted your query as to whether it might be permissible 
for either side to raise new subjects under Item Two. There will be some 
response to this query by early next week either in my next letter on the 
17th or in a telegram.
Yesterday I gave Joy of the British Embassy the observations con­
tained in your 855 concerning O’Neill’s responsibilities. We endorsed 
your suggestions and requested that they be relayed to O’Neill with 
a recommendation that he act on them if he and the British Foreign 
Office perceive no objection. The British are being quite diligent on 
the implementation problem although they are somewhat concerned 
now at apparent leaks to the press (Reuters and AP) which hint at the 
difficulties O’Neill is encountering. I do not know the source of the 
information which the press is obtaining. I doubt if there is much of a 
leak since the information is somewhat garbled. Also the stories may 
indirectly be somewhat helpful rather than harmful since they will add 
a bit to the public pressure on the PRC to act. Still we must respect Brit­
ish wishes where the protection of their reporting is concerned, so we
