Afghanistan 221 because the DRA could not maintain itself very long against foreign interference without this Soviet aid. He did not challenge my assertion that the USG was not aiding the insurgents. 12. Human rights.6 In response to my citation of the DRA’s record on human rights as one of the problems impacting on U.S.-Afghan relations, Amin attacked the human rights record of the previous Zahir and Daoud regimes. The Saur revolution, he said, had overthrown a regime which had existed for the profit and well-being of one family. Ninety-eight percent of the people had been sacrificed for this one family. Under Mohammedzai rule many people had been imprisoned, tortured and executed, but not once had the VOA raised its voice in protest. Amin said he could categorically assert that not one person would be imprisoned or executed if foreign interference in Afghanistan would cease. With a twisted grin, he said he found it surprising that the U.S., a staunch believer in religious freedom, would be concerned about the so-called non-Islamic nature of the Afghan regime which was only trying for the first time in history to permit all Afghans to practice any religion or non-religion they chose. 13. Impressions. The man is impressive. His survival to date is by itself impressive, as is the air of quiet self-confidence he exudes. Clearly, he is aware of the mortality rate of Afghan leaders; several times he said “even if I am killed tomorrow.” He masks his ruthlessness and toughness quite well by his soft-spoken manner. In remarkable contrast to his turgid public speeches, his private discourse is refreshingly free from Marxist cant and cliche´s. His English is quite good and very easy to understand. Only once did he seem to have difficulty in expressing himself and that was when, perhaps in an attempt to convey great sincerity, he was declaiming how he could never sacrifice Afghan independence to any foreign demands, including from the Soviets. 14. I think he wants an improvement in U.S.-Afghan relations. His reasons could be varied: Soviet coaching; a long-range hedge against over-dependence on the Soviet Union; concern over the trouble which open U.S. animosity can create for his regime; conversely, an interest in bringing about the doubts and confusion which friendlier U.S. relations could sow among the supporters of the insurgency, the Pakistanis, Iranians and Saudis; a genuinely felt need for economic assistance. 6 The Embassy’s draft of the 1979 Annual Country Report on Human Rights Practices for Afghanistan was relayed in telegram 5923 from Kabul, October 9. The report painted a grim picture of the state of human rights in Afghanistan, noting the commonplace practice of torture and atrocities visited upon Afghan villagers by the Afghan military. (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, USSR in Afghanistan (10–31 Oct 79))
