Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI duct of war. Approaches for achieving greater survivability were addressed in NSDM 333.5 The Group believes that expeditious implementation of enhanced survivability measures for critical space assets should be given high priority. There are two broad alternatives for an anti-satellite capability: (1) physical destruction or damage, and (2) electronic interference. [4 lines not declassified] However, such a capability is likely to be perceived as more provocative than electronic interference for two reasons: (1) its effect is irreversible and unambiguous and (2) the political consequences of its use are likely to be more severe. Moreover, such a physical destruction system is likely to be more expensive than an electronic interference system. Physical damage by radiation such as laser, microwave, or possibly particle radiation has characteristics somewhat intermediate between explosive kill and electronic interference. Its effects would not be reversible, but could be ambiguous and the political consequences less severe than in the case of explosive kill. The Group recommends that first priority be given to developing an early capability for electronic interference. Different satellites have vulnerabilities to different electronic warfare techniques. The generic techniques which may in principle be employed include noise jamming, deception, command link capture, uplink jamming, delayed repeater jamming, and RF burnout of electronic components. Not all of these techniques can be employed effectively against all satellites. Some of these techniques would be realized most effectively with coorbital jamming satellites, while others could be best achieved from ground-based jammers. Specifically, some types of radar, ELINT, and navigation satellites could be negated by another satellite nearby which emits a noise barrage or rebroadcasts their signals with small random time delays. Since the operation of many satellite systems is dependent on the frequent receipt of commands from ground stations, command link capture or jamming represents a particular vulnerability of satellite systems. The possibility of interfering with this link depends strongly on the altitude of the satellite. The command link of a low altitude satellite, such as a photo-reconnaissance satellite, is normally only turned on to receive when the satellite is over the Soviet ground station and is out of view of possible jamming sites. As a result, it is more difficult to interfere with low altitude satellites than it is to interfere with satellites in synchronous operational orbit which are always in view.
