562 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement renunciation force would be useful move, it cannot provide much in way of subject for discussion in meetings. 6. In light of above I will need as well as much background guid­ ance as it is now possible to give me on what we desire concerning future course of talks. 7. With respect Wang’s draft believe situation precludes my intro­ duction new counter draft or return my first draft. On other hand I should have clear idea whether we willing accept his draft with or without such amendments we might suggest. I need not necessarily give final approval at next meeting but will desire avoid taking any positions from which I might later be required to retreat. 8. With respect his draft it seems to me principal question is whether I should press for specific mention of Taiwan. It seems to me from standpoint our relations with GRC and degree to which we are committed to discussion Taiwan area questions with PRC there is much to be said for omission any specific reference to Taiwan in declaration. This also related to whether we are to regard any such declaration as primarily legal or political statement. While statement as presently drafted may contain legal loopholes with respect Taiwan area, regarded as political statement it seeems to me it would be extremely difficult for Peiping issue this statement and then turn around and attempt justify attack in Taiwan area on grounds unexpressed fine print. In eyes of world both friendly and enemy, major dispute between U.S. and PRC is in Taiwan area. 9. With respect second para Wang’s draft, important note re accu­ rate and literal translation of Chinese original would be “PRC and U.S. are determined that they should settle disputes between their two countries through peaceful negotiations and also will not resort to any (and all) threat (intimidation) of military force”. (Chinese text operative portion this para and last para being transmitted by separate tel.) This of course much stronger and preferable from our standpoint to English translation given me by Wang, there not being any conditional relation­ ship between negotiations and renunciation of force. 10. Therefore believe that, subject to whatever views Department may have with respect to specific reference to Taiwan, I can and should at next meeting probe on substitution of “and also” for “without” in English text. Wang will probably not commit himself but question will inevitably arise as to whether we prepared accept if they agree our English version. Gowen
