42 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 3. The Moslem students in the compound possess no heavy arms. They have light weapons (G–3), grenade launchers, and hand grenades. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: The G–3 is a 7.62 mm rifle, produced in Iran under license from the West German firm Heckler and Koch. It is similar to the U.S. M–14 rifle.) 4. As of 9 November, the students had published 17 communiqués and held several press conferences. After 6 November, the communiqués stopped, but a press conference was supposed to be held the afternoon of 9 November. 5. Since 7 November, the Embassy has been completely cut off from the outside, no one having gone inside except for Ayatollah Sadeq Khalkhali who went in the afternoon of 7 November. Journalists have not been permitted to enter, having been brutally pushed away by the guards stationed outside. The determination of the students seems certain. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: [1½ lines not declassified] Khalkhali is the leader of armed group called “Islam Fedayeen” which is not the same as the Fedayeen-e Khalq who are against the occupation. It is possible the “Mujahidin Islam” [less than 1 line not declassified] and the “Islam Fedayeen” led by Khalkhali are the same group.) 6. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: Except for some intellectuals knowledgeable of international law, the Iranians have absolutely no idea of the gravity of the action undertaken by the Islamic students at the direction of the Imam.) 7. The Iranians approve of the action in general, the only reservation expressed thus far having been those of new Iranian Foreign Minister Abdol Hassan Banisadr who was concerned on 7 November that Iranian ambassadors abroad might one day suffer the same fate. Since then, however, Banisadr has rescinded his statement, and as of 9 November, was seeing only the positive points of the students’ action. 8. Iranian opinion estimates that the action constitutes a humiliation which is without precedent, imposed by a small nation on a great power. The oppressed have finally had an effect on the oppressors. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: This public opinion naturally does not take into account the consequences which their enterprise can have and are convinced that the United States will give in to their demands.) 9. In the mind of Khomeini, these demands are to obtain the extradition of the Shah, to judge him and to execute him in order to destroy the only dangerous enemy which remains. According to Khomeini, the Shah is the only person who is capable of endangering the Islamic Republic. 10. An American military action could be considered by the Iranians as a cause for war (casus belli) and could lead Iranian officials to call
