276
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
finan aid to Iran in circumstances which wld be acceptable to public
opinion of three countries: US, Iran and UK.
3. I said US not (rpt not) accustomed to extending finan or budg-
etary aid except in emergencies. On several occasions Mosadeq had
asked for Amer finan aid and it had not (rpt not) been given him. Amer
Govt and public had been of opinion that kind of emergency which wld
justify budgetary aid did not exist when request from Mosadeq was
recd. There was widespread belief in US that if Mosadeq had taken
what US Govt and public considered to be reasonable attitude resolu-
tion oil problem Iran wld have been able overcome its budgetary diffi-
culties without finan help from US. It was clear that Amer public
opinion was against giving finan aid to Iran in circumstances which
wld make it appear that such aid was in fact subsidizing what it consid-
ered to be unreasonable attitude of Iran Govt. It seemed to me person-
ally that situation at present was somewhat different. It was my under-
standing that present govt was anxious solve oil prob on basis which
wld be fair and reasonable to all concerned and which at same time wld
safeguard Iran’s rights and promote welfare Iran people. Present Iran
Govt moreover was in urgent need finan help during period which
must elapse before oil problem cld be solved and Iran’s oil resources
cld begin again produce badly needed revenues. Yesterday, therefore, I
had recommended to US Govt it consider request from Qavam in
somewhat different light from requests heretofore recd.2 I told Qavam
that such recommendations as I had made had been for aid of limited
character. I had recommended limited aid because I did not (rpt not)
believe that Amer or Brit public opinion wld look with favor upon ex-
tension at this moment of financial aid to Iran in amts greater than
might be needed to tide country over period longer than perhaps two
months. I had, therefore, urged that US Govt give favorable consider-
ation to extending finan aid to Iran sufficient to enable govt to function
until, say, Sept 20, by which time it wld be possible reasses situation in
light achievements govt and progress made in solution oil prob. It had
seemed to me that by Sept 20 if Iran Govt pursued energetic measures
its finan house might be in sufficiently good order, and its progress res-
olution oil prob might be sufficiently satisfactory to effect restoration
Iran’s solvency to such extent it wld be able satisfy its future finan
needs thru existing internal and domestic channels.
4. I particularly stressed that if finan credit was to be extended attn
must be particularly paid to Amer public opinion. US Govt had no (rpt
no) desire interfere in selection members Cabinet. Primin must realize
however that US public opinion wld be more favorable if Cabinet
members wld so far as possible be men whose integrity and ability wld
2 See Document 86, footnote 4.
