208
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
49.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Western Europe: An Overview
The issues you will face with Chancellor Schmidt (and later with
Prime Minister Andreotti) are not limited to those two countries.2 They
are part of wider developments in Western Europe—and the relations
of these countries with us—that have been characterized as malaise or
stagnation.
Today’s problems have several causes. Among them are:
—The mismanagement of the U.S. economy during the Vietnam
War (particularly 1967–71) helped hasten the end of the effective
workings of an international economic system that had prospered—
with American strength and leadership—since the War. Since then, the
central pivot of stability and confidence in the global economic system
has been missing.
—The oil price rises of 1973–75 deepened gathering economic
problems, pushing inflation into double digits and unemployment to
levels not seen in post-Marshall Plan Europe. And these countries, after
all, have much more searing memories of the 1930’s economic failure
than in the United States.
—In Europe—as here—there are few economic answers to what
seem endemic problems; in Europe, even more than here, there has
been a loss of confidence in the ability of institutions and leaders to
solve the new economic riddle of “stagflation.” Only Germany, among
the major states, is relatively untouched: but there the fear of economic
collapse is deepest of all.
—Political institutions also seem unable to cope with basic social
problems. With recession, there has been a widening gap between eco-
nomic expectations that had come to be taken for granted (particularly
in welfare states), and the ability of governments to deliver. These
problems are particularly acute among the young—which is one reason
the issue of youth unemployment was put in the agenda at the London
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, 1977–1981,
Box 63, PRC 023, 7/9/77, Schmidt Visit. Confidential. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
2 The President was scheduled to meet with Schmidt on July 13 and with Andreotti
on July 26.
