Meanwhile I have taken some forward steps and, subject to the reservation
mentioned on page 3 of my hereinbefore mentioned despatch No. 1106, I
herewith report progress:
Article VII. This has been passed for the present. Some fundamental and
far-reaching amendments to this Article have been suggested, as the
Department is aware, in before-mentioned Instruction No. 566 which the
Austrian Government desires to examine carefully. It is possible that
objections may be raised to some of the phraseology proposed but in
principle, if I understand Dr. Schüller correctly, he will not object to
affirmative provisions dealing with quotas and licences and customs
formalities.
Article VIII. The suggestion of the United States that the words “internal
taxes” be inserted in the seventh line after the word “to” so as to read “with
regard to internal taxes, transit duties,” etc., is accepted.
The Austrian Government is still of the opinion that there is a certain
inconsistency between Articles VIII and XIII (see page 5 of the
Department’s Instruction No. 527). Dr. Schüller is unable to see how
“transit duties” (Article VIII) could be imposed upon goods imported into
the United States or Austria. I pointed out however that some question of
transit duties might conceivably arise with respect to goods temporarily
warehoused, for example, in Vienna and ultimately destined for distribution
in the neighboring States. In view of this and inasmuch as the alleged
conflicting provisions in Articles VIII and XIII appear in our treaty with
Germany, Schüller is content to waive further objection.
The only modification of Article VIII is contained in the insertion of the
words “internal taxes” as above explained.
Article X. The Austrian Government desires to add at the end of the first
paragraph of this Article “The foregoing stipulations do not apply to the
organization of and participation in political organizations.” This is in
accordance with the understanding of the Austrian Government, but in the
interest of uniformity it is thought best to incorporate the proposal of the
German negotiators.
