856 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII briefing at USUN for Allied Reps from NATO, ANZUS, and Japan. (All were represented except the Turks, who were unable to attend because of schedule conflicts.) Highlights of the briefing follow: [Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.] Afghanistan 8. What Gromyko said was basically no different from his earlier statements on Afghanistan. He expressed support for the May 14 Afghan proposals and stressed the importance of getting talks going between Afghanistan and Pakistan and Iran.3 There was some uncertainty as to whether he was still referring to two sets of bilateral talks as previously, or whether he was suggesting tri-lateral negotiations. He stated that, if an agreement proved possible between those three countries and there were an end to outside interference and guarantees, then and only then would there be a withdrawal of Soviet forces. Gromyko also commented that large groups of invaders from outside had been eliminated but that there were still small groups which were infiltrating into Afghanistan and committing acts of terrorism. 9. Referring to possible UN initiative on Afghanistan, Gromyko said he saw no need for an international conference. He said that if Pakistan was willing to enter into direct negotiations with the Babrak regime, he had the impression—while he could not speak for Afghanistan—that the Afghanis might be prepared to move in the disputed border regions—thus implying a possible Afghanistan willingness to recognize the Durand Line. 10. The Secretary made the appropriate responses. He pointed out that, so long as Soviet troops remained in Afghanistan, the situation was not only dangerous for the stability of the region but also contributed to international tensions. It also made ratification of SALT II more difficult.4 [Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.] Muskie 3 See Document 275. 4 A memorandum from Brement, September 26, called two items to Brzezinski’s attention regarding the meeting. Brement was “struck” by Gromyko’s statement that “large scale gangs no longer cross the border” in Afghanistan, which Brement took as a sign that the Soviets were “relatively satisfied at the efficacy of the measures they have taken to seal off the Pakistan border and are pleased at the improving security situation in Kabul and other population centers.” Characterizing Gromyko’s points as “predictable propaganda,” Brement also noted the only “modestly new departure” in Soviet policy with respect to Southwest Asia: Gromyko’s assertion that “Pakistan should have no apprehensions about Afghanistan territorial claims against them.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West, Brement, Subject File, Box 61, Afghanistan: 11/79–1/80)
