States have sought agreement upon this important branch of law. The
United States did not participate in any of the earlier conferences dealing
with this subject. Among the twenty Latin-American Republics there have
been serious divergences of position resulting from the acceptance by some
of them of the system of domicile, and reception on the part of the others of
a system based on nationality. The Code presented to the Commission for
its consideration is very largely based upon the system of nationality and it
was at once perceived by the American Delegates, that the projected Code
would be opposed by the representatives of those States almost wholly
south of the Equator which had adopted in their municipal systems the
theory of domicile. The opponents of Mr. Bustamante’s code, however,
were not prepared to present a substitute code based upon domicile,
although they did insist upon those portions of a code so based, known as
the Conventions of Montevideo of 1889.37 The American Delegates soon
became convinced that unless the Code as prepared by Mr. Bustamante was
adopted at least in substance by the Commission, all attempts at the
codification of Private International Law at Rio de Janeiro would prove
abortive; that thereby the Resolution of the Fifth Pan American Conference
would fail of execution, and that the forthcoming Sixth Conference would
fail to have before it, for its consideration, any constructive projects dealing
with the subject. The Delegates of the United States therefore determined to
support wherever possible, the Recommendations of the Commission by
which the projected code might be transmitted to Habana. This position was
set forth in a declaration made by the American Delegation on May 9th, as
follows:38
The delegation of the United States desires to have its vote
recorded in favor of the articles reported to this Plenary Session
from Sub-Commission B, and based upon the project of the Code
of Private International Law, prepared by the learned and very
distinguished delegate from Cuba, Mr. Bustamante.
In so recording its affirmative vote the delegation does not desire
to imply that the articles for which it votes are in accordance with
the laws of the various jurisdictions of the United States, forty-
nine in all. As a matter of fact and as is well known the
jurisprudence of the United States is based in general upon the
