1020 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III tial costs and a long-term payback period. We could design and propose such a mechanism, which might involve such options as a special window at the MDBs, a new bank or fund, or a special bond underwritten by an international institution or consortium of OECD and OPEC countries. —International Research Institutes: We might take the initiative, perhaps through the FITC, to stimulate the establishment of several international energy research institutes in the LDCs using the model of the international agricultural centers. We would try to mobilize foundation, MDB, and bilateral funding, plus a major commitment from host LDCs. —Nuclear Energy Program:* It is inevitable that LDCs will include nuclear power as a component in their energy programs. We can take some steps to try to limit the ways in which such nuclear programs can complicate our non-proliferation effort. We might consider expanding membership in the London Suppliers Group to LDCs with nuclear technologies, establishing internationally controlled enrichment centers in upper tier LDCs, and pushing the Nuclear Fuel Bank concept. FOOD Although good weather in grain producing countries over the past three years has reduced worldwide concern with ensuring adequate food supplies and stocks, long-range projections, particularly for Africa and Asia, point to large and growing food deficits over coming decades. We need to include food as a central North-South issue. The President’s Commission on World Hunger is an important vehicle, and we should use it. Four specific initiatives we may wish to press are: —World Food Security Reserve for LDCs: Should the current grain negotiations fail, we could propose a world reserve of 13–15 million tons of grain to be held by key producing countries which could be made available to LDCs suffering from substantial crop shortfalls or when world prices increase sharply. —Food Aid: We should continue to push for an international food aid commitment of 10 million tons annually, of which the US would provide about half, even if we cannot achieve it through the International Wheat Agreement’s Food Aid Convention. —Agriculture Research: We might announce a research package geared to the crops (tubers and tree starch crops), livestock (goats and sheep) and techniques applicable to the poorest rural populations. FITC and domestic reserves could be used. —LDC Public Policy: We could make a major effort through bilateral programs and via international institutions to help LDCs develop the public policies most conducive to increased agricultural production, e.g. tax, investment, transport and price policies.
