March–August 1953 499 non-aggression and friendship with Iran, and the result would be another Korea, with the United States in a rather worse position. Mr. Cutler inquired of General Collins what could be anticipated if the Tudeh Party seized Northern Iran. Would it be possible in these circumstances for the free world to hold the south? General Collins thought that this might be possible in very favorable circumstances, but it was much more likely that the Russians would come to the assistance of the Iranian Communists in the guise of volunteers. We would then be faced with a most difficult decision. It seemed to General Collins, in conclusion, that about the most feasible solution in the contingency envisaged by Mr. Cutler, was for the Central Intelligence Agency to work out plans by which the free tribesmen in Southern Iran could be armed. With some outside assistance such forces might conceivably be able to hold the south in the event of civil war in Iran. The National Security Council:4 a. Noted an oral report by the Secretary of State on possible courses of action with respect to the current situation in Iran, and agreed: (1) That the three questions which the Iranian Prime Minister had been considering asking the United States Government, should not be answered in the affirmative if they are actually presented. (2) To give economic and technical assistance to Iran on a modest scale, if necessary in order to maintain the present government. (3) That no proposal to buy Iranian oil should be made at the present time. (4) To explore the possibility of more equitable procedures for an Anglo-Iranian settlement. b. Noted an oral briefing by General Collins on the military difficulties of defending a line through the Taurus–Zagros Mountain ranges under either hot or cold war operations. Note: The action in a above subsequently transmitted to the Secretary of State for implementation. [Omitted here is discussion of a decision to postpone consideration of United States objectives and courses of action with respect to Latin America.] S. Everett Gleason 4 Paragraphs a and b and the Note constitute NSC Action No. 735. (National Archives, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, Records of Action, Box 95, NSC Actions 697–1001)
