1106  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
leadership and had every confidence that he and Beltrán would suc-
ceed in restoring the economy to a sound basis. I had only one preoc-
cupation for the future, that unless the Government and the wealthy 
classes would quickly take much more action than had ever been 
taken in the past to reduce the excessive difference between great 
wealth and great poverty there would be a social revolution.
The President said that this was the basis of his policy. (I have seen 
no signs of it.) He was satisfied that democracy was now on a firm 
basis in Peru. The armed forces were completely loyal and democrat-
ically inclined and would protect the constitutional government from 
any attempts to establish other forms. I agreed and congratulated him. 
He was confident that the economic battle would be won. Congress 
was proving very difficult but this was part of the democratic pro-
cess. I agreed and said that neither he nor the country could afford 
to lose this battle. With respect to the social problem he maintained, 
as does Beltrán, that a sound economy must be established first and 
that thereafter housing and land reform were the two most important 
steps. I agreed but maintained that the problem had great urgency. 
Every time I traveled in Southern Peru I became more convinced of 
the acute danger unless action were taken quickly. I very much hoped 
that a great deal of such action would be taken during the remainder 
of his time in office.
He said that Communism was another problem. I said it was one 
aspect of the social problem and could be combated successfully only 
as the basic economic and social problems were solved. I remarked 
that it was highly unfortunate that the leading crypto Communist 
of Arequipa should be appointed President of the Relief and 
Rehabilitation Junta.3 President Prado denied at length that Humberto 
NUNEZ Borja was a Communist, but I expressed the conviction that 
he was working clandestinely and effectively against the President 
and the Government of Peru.
On leaving, the President thanked me for my efforts toward 
improving Peruvian-United States relations.
3 President Prado appointed Humberto Nuñez Borja to head relief efforts after an 
earthquake struck southern Peru, particularly the Department of Arequipa, on January 
13. Documentation on disaster relief in is file 823.49.
