652 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 a specific program. We would not wish to be faced with the need to extricate ourselves from legislation for purposes of negotiations. The Vice President said we should keep the Congress out of this. They can vote any kind of attachment on these funds, and it would be impossible to vote against that sort of thing. They could vote half a billion to every hostage. Mr. Cutler said the mere inventory of claims was a very modest step. It would take five years for individuals to pursue their claims through litigation. Mr. Christopher said he was concerned that we do not know exactly where we want to go. He wondered if we wanted to go to Congress with all the hearings, etc. Mr. Powell said Option A was not clear enough. We should say something about claims dispersal. He thought Option B7 was more appropriate. Dr. Brzezinski said we could announce Option A and background the other. Mr. Cutler said “claims are to be satisfied out of assets frozen by the previous Government order.” The President was inclined to go for Option D. Mr. Powell said we need to move forcefully. If necessary we can get congressional leaders down here and say what we need. The President said we need to be able to move expeditiously if the hostages are released. We should keep any legislation honed down and specific. The legislation can be vetoed if it is too much. We can warn the Congress that special interest legislation is not acceptable. He could not see keeping the hostages and their families on tenterhooks for five years. Dr. Brzezinski said this would make it more difficult to negotiate the final release. Secretary Vance said that Option C would aid in designing a claims program. The President said we would still have to draft legislation. Mr. Powell said it would be known within 24 hours of the time we started. Mr. Cutler said that the Congress will draft it if we do not. The President said he could see no problem with drafting legislation. 7 For an explanation of Options B, C, and D, see footnote 6, Document 244.
