Afghanistan
877
to decrease as the world loses interest and comes to accept their occupa-
tion of Afghanistan. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
[1 line not declassified] estimates that between 20,000 and 50,000
insurgents are in the field at any one time, in groups ranging from 25
to 2,000. This force is drawn from possibly as many as 1 million Afghans
involved intermittently in the fighting. ([classification marking and han-
dling restriction not declassified])
[less than 1 line not declassified] the insurgents are in “full control”
of about half the districts in the country and control another quarter
at night. [less than 1 line not declassified] seem to support this. Until
recently, insurgents had been in virtual control of parts of the city of
Herat, and assassinations and sabotage occur frequently in Kabul and
other cities. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
Attacks on roads and government installations are common even
in districts supposedly under full government control. Insurgent raids
on convoys have almost completely disrupted the country’s transport
system; many civilian truck drivers refuse to travel in the countryside
even with a military escort. The Soviets recently forbade military con-
voys to move after dark and adopted new procedures in an attempt
to improve their air support for the convoys. ([classification marking,
codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
Mixed Results for Moscow
The Soviet presence and firepower have forced the insurgents to
forgo large-scale operations. Before the invasion, the insurgents moved
at will in sizable groups, but now they retreat quickly to avoid Soviet
forces. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
The insurgents, moreover, no longer attempt to sustain siege opera-
tions against important government garrisons and towns, to block
roads permanently, or to hold any area Soviet troops make a serious
effort to clear. As recent operations in the northeast and Konar Valley
indicate, however, the Soviets do not have nearly enough troops to
garrison the country and still cannot depend on the Afghan Army to
do the job for them. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
The insurgents are still able to move men and material across the
border with Pakistan and Iran despite Soviet efforts to reduce the flow.
Soviet patrols, sweep operations, and extensive mining so far have been
directed at only part of the border. The Soviets have only succeeded
in turning open borders into borders that must be crossed with more
caution. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
There has been only slight success in winning over insurgents, but
there have been some defections to the government; a few important
arms caches have been seized, presumably on information from defec-
tors and prisoners. Such inroads are insignificant and seem to have
