Chapter 1, 1988  19
expired, but he wanted to make a suggestion. In reply to the report-
ers’ questions after the meeting, they might say that the meeting had 
gone well, that they had known each other before and had renewed 
their acquaintance, and had had a good review of questions of interest 
to both sides. The Vice President might also stress his concern about 
chemical weapons.
Shevardnadze joked that perhaps he might say that the Vice 
President had spoken from a position of strength.
The Vice President replied that he would have to think about 
whether he would like that or not. He added that, knowing the 
reporters that were stationed outside, he presumed that they would 
ask Shevardnadze questions dealing with the political situation in the 
U.S. If it were okay, he would prefer to go with what Secretary Shultz 
had said.
Shevardnadze replied that he would say that they had had an in-­
depth discussion, and that this had not been their first meeting.
Secretary Shultz interjected that this would have advantage of 
being true.
Shevardnadze added that he would say that the Vice President had 
indicated that he would continue to develop the level of cooperation 
which had been achieved between the two countries.
The Vice President wished to add one more “technical detail”. 
This meeting had been exactly the type of meeting which he had 
hoped to have. The Foreign Minister should know that the notes about 
the meeting would be passed on only to Secretary Shultz and the Vice 
President, and not enter the bureaucracy, although no secrets were dis-
cussed. It ought not to be viewed that the Foreign Minister was look-
ing over the horizon at the future American political structure. And 
the Vice President would treat this in the same way, and for this reason 
he was glad that the breakfast had been so limited in composition. 
He did not want it to be seen as an element in his political campaign. 
The joint work being carried out between the two countries was too 
important for that.
