We trust that the arrangements heretofore existing between your predecessor in office and the American Custodian may be continued, and we assure you of our willingness to cooperate in any way that will advance our mutual interests.” This latter communication was acknowledged by the Comptroller of the Clearing House by letter dated April 21, 1925,33 in which with respect to the court decision in question he stated: “I note, and[,] if I may respectfully say so, concur in, the view you express that the recent decision of your Supreme Court does not apply to cases where you, as representing your Government, had intervened, to claim the interest over the ex-enemy holdings in American Corporations even though the certificates themselves were held outside the United States. In such cases, purely as an expression of my personal opinion, I am disposed to agree that, by virtue of the right of eminent domain, a Government has supreme power over its Corporations as against all comers. I am therefore prepared to subscribe to the arrangement come to by you with Mr. Simpkin, the British Public Trustee.” It is worthy of mention that this construction of the law and of the decision of the Supreme Court is advanced and relied upon in an action recently instituted in Canada by the Canadian Alien Property Custodian against the American Alien Property Custodian and others, in which the situation presented in the actions filed by the Public Trustee is reversed, i. e., the Canadian Custodian claims title by virtue of vesting orders to securities of Canadian corporations as against the American Custodian who had seized the stock certificates actually in this country. The contentions of the Canadian Custodian in the Canadian action are diametrically opposed to those of the Public Trustee in the actions filed in the District of Columbia. It is understood that Coudert Brothers of New York represent both the Canadian Custodian and the British Public Trustee. Following the despatch of his letter of April 21, 1925, the Comptroller of the Clearing House delivered certificates to the Alien Property Custodian who surrendered them to the companies and obtained from the latter new certificates registered in his name.
