394  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
papers and provides some questions you can use to channel the discus-
sion in some interesting and useful directions.
Strategic Forces Issues
Harold Brown’s first paper (Tab B) describes a strategic forces 
modernization plan that addresses three main factors:
1) obsolescence in the bomber and ICBM legs of the Triad;
2) vulnerabilities in the ICBM force and the bomber force created 
by Soviet ICBM improvements, their construction of an SLBM force 
that could pose a significant prelaunch threat to our bomber force, and 
improvements in Soviet air defense; and
3) the need to increase our force capabilities to maintain essential 
equivalence with the Soviets.
For the long term, Harold presents a “representative strategic force 
modernization program” aimed at increasing our capabilities through 
improvements in the forces that most need modernizing. The suggested 
program raises our steady-­state total strategic spending to $9B per year 
(compared to $5.4B in 1979) and includes the following:
—Development starting in FY 79 of a new “mostly common” 
missile that closely approximates the M–X missile but provides major 
components that can be used to upgrade the Navy’s new C4 missile to 
closely approximate the D5 (Trident II) missile at less than one-­fourth 
the R&D cost of the D5.
—Development in FY 79 of the MAP basing scheme, and either 
an air mobile or ground mobile basing scheme, or both, with the best 
system to begin full-­scale development by FY 80.
—Development of a cruise missile carrier (CMC) aircraft begin-
ning in 1981 not as a force enhancement program, but as an eventual 
replacement for our first CMC, the B–52G.
—Production of 3,000 first-­generation cruise missiles beginning in 
1980 (with an IOC of 1982) plus development of a second-­generation 
cruise missile with reduced detectability.
—Upgrading the B–52H fleet (including new avionics and ECM) to 
maintain it as a penetrating bomber force until the end of the century.
—40 new austere inland bases to allow wider dispersal of the 
bomber and cruise missile carriers.
Harold also notes that the vulnerability of our strategic C3 systems 
is as profound a concern as the vulnerability of the forces themselves; 
that our strategic C3 [3 lines not declassified] in a major study by mid-79. 
The paper also comments that a new penetrating bomber is “indicated 
by the late 80s” and that we will want to explore smaller submarines 
than Trident as a possible follow-­on.
Comments
Harold’s analysis is based on the judgment that we want to retain 
a full Triad and will not go to a posture (e.g., Dyad) that depends
