704  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
4. Your argumentation at last meeting was excellent throughout 
and theme can be repeated next meeting with suitable variations.
5. FYI We do not wish talks broken off and under no circum­
stances should break come from us. Break, if inevitable, should come 
from other side. If Communist press for discussion of trade embargo 
or higher level meetings you should maintain position that fruitless to 
discuss other issues until both sides renounce use of force.
6. FYI. It would be possible by rearranging draft announcement of 
renunciation of force to eliminate any basis for claim that juxtaposition 
of reservation of self-­defense and mention of Taiwan would represent 
Communist concession that Taiwan not part of China, and we could 
also insert statement that neither party gives up right to achieve objec­
tives by peaceful means. However, because of categorical Communist 
statements which make clear their plan to contend that US renunci­
ation of force would in effect give up US rights in Taiwan area and 
in implementation of Defense Treaty with GRC, we do not ourselves 
suggest any change in formulation of announcement, as it would be 
misinterpreted.
Dulles
472.	 Telegram 1440 from Geneva1
Geneva, February 1, 1956, 11 a.m.
1440. From Johnson. Paragraph 3 Department telegram 1559.
Appreciate reasons against appearing accept even by implication 
obligation investigate names submitted by Wang in absence any show­
ing of current desire return and current obstruction departure. Will 
continue make clear not accepting any such obligation.
However, believe refusal accept further lists would be inconsis­
tent with acceptance previous lists and my stand regarding his refusal 
accept list 450 military personnel which we may again desire raise.
Also as matter has thus far been handled by him in meetings 
it is only after receiving and reading lists that I can determine exact 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/2–156. Secret; Limit Distribution.
