774
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
fact, [less than 1 line not declassified] indicates that Tito stonewalled
Brezhnev on the latter’s requests for port facilities, overflight rights,
and landing rights.
While, if time permits, it would be valuable to discuss broader
aspects of international relations with Kardelj, he will be most interested
in the bilateral aspects of our relations, in order to pin down U.S.
concerns.
Of special significance for him also will be Yugoslavia’s leadership
of the non-aligned movement. There is also their proposal and support
for next year’s UN Disarmament Conference. And Yugoslavia is proud
(and a bit uneasy) to be hosting the CSCE review conference, opening
on October 4. (FYI: on the basis of Yugoslav heavy-handedness in
dealing with representatives of Non-Governmental Organizations at
the June preparatory conference, we have urged them to seek advice
from the Finns and Swiss—who hosted CSCE in the first round. Other-
wise, we fear ugly incidents. This matter will be raised with Kardelj
in other meetings.)
Kardelj has a long (6 or 7 page) letter for you from Tito, covering
his trip to Moscow, Peking, and Pyongyang, as you had suggested in
your letter to him.5 Kardelj will reportedly say that Tito would like to
come here in January or February.
The Yugoslavs are also concerned about the record of violence by
emigre groups against their missions in this country, and have repeat-
edly accused us of not taking appropriate action. (Except for the TWA
hijacking, no case has been solved, and at times the FBI has been
uncooperative.) If this comes up in other meetings, Kardelj will be
given strong assurances about our concern and commitment.
Kardelj’s latest book, Trends in the Development of the Political System
of Self-Management Democracy, has just been published. State summa-
rizes it as follows:
5 See Document 239. An English translation of Tito’s letter, dated September 22,
was attached at Tab B of Brzezinski’s second memorandum to Carter on September 29.
(See footnote 1 above.) Tito informed Carter that in his discussions with Brezhnev, the
Soviet leader stressed Soviet interest in disarmament and the SALT II negotiation process.
Describing his meetings in Pyongyang, Tito recounted Kim Il Sung’s proposal that a
peace treaty be negotiated between the People’s Democratic Republic of Korea and the
United States or that tripartite negotiations among the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Korea, and the United States begin, but only after South Korean
President Park Chung Hee was removed from power. Regarding Sino-Soviet relations,
Tito described his impression following visits to Moscow and Beijing that neither country
was prepared to make any concession which would alleviate the tensions and that the
relationship was bound to continue on its present course. On October 6, Carter signed
a letter to Tito thanking him for his insights and inviting him to Washington in 1978.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977)
