Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII the incident. Taroon insisted that the Ambassador’s driver repeat the story to him over the telephone. (At this time, it was not yet clear to the Embassy whether the Ambassador had been taken by Afghan officials or someone else.) Mandozai called back almost immediately and informed DCM that he had informed Foreign Minister Amin, that this was not the work of the government, and that they were in touch with the police. 5. Events at the hotel: Some EmbOffs immediately went to the Kabul Hotel, arriving at approximately 0900. At the same time, the first police arrived, pushing through the people in the lobby toward a small room off the hotel desk. The EmbOffs heard loud scuffling and angry noises in the room. 6. At about 0915 Political Counselor Flatin established contact with a plainclothes police officer, who appeared to be in charge of the operation. He was a former Air Force officer known by Americans to be one of Taroon’s closest aides. We do not know his name. 7. At about 0920, the first Soviet police advisor, a tall, balding man, with a black overcoat, arrived on the scene and immediately went into consultations with the Afghan officials. 8. At about 0930, at the request of the American side at the hotel, there was a small conference among the Americans, the Afghan police, and the Soviet advisor. All then available information about the incident was exchanged at that time. We were told that the kidnappers had refused to answer the room telephone and were refusing to respond to any attempts to communicate with them. The American officers stressed their concern for the safety of the Ambassador, and were assured by the Afghan and Soviet participants that they shared this concern. Following this meeting the American officers began to find it more difficult to deal directly with the Soviet advisors and therefore began to negotiate directly with the senior Afghan police officials at the scene. 9. At 0950, under the instructions of DCM Amstutz, Political Counselor Flatin repeated the strong concern of the USG for the safety of Ambassador Dubs to both the Afghan police and Soviet advisors (at this time another two Soviet plainclothesmen had arrived on the scene, carrying with them several green canvas bags) and requested that no precipitous action be launched. They were told that in the American view this would greatly endanger the Ambassador. The Americans requested that the Afghans wait for the advice which the Embassy had already requested from Washington. The Afghans and Soviets clearly acknowledged and understood this U.S. request and indicated that they agreed with the wisdom of following a patient course of action, but they declined to make any commitments. About this time, the Embassy’s ambulance and medical staff arrived at the hotel and were permitted to position themselves in the lobby.
