Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976 43 But military strength alone is not enough. Over the years, our greatest source of strength has come from those basic, priceless values which are embodied in our Declaration of Independence, our Constitution, and our Bill of Rights: our belief in freedom of religion—our belief in freedom of expression—our belief in human dignity. These principles have made us great and, unless our foreign policy reflects them, we make a mockery of all those values that we have celebrated in this bicentennial year. We have not always lived up to our ideals, but I know of no great nation in history that has more often conducted itself in a moral, unselfish, generous manner abroad, and provided more freedom and opportunity to its own citizens at home. Still, in recent years, we have had reason to be troubled. Often there has been a gap between the values we have proclaimed and the policies we have pursued. We have often been overextended, and deeply entangled in the internal affairs of distant nations. Our government has pursued dubious tactics, and “national security” has sometimes been a cover-up for unnecessary secrecy and national scandal. We stumbled into the quagmires of Cambodia and Vietnam, and carried out heavy-handed efforts to destroy an elected government in Chile. In Cyprus, we let expediency triumph over fairness, and lost both ways. We responded inadequately to human suffering in Bangladesh, Burundi, the Sahel, and other underdeveloped nations. We lessened the prestige of our Foreign Service by sending abroad ambassadors who were distinguished only by the size of their political contributions. We have allowed virtually unlimited sales of United States arms to countries around the world—a policy as cynical as it is dangerous. I find it unacceptable that we have in effect condoned the effort of some Arab countries to tell American businesses that, in order to trade with one country or company, they must observe certain restrictions based on race or religion. These so-called “Arab boycotts” violate our standards of freedom and morality.2 2 In December 1945, the Arab League declared a boycott on trade between Arab countries and Israel. The boycott had evolved by 1948 to include three components: a continuation of the original boycott, a boycott against any companies operating in Israel, and a boycott against any companies that had relationships with companies operating in Israel.
