790 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The development of a long-­range air-­launched cruise missile (ALCM) continues. —The SS–20 IRBM is adding to Soviet striking power and flexibility for attacking targets in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. A variant of the SS–20 is being flight-­tested. Some older MRBM and IRBM sites have been deactivated, but some of the launch-­related equipment and missiles are apparently being transferred to remaining active sites. —The Soviets are increasing the proficiency of their command and control system [3 lines not declassified] —The Soviets are improving their ability to launch their missiles on receipt of tactical warning. They are completing large new radars that will improve ballistic missile early warning. Their launch detection satellite program is still in difficulty, however. 18. The capability of Soviet strategic defenses to contribute to limiting damage to the USSR remains low despite large, continuing Soviet investments. Weapon systems now being tested should bring some improvement, notably in strategic air defenses. —In strategic air defense, the Soviets are starting to deploy new versions of existing interceptors, but their low-­altitude capabilities will be limited. Modified and new interceptors with lookdown/shootdown capabilities are being flight-­tested, and deployment of a new low-­ altitude surface-­to-­air missile system is imminent. An airborne warning and control system (AWACS) that is being tested probably will have capabilities over land as well as over water. These systems will have better capabilities against low-­altitude bombers, but they probably will have only limited capabilities against cruise missiles. There is as yet no evidence of active development of systems designed specifically to intercept cruise missiles at low altitudes. —In ballistic missile defense, the Soviets are continuing to develop an ABM system that could be deployed more rapidly than the Moscow system. The R&D program for antiballistic missiles could give them options in the 1980s for upgrading their present ABM system at Moscow or for deploying ABM defenses more widely. —In antisubmarine warfare (ASW), intensive efforts are under way to improve both acoustic and nonacoustic sensors. However, Soviet towed-­array sonar development is not as far along as we had thought. [2 lines not declassified] [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] —In directed-­energy technology, the Soviets are conducting a broadly based research program to investigate applications for strategic defense. They are continuing to develop laser weapon prototypes for testing against aerodynamic vehicles, satellites, and ballistic missile reentry vehicles. —In civil defense, new evidence and analysis show that the proportion of urban residents that could be accommodated in blast shelters is toward the low side of our previous estimate of 10 to 20 percent. This reinforces our belief that the Soviets would have to rely on city evacuation as their principal means of protecting the urban population.
