310 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 110. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, December 28, 1979, 1628Z 8668. Subj: (LOU) Some Thoughts on Whether To Recognize the Babrak Karmal Regime. 1. (C—Entire text) 2. As the Department considers the question of recognizing the new regime in Afghanistan, I would like to add some thoughts for your consideration. First, it seems to me that the paramount factor in this [garble—equation?] is the means by which the Babrak Karmal regime came to power. Based on the views of our Mission officers, and those too of the French and Italian Embassies who have consulted us, the Soviet forces which had been airlifted into Kabul over the past two days, launched last night a surprise attack on the Afghan Army units guarding DRA installations in the city, and spared no force in destroying them. The struggle was strictly one of Soviet military vs. Afghan units. Thus, Babrak now holds his position solely [due] to the might of the Soviet Army, a consideration which casts doubt on whether this regime has actual or ethical legitimacy or can ever really rule this country. Though the Soviets got away with such tactics in Eastern Europe after World War II, I doubt they can duplicate it here in Afghanistan. 3. Secondly, following the April 1978 revolution, there was some discussion—in the context of “recognition”—of whether the overthrow of Daoud had been launched by Afghans or by connivance of the USSR.2 After examination of available evidence, we and the Dept. generally agreed that the Khalqi regime did appear to have organized and launched its own revolution, although the USSR undoubtedly had helped the conspirators clandestinely over the years with advice on subversion and secret training. That conclusion of an indigenous revolution, I think played some part in our decision to carry on business with the Khalqis. That argument hardly holds now with a regime which was brought to power only because of Soviet military intervention. 4. Thirdly, I recall that generally it is U.S. practice with respect to recognition to consider the key factor to be whether the new government exercises effective control over the country. If it does, the U.S. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Daily CIA Brief File, Box 24, 12/15/79–12/19/79. Confidential; Niact Immediate; Exdis. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room. Carter initialed “C” in the top right corner of the cable. 2 See Document 11.
