408
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
142.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
Islamabad, January 4, 1980, 0500Z
65. Subject: (U) Afghanistan, Pakistan, the USSR, and the United
States.
1. (C) Summary: The Soviet rape of Afghanistan during the last
week of December 1979 has qualitatively changed the geo-political
situation in South Asia. It has made Pakistan’s worst-case analysis
come true and produced a profound sense of unease in a nation already
wanting in sense of purpose and security. Differences in perceptions
in South Asia, fanned by reports of outside military aid for Pakistan,
may exacerbate relations between India and Pakistan as well.
2. (C) South Asia can be a fertile area through which to channel
our regional response to the Soviet grab; Pakistan, in particular, needs
help, and if it is perceived to be adequate, to be funded, and to be
carefully orchestrated—with full consultations—such help as we may
provide should be welcome here. But the regional and world situation
is much more complicated than the environment in which the 1959
bilateral agreement was formulated, and we can be sure that actions
meant to reassure Pakistan are in fact reassuring in Islamabad (and
salutary in Kabul and Moscow) only if we consult closely, fully, and
continuously with Pakistan. Beyond South Asia, the Soviet actions in
Afghanistan pose a critical juncture in U.S.-Soviet relations, and it is
in arenas other than South Asia that the main U.S. response should be
registered. End summary.
3. (U) Background: During all of the last century of the British Raj
in South Asia, a dominant theme in British geo-political policy was to
make safe the Empire’s Indian realm by ensuring that at no time was
a power inimical to British interests permitted to determine the destin-
ies of the Kingdom of Kabul at the head of the best land route into
South Asia from the west and north. As Czarist Russian influence
filled out the vast Central Asian reaches—epitomized by sweeps of
swashbuckling Cossacks—the British fought numerous small and sev-
eral major campaigns in the harsh topography of Afghanistan to under-
line their determination. In 1880, the issues were significant enough to
play a role in the return to power in England of Gladstone.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800009–0322.
Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Sent for information to Colombo, Dacca, Kathmandu,
Karachi, Lahore, New Delhi, Moscow, Beijing, London, USNATO, and Kabul.
