864  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
NI–17.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to 
the Department of State1

Managua, August 18, 1959, 5 p.m.
55. Following Embassy conclusions reached after Ambassador’s 
personal attention Department’s telegram 36.2
1. In view current Caribbean unrest, only “responsible” opposi-
tion in terms of U.S. standards is that which has refrained from active 
steps looking to violent overthrow GON. This particular segment 
Conservative and Independent Liberal opposition believed to be 
small part total opposition. It is only moderately influential political in 
­financial and other economic circles but is aspiring to greater if not pre-
dominating influence assuming this position can be attained as result 
intransigent Conservative and Independent Liberal attitude in face 
GON’s overwhelming strength.
Embassy has valid reason believe only small minority so-­called 
responsible opposition leaders identified this category would not at this 
time vocally object to EXIM loan. All others this classification would 
either be highly critical of loan or adopt resentful attitude toward U.S. 
in protest over alleged U.S. economic intervention in support Somoza’s 
dynasty and economic domination. Most representatives this category 
have in past repeatedly told Embassy their choice between (A) peaceful 
coexistence with GON assisted by U.S. loans and (B) economic deterio-
ration implicit in other groups active efforts for exchange of government 
by any means including total isolation from U.S., would unequivocally 
be latter. Hardship to themselves involved this choice they contend 
would be assumed as their contribution eventual welfare Nicaragua.
Basis past experience Embassy believes however, these same patri-
ots if loans were granted would not refuse share directly or indirectly 
in its benefits.
2. Brief comment other opposition elements follows: Hard-­core 
Conservatives and its offshoot Conservative Youth. Both are estimated 
to be so basically opposed Somoza regime on emotional grounds regard-
less damage to country or odds against them that any consideration 
to GON however slight will be interpreted as direct U.S. opposition 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 817.10/8–1959. Secret; Priority; Limited 
Distribution. Information on the source text indicates that the telegram was not for distri-
bution outside of the Department of State.
2 Telegram 36 to Managua, July 31, informed the Embassy that the Export-Import 
Bank was considering a loan to Nicaragua and solicited the Embassy’s evaluation of the 
“responsible” opposition’s attitude toward the United States if the loan were granted. 
(817.10/7–3159)
