112
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
with the functioning of that equipment. In other words, the purpose of
our work is to ban any and all actions against space objects which
would impede their normal functioning. If they had left any out, they
would just have to add them. The purpose of the main provision was to
give an exhaustive list of all forms of action which could be taken
against a space object which would impede its normal functioning.
10. With such a comprehensive approach, Khlestov said, a state
could not protect itself from pernicious actions carried out using space
objects. If it took steps to interfere with pernicious actions, it would vio-
late the provisions of the agreement. The U.S. idea to include provi-
sions for making an addition to the agreement several years in the fu-
ture was not very consistent. It would not be good to wait for such an
action to occur. It was better not to have such an action. Including a
provision now was an additional guarantee that cases of a space object
being used for pernicious actions would not happen. Since there would
be full clarity in the text on space objects used for pernicious actions, no
one would want to carry out such actions.
11. Khlestov said the Soviet side proceeded from the premise that
there would not be cases when a space object would be used deliber-
ately for pernicious actions. They referred to a hypothetical case. With-
out their “hostile acts” provision, in order to carry out “prohibited” acts
a side would have to quickly withdraw from the agreement. In situa-
tions relating to space objects, the time factor would be very important.
Withdrawal from an agreement would require certain time-consuming
procedures. A question of countering a space object used to carry out
pernicious actions might take minutes or hours but no more. A ques-
tion of withdrawing from the agreement would take weeks or months.
Therefore, this is not a solution to the problem.
12. Buchheim said that the Soviet side’s concern over timing and
taking rapid measures raised questions on the U.S. side. He wondered
if the Soviet side brought this up because it foresaw some activity by
the U.S. (or for that matter the USSR) representing real and practical
problems. The U.S. side did not. He thought that an obligation not to
damage, destroy, or change the trajectories of each other’s space objects
included the presumption that both sides would be careful in what
they did with their space objects. As Khlestov had said yesterday, each
side knew how to use space objects properly. He thought that in the
spirit of the common purpose that this agreement could serve, early in-
dications of a move toward missions which one side would find trou-
blesome should lead to consultations with the other side, and not to
abrupt exercising of a provision giving a right to begin destroying,
damaging or changing the trajectories of a space object.
13. Buchheim said the U.S. side was only acknowledging a hypo-
thetical possibility, making an agreement easy to implement if unfore-
