Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA 195 knowledge of the non-Russian peoples of the Soviet Union whose rapid rate of population increase will soon make them the majority. RFE/ RL has a unique capacity to contribute in this area and one of our objectives is to improve both research and broadcasting by recruiting more young people of non-Russian nationalities and training them well. I know that Gronouski and Ferguson have been explaining their approach to your senior staff and making a strong case for the modest budget increases they feel they need in FY 1980 if we are to get full value out of the increased transmitter power of RFE/RL. This operation has been in existence for a long time, but it should not be looked upon as a routine feature of our foreign information program. I am satisfied that the BIB, under Gronouski, is doing a more careful job than ever before of examining broadcasting requirements. What the BIB is asking for RFE/RL is modest, but a 7–8% increase in FY 1980 is necessary to enable them to do the job we have set for them. Zbigniew Brzezinski 60. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (McIntyre)1 Washington, December 1, 1978 SUBJECT BIB (RFE/RL) FY 1980 Budget Request In reference to your Overview summary of the Foreign Information and Exchange portion of the FY 1980 Budget (as well as BIB Chairman John Gronouski’s letter to you of November 16, 1978 commenting on your office’s proposals for reduction in the BIB’s budget request), I am disturbed by the concluding statement on page 3 of the Overview which states: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board for International Broadcasting (RFE, RL, VOA): 1/78–4/79. No classification marking. The closing is handwritten. Henze forwarded a draft to Brzezinski under a November 30 covering memorandum and commented: “OMB did its detailed homework sloppily, cutting positions that had already been eliminated and misreading amounts requested for travel, recruitment and training of new personnel and certain other items.” He concluded: “OMB has recommended cutting the very items most needed to enable the reorganization of RFE/RL to be effective.” (Ibid.)
