3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 314 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI Finally, you may reiterate to the Soviet leaders my willingness to invite President Brezhnev to the United States at a mutually convenient time to pursue these issues further and to solidify a more cooperative relationship.3 Sincerely, Jimmy Carter 3 Below his signature Carter wrote, “Cy, good luck! This is another difficult assignment for you. You have my complete confidence and support. J.” 97. Backchannel Message From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance in Tanzania1 Washington, April 14, 1978, 2031Z WH80506. Subject: Conversation With Dobrynin. Dobrynin called yesterday asking to have lunch with me prior to his trip to Moscow. Lunch was held today. We talked for about an hour or so. His first and immediate concern was to know whether you were coming to Moscow with specific proposals, designed to accomplish at least as much progress as—in his words—was accomplished during Gromyko’s visit here. I told him that you were going to Moscow in a constructive spirit to move forward the SALT negotiating process and to review the overall nature of our relationship. However, I indicated that I was not in a position to discuss the nature of the U.S. SALT position, though some elements of that may be conveyed to him by Warnke. He was scheduled to see Warnke afterwards. The conversation then focused on broader aspects of U.S.-Soviet relations. Dobrynin stressed that the Soviet leadership feels rather “emotional” about the relationship. He expressed the view that it is important for us to try to develop political understanding and that this requires more regular consultations. He agreed with me that the correspondence between the two leaders has not filled the void and he repeatedly inquired as to 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 6, U.S.S.R.—U.S.-Soviet Relations: 2/77–6/78. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent to the Embassy in Tanzania with instructions to deliver at the opening of business. Vance arrived in Dar es Salaam on April 13, the first leg of a trip that would take him to South Africa, Rhodesia, the United Kingdom, and, April 19–23, the Soviet Union.
