440  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
However, the need to kill these targets is realistic only in scenarios 
in which the crisis deepens from modest levels (where actions to reduce 
the values of potential targets don’t seem necessary to the Soviets) to 
the missile shooting level in a matter of less than a day or two, and such 
scenarios don’t seem likely.
With respect to the missile silos and launch control centers, while 
we might like to be able to destroy such targets before they launch their 
missiles, it doesn’t seem likely that we would be able to. Soviet mis-
sile readiness levels, warning systems, doctrine, and exercises indicate 
that they are capable of and apparently plan on launching their missiles 
under attack. We might want to attack such targets anyway—­to destroy 
missiles that failed to launch, or to prevent reload of the silos . . . How-
ever, if this is our purpose, a half a day or so delay in hitting these tar-
gets probably wouldn’t make much difference.
To the extent that there is a real requirement to be able to destroy 
the [less than 1 line not declassified] time-­sensitive targets, SLBMs can 
be made capable of the task. Bill Perry noted in the Defense Review 
meeting that while it would be a tough technical problem, SLBMs can 
be made to achieve ICBM accuracies by the late 80’s. Further, contrary 
to popular opinion, submarine C3 is good enough to rapidly generate 
large nuclear strikes. Against worst case jamming, TACAMO aircraft 
operating off our coasts can complete transmission of an emergency 
action message (EAM) within 45 seconds with virtually perfect con-
fidence that it will be received by any submarine at normal operating 
depth that is within 800 nautical miles. This implies that two TACAMO 
aircraft can guarantee coverage of about 4 million square miles of 
ocean—­enough operating area for at least five SSBNs carrying a total 
of more than 600 warheads. These aircraft can also guarantee delivery 
of an EAM over an additional 10 million square nautical miles within 
15 minutes—­which would allow launch of more than 1500 additional 
warheads.
One might argue that other elements of the SSBN C3 networks may 
fail to get the message to the TACAMO aircraft, but in this regard, the 
SLBM C3 network seems no worse off than the C3 network supporting 
the ICBM force. Given the vulnerability of ground based communica-
tions stations and transmission lines, the ICBM force seems likely to be 
controllable only from our airborne command posts, and getting the 
word to TACAMO isn’t much tougher in principle than talking to our 
other airborne command posts.
The Increment of Hedging Provided by a Modernized ICBM Force
One of the strongest arguments made in favor of modernizing 
the ICBM force is that it substantially improves the degree to which 
our overall strategic posture is hedged against catastrophic failures in
