Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —what do we say to the press and to non-governmental organizations outside the conference? We cannot be silent, yet blurring what goes on inside the conference with what is said outside could provoke the confrontation we all say we want to avoid. (The Soviets have been quite clear in indicating that they are prepared to retaliate if need be.) Can we reach an understanding with the Soviets that will not be perceived here as a sell out? —a related issue, as important, is how we deal with members of Congress who will go to Belgrade as representatives of the CSCE Commission. So far our relations with the Commission at the working level are good, and many of the Commission’s interventions have been useful (for instance, Dole pushed us in a direction quite opposite from what I might have expected). Yet in the fall, senior members of Congress will be independent actors no matter what our treaty with the Commission. —should our preparations include a fairly detailed self-criticism, not just in Basket III but in others as well? —what level representative makes sense for the opening session: Christopher, Young (as the President has once suggested), or a lower level? Balancing the Baskets The general question is what can be done to make our approach seem less biased toward Basket III? For instance: —are there possibilities in the area of CBMs, even though the Soviets have shown little interest up to now (and others have worried that CBMs agreed in the CSCE framework will foreclose more valuable stabilizing measures in MBFR)? —what dangers are there for us in a thorough review of implementation of Baskets I and II (for instance, in raising Jackson-Vanik)? —should we take such a dim view of the “Brezhnev proposals”11 as we have up to now? Why? Relations with Allies —how much coordination with allies (and neutrals) makes sense? Until now our preparations have presumed that very close cooperation was an—perhaps the—imperative. There is no gainsaying the importance of close and frank coordination. But we do not want to go to the
