United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 83 have dried up capital inflows, while budgetary and monetary policies have had adverse impacts. The drain on dollar reserves should slow down to manageable proportions in 1960 as long as the GOV follows sound policies and makes a real effort to deal with its internal problems. The outlook, however, is not too good for any revival of economic growth. ETA–29. Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs (Turkel) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1  Washington, February 5, 1960. SUBJECT Discussion at Secretary’s Staff Conference—February 5, 1960 I feel that you should be aware of the following points that came up at the Secretary’s staff conference on February 5.2 [Here follows discussion of two matters unrelated to U.S. loan activities in Latin America.] 3. I stated that my colleagues on IA–ECOSOC yesterday had referred to the February 4 front page article in the New York Times by Kenworthy3 stating that U.S. aid to India would increase from $150–170 million per year to $250–300 million per year but without any increase in the total. They said if this is so, obviously the priorities of other participants must be reduced. Is this our support for Operation Pan America? I said that I did not know about the alleged [illegible in the original] or the accuracy of the article. My Brazilian colleague said that the Brazilian Ambassador at the Pan American Society had recently stated that Latin America had participated in DLF funds to the extent of only 7-1/2%. He added that if you eliminate the Argentine participation, which [illegible in the original] a stabilization loan, the real participation was around 5%. 1 Source: Department of State, ARA Files, Lot 62 D 302, “Chron File of Memoranda & Miscellaneous.” Official Use Only. Drafted by Turkel. 2 The record of the Secretary’s staff meeting, held at 9:15 a.m. on February 5, drafted by John A. Calhoun, Director of the Executive Secretariat, contains a brief mention of the subject dealt with in this memorandum. (Secretary’s Staff Meetings, Lot 63 D 75) 3 E.W. Kenworthy.
