Afghanistan 797 301. Memorandum of Conversation1 Tokyo, July 10, 1980, 9:15–10:15 a.m. SUBJECT Memorandum of Conversation between President Carter and Premier Hua Guofeng of the Peoples’ Republic of China—Tokyo, Japan, 9:15–10:15 a.m. July 10 PARTICIPANTS PRC U.S. Premier Hua Guofeng President Jimmy Carter Deputy Foreign Minister Han Secretary of State Edmund Muskie Nianlong Zbigniew Brzezinski, Special Minister Counselor (Deputy Chief Assistant to the President for of Mission of the PRC Embassy National Security Affairs in Japan) Wang Xiaoyun Michael Mansfield, U.S. Deputy Director of Asian Affairs of Ambassador to Japan the Foreign Ministry Xiao Michael Armacost, Deputy Assistant Xiangchuan Secretary of Bureau for East Sun Ping: Notetaker Asia and Pacific Affairs Chun Hui: Interpreter Director of Donald Gregg, National Security Secretariat of Foreign Ministry Council Staff Member Vivian Chang (interpreter) [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] Turning to Afghanistan, the President said that some limited assistance was being given to the Afghan freedom fighters who are struggling for their independence against the Soviet invaders. The President noted that much of the Afghan army has defected to the freedom fighters, taking their weapons with them. The President said that the U.S. considers it important to give assistance to those who struggle for their freedom. The President noted that Pakistan, even though under Soviet pressure, was participating to some degree in efforts to support the Afghan freedom fighters. The President said that these actions are very sensitive, and that it is difficult to discuss them in complete candor. He also noted that the U.S. is willing to exchange intelligence with the PRC on the situation in Afghanistan, and that we have benefitted from some information received from the Chinese side. Dr. Brzezinski said that the U.S. has not been indifferent or passive in responding to the difficult situation in which the Afghan freedom 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 38, Memcons: President: 7/80. Secret. The Chinese and U.S. delegations were in Japan to attend the memorial service for Japanese Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira, July 9–10. For the full text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1977– 1980, vol. XIII, China, Document 313.
