conciliation. Something may be deduced from the speech of Dr. Rada y
Gamio forwarded with my despatch No. 945,81 in which he contrasted
Peru’s past attitude on this question with that of Chile. I will quote the
following extracts in translation:
“Peru has always been a supporter of international arbitration
without limitations of any form. In the history of arbitration, we
have without doubt a very distinguished place.
“In the First Conference in Washington arbitration was
considered. The Committee on general welfare proposed the
conclusion of a uniform arbitration treaty. In the general plan it
was agreed that the Republics of North, Central, and South
America should adopt arbitration as a principle of international
law for the solution of controversies which might arise between
two or more of said Republics, and that arbitration was obligatory
in all differences referring to diplomatic and consular privileges,
frontiers, territories, indemnities, rights of navigation, and the
validity, interpretation, and execution of treaties. Questions which
could imperil the independence of States were excluded and
optional (facultativo) arbitration was prescribed for them. The
arbitration agreed upon was retroactive (retrospective). Peru
raised the banner of arbitration on high and without limitations.
Chile opposed arbitration of this nature so far as it was possible
for her to do so.
“In the Second International American Conference in Mexico, the
noble and progressive Argentine nation, through her delegation,
proposed obligatory arbitration for certain rules which comprised
all the possible origins of a casus belli. She said she could repeat
what she said to Chile in 1872 and to Colombia in 1880: With
treaties or without them, the Argentine Government is determined
to end all international questions by arbitration.’
“The Chilean delegation at that conference was opposed to
obligatory arbitration. On the other hand, the Peruvian delegation
stated that ‘the stability of institutions and peace between the
Republics of America were the two cardinal necessities, and that
