Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
165
These are very controversial proposals which no department or
agency endorses.
4. The BIB has been successfully established over the past three
years and is a good formula for sponsorship of RFE/RL [less than 1
line not declassified] but it has developed a tendency to become an extra
layer of management with its own continually increasing staff. The
radios feel that it interferes too much in day-to-day operations and tends
to pre-empt decisions that are more properly left to the RFE/RL board
of directors (chaired by John Hayes, of the Washington Post-Newsweek
radio/TV empire).
5. The BIB has an important but limited role to play. It should not
become involved in management of the radios. It should not get into
jurisdictional disputes with other U.S. Government elements, trying to
take over VOA, e.g. Its staff should be kept lean and confine its efforts
to true oversight/review functions, as required by law, and to representing
RFE/RL with the Congress.
6. In the form in which it has existed up until now, the BIB has
been dominated by David Abshire, a Nixon appointee, who also heads
a research center at Georgetown University. Foy Kohler has played a
positive role in the BIB, but he has pressed to have too many positions
in the radios filled by retired FSO’s and USIS people. We need younger,
more vigorous people for these demanding jobs. John P. Roche has
been disappointing as a BIB member. The two other BIB members,
John T. Murphy, President of AVCO Broadcasting in Cincinnati, and
Thomas H. Quinn, a young Washington lawyer with no visible qualifi-
cations for the job, were originally appointed for two years and (unfor-
tunately) reappointed for three more last year. The prime reason for
appointment of Murphy was that he was proposed by Senator Taft,
while Quinn was a protege of Senator Pastore. (Congress simply played
favorites here, but there was apparently no effort by the Executive
Branch to propose more effective people.) We could certainly find
better people than these two to serve on this Board, but for the time
being emphasis must be on filling the two vacancies that occur as of
30 April when Kohler’s and Roche’s terms run out.
7. Griffith, whom we are proposing to replace Kohler, is an ideal
choice from the viewpoint of both knowledge of the radios, in depth,
and knowledge of Eastern Europe and the USSR.
8. Since one of the most important functions of the Board is to
serve as the radios’ interface with Congress, we feel a former Congress-
man would be useful on the Board—preferably one with an interest in
international affairs. Also, since only three BIB members can belong
to one political party, the Congressman should be Republican. We now
have clearance from Frank Moore’s office to offer the other BIB vacancy
to Peter H.B. Frelinghuysen, former Congressman from the 5th District
