286  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
make clandestine listening devices ineffective. Mr. Ash said that the 
NSC Committee had this defensive measure under consideration, and 
that State Department technicians were experimenting with a proto­
type “jamming” device which, however, required excessive voltage for 
operation. Mr. Allen Dulles commented that one object of searches is 
to tune in on the wave-­length of the opposition device. The President 
understood that this type of search applied to radio-­type devices.
The President then asked whether the United States tried to exploit 
devices that had been discovered in a kind of “double-­agent” way. 
Mr. Dulles said attempts were made to exploit discovered devices, but 
that such exploitation was rendered difficult because of the tendency to 
rip out the device immediately upon its discovery. He felt that discov­
ery of a device should be reported but the device should be left in place.
The President felt that experts should be available at foreign posts 
to exploit clandestine devices when they are discovered. He asked how 
often important offices and conference rooms were checked for clandes­
tine listening devices, and recalled from his experience in World War I 
that induction principles could be used for listening without actual 
connection with a telephone line. Mr. Ash said that periodic technical 
examinations were made of White House and NSC offices. He added 
that the technicians could, through examining impedences on the lines, 
detect listening by induction.
The Vice President said he had been told that it was possible, 
through the medium of metal venetian blinds, for a man across the 
street to hear what was going on in a room.
The President remarked that the great ingenuity being displayed 
in connection with communications devices pointed to the need for the 
services of experts in this field.
Mr. Allen Dulles said CIA was engaged in a major research effort 
in the technical surveillance countermeasures field. Mr. Gray said that a 
panel of the Science Advisory Committee was engaged in basic research 
on passive (“room within a room”) and active countermeasures.
The President observed that if clandestine listening devices con­
tinued to improve, it might eventually be necessary to stop talking and 
start writing instead.
The Vice President asked if there were not measures which could 
be taken to prevent the use of a telephone instrument as a listening 
point. Mr. Ash said that telephones such as those in the White House 
and other important offices can be equipped with a mercury switch to 
knock out the tap.
The National Security Council:
Noted and discussed the Annual Report of the NSC Special Com­
mittee on Technical Surveillance Countermeasures, prepared pursuant 
to paragraph 7 of NSC 5618 and transmitted by the reference memoran­
dum of June 24, 1958.
