Eastern Europe Region 143 measures that would inevitably be painful. A prolonged period of economic stagnation—of level or slowly declining living standards— seems in prospect, as all the economies of Eastern Europe face austerity imposed by energy problems, demographic developments, and the requirement of improving external hard currency financial positions. (C) Politically, the deteriorating economic situation could lead to disputes within the leadership and the populaces could gain the impression that the regimes are not united and are indecisive. This perception might tempt workers and political dissidents to become more assertive and perhaps to cooperate with one another. Under such conditions, the victory of the Polish workers could become an example other East European work forces might seek to emulate. They would still be taking a great risk, however, for they would have less reason to believe that their regimes would necessarily follow the Gierek regime’s example or that Moscow would tolerate another “Polish Summer.”2 (C) 2 See Document 38. 41. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in All NATO Capitals1 Washington, September 20, 1980, 0753Z 250846. Subject: Poland and Eastern Europe: Analysis and Policy Implications. Ref: State 238732.2 1. (C-entire text) 2. In an effort to analyze the likely effect on the USSR and Eastern Europe of the developments in Poland and to evaluate their implications for U.S. policy, we circulated our initial assessment (reftel) to our posts in Moscow and Eastern Europe for their initial thoughts and 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800453–1198. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Gilmore; cleared by Bridges, Parris, and Barry; approved by Ridgway. Sent for information Priority to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest, Moscow, Prague, Sofia, Warsaw, Helsinki, Madrid, Stockholm, and Vienna. 2 In telegram 238732 to multiple posts, September 8, the Department provided a draft of the paper and requested comments on the analytical section as well as policy recommendations for each individual Eastern European country. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800428–0391)
