784  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
practical working point of view. The Ambassador agreed that this was 
an essential principle, but it was at this point that he suggested that to 
be acceptable personnel should not necessarily be the most highly qual-
ified from a technical point of view. Mr. Warner commented that we are 
not trying to have a program which is dependent on any single man 
for its success and Mr. Wieland cited the case of the recent departure of 
Mr. Ward from Artibonite valley and the difficulties we are having in try-
ing to find another man who is as well qualified. Nevertheless, in order 
that the work go forward, we have named a temporary replacement 
who is not as well qualified but who we think is acceptable for the time 
being. In the same spirit we have accepted the Haitian Government’s 
nominations of Mr. Cantave and Mr. Jospitre and believe that we can 
carry on a satisfactory program with them even though they do not 
appear to be as well qualified, from the point of view of previous expe-
rience, as the men they replaced.
It was apparent that Ambassador Bonhomme is discouraged and 
frustrated by the present state of affairs. At one point he mentioned that 
he has been considering returning to Port-­au-Prince to tell President 
Duvalier that it he continues his apparent new policy of turning away 
from the United States, the Ambassador’s usefulness in Washington 
may be ended. Mr. Wieland and Mr. Warner said they hoped the 
Ambassador would not find it necessary to do this and assured him of 
their very high regard. Mr. Warner said that if the Ambassador should 
return to Port-­au-Prince, he should assure his Government, if it has any 
doubts, that United States policy toward Haiti continues to be one of 
cooperating to the fullest extent possible in working out problems of 
mutual concern. Near the end of the conversation, Mr. Warner referred 
to the Artibonite valley difficulties and said these are traceable in part to 
what happened there years ago when, from the Haitian Government’s 
point of view, a great deal of money was spent with comparatively lit-
tle result. The DLF was keenly aware of these past difficulties, and the 
criticism which had arisen as a result, when it approved the loan for 
further work in the valley; perhaps the DLF has seemed excessively 
cautious and strict in its administration of the loan funds. However, the 
DLF wished to assure that the funds are used with the maximum effec-
tiveness. Thus how to achieve an effective operation appears to be the 
real problem in the Artibonite valley and in other projects rather than 
the amount of money. Mr. Warner commented, and the Ambassador 
agreed, that money in itself will not solve the problem. When asked 
for what specific suggestions he would have to make operations more 
effective, the Ambassador had none, although he did say that some 
gesture by the United States toward Haiti at this time might be very 
helpful.
