70 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 24. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1 Washington, September 1, 1978, 1:10–2:40 p.m. Subject Middle East—Camp David Summit Participants President Jimmy Carter CIA Vice President Walter Mondale Adm. Stansfield Turner State White House Cyrus Vance Zbigniew Brzezinski Hermann Eilts U.S. Ambassador Hamilton Jordan to Egypt Jody Powell Samuel Lewis U.S. Ambassador NSC to Israel William Quandt Defense Harold Brown Joint Chiefs of Staff2 The President began the meeting by asking Ambassador Eilts and Ambassador Lewis to discuss briefly the personalities who would be with President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin at Camp David. Ambassador Eilts noted that Hassan Tuhamy would be there, but that he would not have much influence over Sadat. Foreign Minister Kamil is the next most important person, and he strongly believes in protecting Sadat from going too far. Ambassador Eilts concluded that none of the ministerial-level advisers would have much influence over Sadat. Under Secretary al-Baz is very able and will be the principal drafting officer, but he also has little direct influence over Sadat. Ambassador Lewis then reviewed the Israeli personalities who would accompany Begin. He ascribed greatest influence to Foreign Minister Dayan, and noted that the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister now work closely together. Ambassador Lewis suggested that Dayan should be included in small meetings with Begin. Both Dayan and Weizman see Camp David as more of a watershed than does Begin. Weizman has a better relationship now with Begin than he did some months ago, but his relationship is not as good as that of Dayan. Begin is more ideologically attached to the land, the West Bank and Gaza, 1 Source: Carter Library, Vertical File, Middle East. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. A summary of conclusions from the meeting is ibid. 2 According to the summary of conclusions, General Jones represented the JCS at the meeting.
