284  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
capability, which involves long lead times, is planned more against the 
future, when we expect to turn our attention to sustaining capability, 
than it is against the present, when we must first make sure that NATO 
is not overwhelmed even before the first convoys from the United 
States can arrive. The utility of low-­readiness reserve units in this kind 
of a NATO war would be dubious at best, and we will thus try to move 
as much funding as we can to units that can be kept ready enough to 
meet our critical early requirements.
There are two justifications for this emphasis. The first is simple 
enough: it doesn’t matter how much long-­term sustaining capability 
we may have if we cannot hold out for the first few weeks. And we 
may not be able to; the current balance of forces gives no cause for 
complacency, so our first task is to improve it. The second reason is, I 
think, equally practical: our NATO allies have traditionally shown lit-
tle interest in building a sustaining capability, preferring to rely on the 
deterrent of nuclear warfare.19 I believe they are now seriously inter-
ested in trying to improve their conventional capability, at least for the 
initial fighting.20 But there must be real—­not just planned—­progress in 
improving that initial capability, and more confidence on their part that 
the Soviets can be held, before they will show any interest in preparing 
for a longer war. To face them with both requirements at once would 
increase the risk that they would do neither. And until they are ready 
to improve their sustainability, there would be little use in our trying to 
go it alone: If it’s at all uncertain that the coalition as a whole can stop 
the Soviets, it’s obvious that United States forces can’t do it alone (nor 
should we).
I mentioned above that the balance of forces in Europe gives no 
cause for complacency, though the improvements we are planning will 
help. As things stand, it looks as if NATO will be outgunned on the 
ground (by one measure of firepower) by about 80% for the first 10–45 
days after Pact mobilization. The offense traditionally requires a force 
superiority, but whether the 80% advantage is enough to tempt them to 
attack is unknowable. It is certainly worthy of our concern. We do hold 
an advantage in the air-­to-­ground capability of our tactical airpower, 
but they outnumber us in terms of aircraft that can be used in air-­to-­air 
combat.21
There is one other important issue in connection with NATO. We 
have concentrated heavily on the Central Front, yet NATO also faces 
threats on its flanks. Aside from military threats, the flank countries 
19 Carter underlined “NATO allies” in this sentence.
20 Carter underlined “now,” “interested,” “improve,” and “conventional capability” 
in this sentence.
21 Carter underlined “We,” “hold,” “advantage,” “air-­to-­ground,” “they outnumber 
us,” and “air-­to-­air combat” in this sentence.
