Human Rights 51 Nearly 80 of these have been completed, are being printed and should go to the Congress in a few weeks as part of the regular security assistance congressional presentation. They reflect developments as of December 1976; an introductory statement notes that there have been significant changes in some countries since that time. The reports are unclassified and may well be published by the congressional committees to which they are submitted. Copies of the individual country reports are being or have been sent under separate cover to posts concerned. They should not be shown to host governments at this time. At the time they are released to the Congress, posts will be advised and may then, at their discretion, bring them to the attention of host governments.6 Posts not repeat not wishing to do so, should advise the Department. 3. In discussing these reports with local officials, posts should note: A) That they are required by law. B) They cover all countries for which the U.S. is proposing security assistance (including FMS cash sales); the fact that a country is reported on does not mean that it is necessarily on any sort of human rights “blacklist.” C) The reports seek to be factual and do not reach any conclusion on whether a country engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights or not. D) References to reports by nongovernmental groups such as the International Commission of Jurists, Freedom House, Amnesty International, etc. and international organizations like the International Red Cross, the UN and OAS Human Rights Commissions are required under the law. 4. The second category of reporting is statements, called for under Subsection (C)(1) of the law. Either house of the Congress or its Foreign Relations Committee may request a statement on the human rights practices of any security assistance recipient country. This must be submitted within 30 days of the request or assistance must cease until it is provided. To date, statements have been requested on Argentina, Haiti, Peru, Iran, Indonesia and the Philippines. These were provided in clas- 6 In telegram 46674 to all diplomatic posts, March 3, the Department indicated that 80 unclassified reports would be sent to Congress as part of the annual presentation for the security assistance program. An advance set of reports would be sent to the Senate Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance “to be used informally” in preparation for Christopher’s March 7 testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770072–0542)
