950
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
have been eliminated or identified and we believe that the armed forces
can be presently considered fairly reliable.
48. Since 1950 the US has assisted in efforts to modernize and im-
prove the armed forces through maintenance of military missions to
the Army and the Gendarme´rie, and through provision of military
equipment. Of the $110 million in such equipment aid allocated thus
far, about $76 million had been shipped by mid-1954. The mission to
the Army is to be augmented by five US training teams at brigade or di-
vision level in early 1955.
49. While some improvements have been effected through these
programs, the Iranian military establishment is still of generally poor
quality. Although it is generally capable of fulfilling its primary mis-
sion of maintaining internal security, it would be unable to offer signifi-
cant resistance to a Soviet attack. Only a start has been made at devel-
oping adequate standards of leadership and tactical proficiency.
Because of a general lack of technical skills and experience and a poor
logistic system, Iran has had difficulty in absorbing even the limited
amounts of US equipment thus far made available. Low pay and the
general atmosphere of slackness, graft, and favoritism have weakened
morale, particularly among the junior officers; these factors were prob-
ably in large measure responsible for Tudeh’s success in winning sup-
porters among the armed forces. Finally, Iran’s potential for defense
against a Soviet attack is weakened by its lack of a modern martial tra-
dition and of any strong popular sense of national loyalty.
50. The development of the “northern tier” concept of a regional
defense system based on the Turk-Pakistani agreement has empha-
sized the potential importance of the Zagros Mountain chain in Iran as
a major barrier to any Soviet military advance into the Middle East. If
an Iranian military force could be developed which was capable of ef-
fecting substantial delay in the Zagros passes, it would constitute an
important asset in defense of the area.
51. An effort to create such an Iranian military capability would re-
quire a long-term program involving US expenditures very substan-
tially in excess of present levels. The first and basic requirement would
be to provide Iranian combat units with sufficient modern equipment
and technical and tactical training to bring them up to adequate stand-
ards of combat effectiveness. Moreover, for such a force to function ef-
fectively additional outlays would be required for redeployment of
troops and military installations from their present exposed positions
to more defensible points in the Zagros Mountains area; the relocation
or new construction of military stores, arsenals, and factories; and the
construction of a number of military roads linking strategic defensive
points. Increased pay for the armed forces would almost certainly be
required if morale were not to remain a major problem. A program on
