Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 555 We are prepared to support that effort as appropriate and to work with the Iranian Government and the people as a nation which shares common interests and common aspirations with us. But just as we respect Iran’s independence and integrity, other nations must do so as well. If others interfere, directly or indirectly, they are on notice that this will have serious consequences and will affect our broader relationships with them. At the same time, we are intensifying our efforts to promote stability throughout the Middle East so that the security and the independence of the nations of that part of the world will be maintained. At my direction, the Secretary of Defense recently carried out comprehensive consultations in Israel, Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia, concerning the security of that region.5 We are determined to work with these nations and with others to put the peaceful development of the region on a sound and a lasting foundation. Recent disturbances in the region have underlined the need to work even more urgently towards peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors. To this end, Israeli and Egyptian negotiators, the Foreign Ministers of both countries, will return to Camp David tonight at the invitation of the United States.6 They will be meeting with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. And I myself will do whatever I can to promote the success of the Camp David negotiations. And if it should be necessary, and the parties show adequate flexibility, I will call another summit conference to work for peace. I urge all leaders throughout the Middle East to recognize the vital importance for their region for these talks to succeed. For us in the United States, any crisis in the Middle East has the most immediate and serious consequences. But we are also deeply concerned by what is happening now in Southeast Asia. The same principles of American policy apply: We support the independence and integrity of the regional nations; we will stand by our friends; and we will continue as a nation to work for peace. Just in the last few weeks we’ve seen a Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia7 and, as a result, a Chinese frontier penetration into Viet- 5 Documentation on Brown’s consultations is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IX, Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980 and Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Regional; Arabian Peninsula. 6 Documentation on the meetings is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IX, Arab- Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980. 7 See footnote 17, Document 108.
