314 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Others who might be invited, depending upon the nature and char­ acter of the items under discussion, would be the Director, Bureau of the Budget, the Chairman, AEC, the Special Assistant for Science and Technology, as well as other officials whose presence might be from time to time required. 4. We then discussed the Taiwan Straits situation. I raised the ques­ tion with the President as to how long we should continue to encourage Chiang Kai-­shek in the notion that we would support his return to the mainland by force inasmuch as it seemed to me that this was no longer a reasonable possibility. The President said that Chiang Kai-­shek hoped that there would be disintegration from within Communist China and that in the ensuing chaos he would be in a position, with our support, to move in and take over. He felt that this was a possibility and was to be distinguished from an attack by the Chinese Nationalists which would result in their taking over control of the country. He believed as long as the first possibility existed that it was important to maintain the morale of Chiang and his people. With respect to the Off-­shore Islands, I expressed my concern that we would not have the support of neutral countries, our allies, or indeed even possibly domestic public opinion if we engaged in hostili­ ties which promised to become wide-­spread simply for the purpose of holding on to the real estate. The President agreed with this in principle and said that he had done everything he could four years ago to pre­ vent the movement of large numbers of troops to the Off-­shore Islands. He indicated that he had sent two of his most persuasive spokesmen (Walter Robertson and Admiral Radford) who found Chiang adamant. He felt, however, that another principle was involved and that was the protection of the symbol of the free world. He felt that inasmuch as the Chinese Communists themselves had by statement and action indicated that the forceable capture of the Off-­shore Islands was only a prelude to the forceful capture of Formosa, we would be compelled to assist Chiang if this became necessary, to prevent loss of the Off-­shore Islands by force. He did agree with the view that some honorable way out of the Off-­shore Islands dilemma was desirable. In this he indicated that perhaps his views as to methods were somewhat at variance with the Secretary of State’s. Gordon Gray Special Assistant to the President cc: Mr Lay
