Czechoslovakia 337 111. Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, October 22, 1979 SUBJECT Trial of Czech Dissidents (U) The trial of six of the ten Czech dissidents began today. Only family members of the defendants were allowed inside the courtroom. (C) The beginning of the trial raises the question of how we should respond. You indicated on my Evening Report of October 16th2 that you felt our Ambassador, Frank Meehan, should be called back for consultations. In principle, I agree; but I suggest that we wait until the end of the trial to see how it is conducted and what the sentences are before recalling Meehan. State concurs. (C) There are two reasons for this: —Our reaction will in part depend on the severity of the sentences; —There may be other trials (either of the remaining Chapter 77 members or of the priests arrested several weeks ago. (C) In the meantime, I would recommend that we do the following in response: —Postpone the scheduled visit by Deputy Assistant Secretary Barry to Prague, planned for November 5–6;3 —Publically condemn the trials as a violation of the Helsinki Final Act;4 —Postpone the tabling of the Czech gold claims proposal and let the Czechs know privately the reasons for our decision.5 (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 17, Czechoslovakia: 1/77–1/81. Confidential. Sent for action 2 In an Evening Report dated October 16, Larrabee informed Brzezinski that rumors were circulating in Prague that the dissidents would be put on trial October 22. Brzezinski marked the paragraph and wrote “Our Ambassador should come home for consultations” in the margin. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Staff Evening Reports File, Box 24, 10/16–19/79) 3 Brzezinski wrote “Yes” in the margin next to this paragraph. The Department informed the Embassy in Prague of the decision in telegram 277453, October 24. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790488–0336) 4 Brzezinski wrote “Yes” in the margin of this paragraph 5 Brzezinski placed a question mark in the margin next to this paragraph
