100 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI continue to believe that Congress will constrain SDI at least as effectively as a D&S agreement, it will see no benefit to agreement to the broad interpretation or to the right to deploy without further reference to the ABM Treaty. (S) Finally, with a well-­planned strategy, the United States could achieve both a START agreement and adjust its position in DST in a manner that would neither reduce the viability of SDI nor jeopardize START ratification. In addition, deep reductions in START might reduce the requirements for a future deployment of U.S. defenses, such that some U.S. concessions in DST might not reduce the viability of future U.S. ballistic missile defenses. In view of the fact that the Congress as a whole, and the Senate in particular, have remained skeptical of the necessity of the broad interpretation, U.S. acceptance of less than the broad interpretation—­i.e., the narrow interpretation—­in exchange for a START agreement may meet with approval. (S) The issues related to Question #4 on DST will be presented for review and decision in the context of NSR–14. [Omitted here are discussions not related to START.] Tab B Paper Prepared in the National Security Council20 Washington, undated EXTRACT FROM NSR–12 IV. The Role of Arms Control in Promoting U.S. Defense Objectives and Strategy: This report should examine the degree to which arms control can and should be used to advance and support U.S. defense objectives and strategy. The following questions should be addressed: General Issues — To what extent can arms control enhance national security and promote strategic stability? (C) — What is the potential value of arms control in promoting such U.S. defense objectives as: (1) enhancing the predictability of the threat; (2) reducing or bounding actual capabilities of adversaries; (3) constraining the diffusion of threatening technologies; (4) restructuring forces in stabilizing or otherwise desirable ways; (5) enhancing force survivability; and (6) channeling the long-­term military competition in directions that ease U.S. security concerns and/or that take advantage of U.S. competitive strengths without imprudently hampering emerging technologies? (C) 20 Confidential.
