Human Rights Discussion: This initiative would help to underscore to our missions abroad and to foreign governments the U.S. intention to incorporate human rights considerations in programming food aid; the effort should increase host countries’ sensitivity to human rights problems. This is a low-cost course of action; we see no serious disadvantages. —Use food aid agreements to seek human rights reform on a case-by-case basis. Specify during negotiations what human rights actions would be required to obtain food aid. Indicate that progress would be considered a positive factor in future food aid decisionmaking, while regression or continued violations would be regarded negatively. Discussion: This procedure would give the U.S. considerable leverage to seek improvement of human rights conditions. This leverage would be hard to exercise discreetly, however, in a way which avoids forcing the recipient nation to acknowledge publicly it is a human rights violator. Not every case would lend itself to pressure through food aid. Failure to reach agreement on a food aid program due to human rights issues would adversely affect bilateral relations and could lead to charges of U.S. intervention. —Reduce or eliminate food aid programs in countries which we believe have performed poorly in the human rights area. Discussion: The problem with a sanctions approach is that it creates animosity without providing a positive incentive for a country to improve its human rights performance. When American food aid is withdrawn, needy people may suffer badly. While there may be regimes whose human rights performance is so repugnant as to require withdrawal of American food aid, in general it would appear desirable to avoid this action. —Include human rights self-help measures in appropriate PL 480 agreements. Discussion: Self-help development measures are currently included in each PL 480 agreement. The principle could be extended to human rights measures. These provisions would have to be carefully drafted to avoid giving unwarranted offense. This would be difficult to enforce and could result in limited bilateral tension, but is an option. It would be more useful in communicating concern than in securing actual progress. —Shift our food aid programs to countries with favorable human rights performance. Announce that we will give priority to such countries and provide food assistance on more favorable terms. Discussion: This proposal is the most forthcoming and would specifically make human rights performance a key criteria in programming food aid. Many would question such a criteria when food needs
