Human Rights
175
Discussion: This initiative would help to underscore to our mis-
sions abroad and to foreign governments the U.S. intention to incorpo-
rate human rights considerations in programming food aid; the effort
should increase host countries’ sensitivity to human rights problems.
This is a low-cost course of action; we see no serious disadvantages.
—Use food aid agreements to seek human rights reform on a
case-by-case basis. Specify during negotiations what human rights ac-
tions would be required to obtain food aid. Indicate that progress
would be considered a positive factor in future food aid decision-
making, while regression or continued violations would be regarded
negatively.
Discussion: This procedure would give the U.S. considerable lev-
erage to seek improvement of human rights conditions. This leverage
would be hard to exercise discreetly, however, in a way which avoids
forcing the recipient nation to acknowledge publicly it is a human
rights violator. Not every case would lend itself to pressure through
food aid. Failure to reach agreement on a food aid program due to
human rights issues would adversely affect bilateral relations and
could lead to charges of U.S. intervention.
—Reduce or eliminate food aid programs in countries which we
believe have performed poorly in the human rights area.
Discussion: The problem with a sanctions approach is that it creates
animosity without providing a positive incentive for a country to im-
prove its human rights performance. When American food aid is with-
drawn, needy people may suffer badly. While there may be regimes
whose human rights performance is so repugnant as to require with-
drawal of American food aid, in general it would appear desirable to
avoid this action.
—Include human rights self-help measures in appropriate PL 480
agreements.
Discussion: Self-help development measures are currently in-
cluded in each PL 480 agreement. The principle could be extended to
human rights measures. These provisions would have to be carefully
drafted to avoid giving unwarranted offense. This would be difficult to
enforce and could result in limited bilateral tension, but is an option. It
would be more useful in communicating concern than in securing ac-
tual progress.
—Shift our food aid programs to countries with favorable human
rights performance. Announce that we will give priority to such coun-
tries and provide food assistance on more favorable terms.
Discussion: This proposal is the most forthcoming and would spe-
cifically make human rights performance a key criteria in program-
ming food aid. Many would question such a criteria when food needs
