774
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
• Access to International Monetary Fund resources has been
sharply increased. Terms are more flexible. New facilities are in opera-
tion. A major quota increase is in process. The World Bank has also
launched an innovative program of lending for structural adjustment.
• The common fund negotiations have been completed. We have
moved ahead on individual commodity agreements.
• On trade, last year’s multilateral trade agreement will mean an
average cut of 25% in tariffs on principal developing-country exports.
Preferential tariff systems have been adopted by all Western industrial
countries.
• Use by developing countries of world capital markets has in-
creased fourfold—from $11 billion in 1970 to $44 billion in 1978.
• The effort to increase world food supplies has been advanced
through the International Fund for Agricultural Development and
through the concentration of World Bank resources. In the past 5 years
the World Bank committed some $11.6 billion to agricultural projects.
• And in another urgent priority area—energy—the World Bank
will be lending well over $10 billion for energy projects between now
and 1985.
This partial listing is not the record of a world community frozen
in shortsighted self-interest, rigidly divided by ideology or stalemated
on methods. Those tendencies do afflict us. Yet in recent years we have
also found the common sense and good will to move forward.
But our accomplishments are still far short of our needs. My gov-
ernment has just completed a major study of the world’s population,
resources, and environmental prospects for the year 2000—just 20
years away.2 Its conclusions remind us again why these debates must
move from rhetoric to reality. Our “Global 2000” study begins with a
harsh truth. In the year 2000, the world population will be more than
half again higher than in 1975. Over the last quarter of this century,
more than 2 billion people will be added—2 billion more mouths to
feed, bodies to clothe, individual hopes to be fulfilled.
Given this fact, the study tells us what could happen if nations fail
to act in time and with reason. Based on current trends, food produc-
tion should nearly double. Still, the number of people going hungry
will rise by millions. Many nations already hungry see their croplands
2 Reference is to an interagency study commissioned by the President in 1977 on the
projected state of the world by the end of the century. The President directed that the De-
partment of State and the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) lead the study. On
July 24, the White House released the 3-volume report, entitled Global 2000 Report to the
President: Entering the Twenty-First Century. For additional information, see Foreign Rela-
tions, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Documents 343, 344,
and 346–348.
