674
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
this option would be left open including the possibility of using global
quotas if necessary. I have discussed this issue with the unions and, al-
though they still prefer a commitment to limit imports to 370 million
pairs, they can accept the approach in option two.
OPTION I (Treasury, State, DOJ, NSC, IDCA, Kahn)
OPTION II (Askew, OMB, DPS, CEA, DOC, DOL, DOI, USDA) Butler8
8 Carter indicated his approval of this option, writing “But: a) keep the statement as
non-specific as possible; b) Include a strong [paragraph] near top re fighting inflation. J.”
Carter’s decision was announced on February 29; for the text of the announcement, see
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp.
420–421.
232.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Economic Policy
Group (Miller) to President Carter1
Washington, February 8, 1980
SUBJECT
Administration Steel Policy
As you know, United States Steel is threatening to file broad-based
antidumping petitions against European and Japanese steel producers,
unless the Government offers the industry relief from imports, environ-
mental regulations and wage-price guidelines, and provides incentives
to capital formation. Other steel companies would probably follow
suit.2
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [8]. No classification marking. Carter wrote at the
top of the page: “Bill—ok—Carefully orchestrate our PR effort—Here & in Europe/
Japan. J.” The memorandum was sent to Miller for his signature under cover of a Feb-
ruary 7 memorandum from Solomon, who reported that Hormats, Cooper, Owen, and
Commerce Department officials agreed to the memorandum; a handwritten note on Sol-
omon’s memorandum indicates that comments received from Schultze and Kahn had
been incorporated into the memorandum for Carter. (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon
Collection, 1977–1980, Chronological File, Box 8, 2/1/80–2/14/80)
2 In a February 12 memorandum to Eizenstat, McDonald characterized this memo-
randum as “quite disturbing. It places this extremely complex problem on the President’s
desk prematurely, offers no reasonable set of options for Presidential review, accepts as
inevitable a major confrontation internationally and domestically, and inadequately de-
scribes the dire consequences of following this course.” McDonald urged making “every
effort to work out an amicable solution with the industry and the Europeans.” (Carter Li-
brary, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 283, Steel (CF, O/A
731) (2))
