254
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
III. TIMING OF RELEASE
Treasury would like to release it tomorrow because of their fear of
further leaks. However, most of the substantive information is unfortu-
nately already in the papers and if you feel that a few extra days is nec-
essary, Tony Solomon believes it would not be a tragedy to release it
Monday or Tuesday.19
Tony has indicated that he has consulted widely with Congress, al-
though, of course, he has not been able to give them the final results for
the report. I have talked to Frank Moore about congressional consulta-
tions. A release early next week would allow for more time for Con-
gressional briefings. Frank indicated that if he knows in the morning
that you have approved the report, he could get together at least a small
group of the steel caucus (most Congressmen are out of town at this
point and will be back Tuesday) for a pre-press conference briefing
around 1:00. He could get a larger group together Tuesday, when the
House comes back in session.
Jack Watson and I believe releasing it early next week will give ev-
eryone a chance to review the final report, which no one will have seen
until tomorrow morning. We feel there is little to lose by a few extra
days delay and much that can be gained by a careful review of the
report.20
19 December 5 or 6.
20 At the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Fri, Sat, Mon or Tues ok w/me.” At
the bottom of the page, he wrote: “Press release should emphasize a) Minimum inflation
impact b) No violation of anti-trust laws c) Pollution standards upheld d) Budget impact
small e) Modernization/productivity f) Maintains competitive market forces.” Next to
this note, Carter added: “If ready Fri afternoon, go ahead—I have no preference. J.” On
Tuesday, December 6, the White House announced that Carter had approved the recom-
mendations contained in the Solomon Task Force’s “Report to the President—A Compre-
hensive Program for the Steel Industry.” See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book II, p. 2083.
