Panama  969
gone, a new President, the Governor gone and Gaither gone, maybe 
this would be a good time to make a little arrangement, beginning on 
such and such a date, to start the custom of flying the flag all the time 
over our Embassy and to fly both the American and the Panamanian 
flags from poles of equal height at the Headquarters of the Panama Canal 
Zone to demonstrate our recognition that residual sovereignty rests 
with Panama. The President said he told Farland to ask the Secretary 
to look this idea over to see if the Secretary thinks it is a good thing, 
and if the Secretary does think it is good, he could check with the Army 
and then the Secretary could put out a directive or the President could, 
he didn’t care which. The President said perhaps we could just make it 
the day after Congress which would keep Flood from going crazy. The 
Secretary said Flood is threatening all sorts of things; The President said 
Farland might, although we don’t have the authority, make the proposal 
to the new President and see if it couldn’t be worked out so this could 
be accomplished—­not announce it, but just see if we can just do it. The 
Secretary said he would give this the most careful consideration.
The Secretary then said he hoped the President had liked 
Ambassador Farland, and the President said he did; that he had met 
him before. The Secretary said he has done so well that we hope he will 
permanently join the ranks of the Foreign Service.
PM–50.	
Letter from the Secretary of State to the Secretary of the 
Army (Brucker)1

Washington, August 12, 1960.
Dear Wilber:
Following the discussion on Panama at our meeting of April 6, I wrote 
to you on April 82 outlining my understanding of the conclusions we 
reached in the hope that we could get together soon thereafter on the four 
points we had under review, prior to seeing the President. Unfortunately, 
due to my very busy schedule in the ensuing weeks, it was impossible 
to give attention to the matter, and Acting Secretary Dillon wrote you on 
May 43 to inform you of the delay which had been encountered.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.19/8–1260. Confidential. Drafted 
by Sharp on July 19.
2. See Document PM–39.
3. See Document PM–40.
