1956  1005
Wang’s December 1 draft an acceptable form and framework for a dec­
laration renouncing the use of force; but we have, also from the time of 
its submission, been concerned about certain ambiguities therein which 
make it possible for the December 1 draft to mean one thing to one side 
and another to the other side.
Our successive efforts since January 12 have been directed at 
removing the ambiguities of the December 1 draft. We could argue that 
Wang, by his submission of his May 11 draft, has in effect acknowl­
edged his own concern about the ambiguities of his December 1 draft.
Wang’s May 11 draft (we could argue), in trying to overcome the 
ambiguities of his December 1 draft, unfortunately sacrifices too much 
of what was good in the December 1 draft. Wang has thrown out the 
baby with the bathwater.
What we ought to do is to concentrate on the essential task of turn­
ing the December 1 draft into a meaningful declaration by removing 
its ambiguities while preserving this mutually acceptable form and 
framework.
How to do this? In regard to what points do both Ambassadors agree 
the December 1 draft requires amplification or specification? First, both 
Ambassadors seem to be in agreement that it is desirable to make it clear 
that the declaration does not prejudice the rights, or the positions and 
views of one side or the other. Various ways, none of them completely 
satisfactory to both sides, have been suggested. And yet, in answer to 
the direct question “should the proposed declaration be interpreted as in 
any way prejudicing the rights of either side, or the position of either side 
with respect to the merits of this dispute?” both Ambassadors would cer­
tainly say it should not.
Secondly, both Ambassadors have suggested ways in which the 
declaration should be related to the Taiwan area. There has been much 
discussion on this point, but surely both Ambassadors would agree that 
the Taiwan area dispute should be included in the disputes referred to 
in the proposed declaration.
Our suggestion in presenting the enclosed draft would be that the 
way to agreement on a declaration acceptable to both sides is to take 
the acceptable form and framework of the December 1 draft and let it 
stand, with the addition of an “Agreed Understanding” (or some other 
name for Codicil) on the two points mentioned above.
I would presume that our initial draft “Agreed Understanding” 
would contain only the two paragraphs. If Wang insisted on a third 
paragraph relating to a FMC, we might be prepared to move towards 
something like the bracketed third paragraph of the enclosure.
On the whole, I am inclined to think this approach might be bet­
ter—safer and more under our control, also less defensive—than the 
approach outlined in paragraph four of my May 14 letter.
