723.2515/2283 supp.: Telegram
[Document 293]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 17, 1926—8 p.m.
For Lassiter. I have conferred here today with Mr. Hughes and Mr. Stimson.
We are all agreed that fundamental premise of my telegram May 14, 4 p.m.,
is sound; namely, that expiration of registration period on Friday, May 21,
raises no issue which requires action on that date. We are all clearly of the
opinion, on contrary, that all action for present that in any way disturbs
status quo so far as plebiscite is concerned should be avoided. We hope that
it will be unnecessary for you to hold a meeting of Plebiscitary Commission
for any purpose. If a meeting has to be held, however, for some routine
reason unknown to us here, we advise that should either party offer
resolutions adoption of which would alter existing status quo (for example
by fixing date for election or by amending regulations affecting
registrations), they should be laid on the table for future action. That is to
say, the situation should be held exactly where it is, allowing matters to take
their normal course without making any attempt to map out any future
course of action or to forecast important decisions. It is of great importance
that you give no indication what course you might think of taking in any
contingency. Within the last 48 hours the situation in negotiations for
settlement has greatly improved; and, while it is still delicate, we are more
hopeful than we have ever been before of being able to effect a final
settlement. It is not feasible to attempt to convey these developments to you
by telegraph. I can only say that intimations of possible action on
resolutions which have been suggested and have received consideration
must not in any circumstances be given to either one party or the other, as to
do so would, we believe, carry grave risk of misunderstanding, perhaps
would raise false hopes or fears and would tend to change attitude towards
settlement which, for the moment, is as satisfactory as we could expect it to
be. You should keep all these matters entirely to yourself. We have weighed
