180
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prior to discussing the U.S. paper3 in detail, he wished to outline a
number of points on which the U.S. and Egypt are in agreement: (a) the
desire to keep and to preserve the relationship between our two coun-
tries, (b) concern that a comprehensive and just peaceful settlement be
reached. The results should be such that it will attract others to join,
(c) whatever settlement is reached must “fortify” Egypt and strengthen
the moderate states of the (Middle East) area in order to enable them to
meet the “dangerous trends” that are now spreading in that area,
(d) we must prevent chaos from developing in the area and be alive to
the dangers of Soviet penetration. This means that conditions should
not be created which have the effect of distorting the U.S. image in the
area.
The Secretary said that we agree on all four points. He called the
maintenance of the U.S.-Egyptian relationship vital. There must be a
comprehensive settlement. We wish the result of the Camp David
meetings to fortify Egypt, to protect Sadat, and to underscore Sadat’s
paramount position in the Arab world. We have great respect for Presi-
dent Sadat as a true leader. We agree that world chaos should be
avoided as should anything that jeopardizes the moderate forces in the
area.
Kamel went on to say that the Egyptian side has carefully studied
our paper. He was happy that we welcome any proposals that the
Egyptians might wish to put forward. The Egyptian proposals, he said,
aim at creating a balance between the obligations of the parties. As he
saw it, the American proposal in its present form will in no way obtain
Saudi approval. He thought that we are in agreement that Saudi sup-
port is needed. Hussein will also be reluctant to join. Hussein’s partici-
pation, Kamel stressed, is essential.
The Egyptian position, Kamel recalled, is explained in the paper
which the Egyptian side had earlier presented to us. It is based on (a) a
balance of obligations between the parties, (b) insuring Israeli with-
drawal to the ’67 lines except for minor rectifications, (c) insuring the
security of all parties, (d) respect for the sovereignty and territorial in-
tegrity of all states and for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people, (e) the participation of all parties. Kamel then asked el-Baz to
present the details of the Egyptian ideas.
El-Baz first explained what he called the “Egyptian approach” to
the U.S. formula. The Egyptians had come, he stated, with the objective
of reaching agreement. By this they meant agreement with the “other
party.” A fortiori they wish to reach agreement with the U.S. in order to
see if there is common ground between us. The Egyptians are positive
3 The specific version of the draft Framework paper is not further identified. See
footnote 53, Document 28.
