328
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
unidentified members of the Babrak government may also be biding
their time in the Radio Afghanistan complex.
8. This will be the last sitrep for tonight unless events warrant
further reporting.
Amstutz
117.
Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Director of the
Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Mark) to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, December 29, 1979
SUBJECT
The Impact of Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan on the Afghan Civil War, the
Region, and the USSR’s Standing
SUMMARY In the current Afghan situation, the USSR has a bear
by the tail. It became entangled in an opportunistic and ideologically
attractive grab to take advantage of the probably fortuitous emergence
of a Marxist regime in Kabul in the revolutionary coup of April 1978.
It cannot now let go without suffering damage to its image as a Marxist
superpower that poses as a reliable ally of socialist and would-be
socialist regimes. It also wants to avoid the risk that a hostile state will
appear on yet another—and sensitive—stretch of the Soviet frontier.
Yet, as it holds on, it becomes ever more deeply enmeshed in an Afghan
civil war, which pits a highly unpopular, fractious, and factionalized
minority grouping of leftists against the great rural tribal majority,
who hate all that the leftists stand for.
Given this unattractive prospect, Moscow has now begun to esca-
late its intervention in Afghan affairs in the hope that this will improve
its chances to reduce the just mentioned negative aspects of the situa-
tion. It is trying to insure that it will gain reliable control over its client
regime (which it did not have under Amin) and that Afghanistan
will neither sink into anarchy (thus increasing the risk of external
intervention) nor become a hostile neighbor to the USSR. Moscow is
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR
and East/West, Brement, Subject File, Box 61, Afghanistan: 11/79–1/80. Secret. Drafted
by Mark, Howells, Baraz, and Harris. Presumably prepared for Christopher prior to his
trip to London and Brussels.
