342
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Hansell said that the preamble language did not constitute a
binding obligation. It could not be grounds for the termination of the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty if the general framework were not imple-
mented. Atherton added that the Egyptians have not seen that as setting
a condition on the Egypt-Israel treaty. Barak said that he was afraid it
could provide a legal basis for breaking their obligations. The President
added that Egypt merely wants Israel to say in the preamble that it will
reaffirm its commitment to the framework agreement. If after doing so,
you were to declare sovereignty over Gaza, the Egyptian-Israeli treaty
won’t be worth anything. Barak said that politically that was true, but
not legally. Israel wants the legal structure to be correct.
The President said that Begin had shown courage in taking a strong
position on the removal of settlements. Sadat has also shown courage
in breaking with the other Arabs. He has said that he will negotiate in
the place of Jordan. Now Israel is suggesting that the framework might
not go forward, but Egypt has said that it will negotiate. Barak asked
what would happen if the Palestinians were to boycott the elections.
The President said that there was no possibility that Sadat would de-
clare the Egyptian-Israeli treaty null and void in that event. Barak re-
plied that Israel is trying to find a way of stating the legal principle that
the treaty will stand intact in those situations. Israel remains bound by
the framework. Israel is not backing out of its obligations. Israel does
not want the legal structure laid for an argument about the validity of
the Egyptian-Israeli treaty.
The President said that Barak was not trying to help solve the
problem that exists. If Israel cannot accept the language in the pre-
amble, then perhaps other language could be drafted which would say
that if the general framework could not be implemented because of the
actions of third parties, this would not be an obstacle to the Egyptian-
Israeli treaty. Barak said that this suggestion helped, but there could be
a situation in which Egypt might say that Israel was to blame for the
non-implementation of the West Bank/Gaza framework. In reply, the
President said it was impossible to cover every eventuality. If the Egyp-
tians want to attack Israel, they will find some pretext.
The President urged that we return to the kind of spirit that existed
at Camp David when the agreements were signed. We want to remove
obstacles. The Israelis know what Sadat needs in terms of his credibility
in the Arab world. There has to be some reference to the Camp David
agreements. The President said that he would be able to get Sadat to
drop some references in the preamble, but not everything. Pretexts can
always be found to break agreements. The Israelis might want to draft a
paragraph dealing with the contingency in which the Palestinians and
the Jordanians cause the problem for the West Bank/Gaza negotia-
tions. But generally he has the impression that the Israelis are trying to
