768
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
anything more than a range of plausible estimates. At the bottom of
the range we are fairly confident that Soviet casualties to date total at
least 4,000. At the top of the range we can find reasonable grounds for
entertaining the possibility that these casualties may have been as much
as two or three times higher.3 Whatever the number, it is important
to bear in mind that a high proportion of injured soldiers are probably
returned to duty.4 ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restric-
tion not declassified])
Combat Casualties
[1½ lines not declassified] These reports provide information on the
number of Soviet troops killed or wounded in combat during a specified
period, often with a breakdown by individual unit. Although incom-
plete, these data indicate that Soviet military forces suffered at least
2,031 casualties—771 killed and 1,260 wounded and injured—between
late December and mid-May. Among individual ground units [less than
1 line not declassified] casualties during this period were as low as 2
percent but generally approached 5 percent and in one instance reached
13 percent. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
[less than 1 line not declassified] do not provide continuous coverage
on all combat units in Afghanistan. [1½ lines not declassified] indicate a
consistently low level of casualties, perhaps no more than a total of
4,000 from late December to mid-May if the actual figures obtained
are doubled. Additional casualties on which we do not yet have a
complete assessment [less than 1 line not declassified] have undoubtedly
been incurred in late May, when combat continued to expand into
new geographic areas. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling
restriction not declassified])
Other Casualties
There are instances of casualties not specifically covered [1 line not
declassified] other reporting addresses types of noncombat casualties
that are not covered in the [less than 1 line not declassified] cited above.
This includes casualties among combat support personnel, off-duty
troops, and advisers who are killed or wounded by insurgents, by
deserting Afghan Army troops, or by angry civilians. These reports
3 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assistant
Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force; and the Director of Intelligence,
Headquarters Marine Corps believe that there is inadequate intelligence data on which
to treble the 4,000 minimum Soviet casualty figure. [Footnote is in the original.]
4 Army medical intelligence estimates that typically 60 percent would return to
duty in about two weeks after hospitalization. [less than 1 line not declassified] emphasizes
the validity of the World War II experience that in the long term 70 percent of all
wounded are returned to military duty. [Footnote is in the original.]
