1172
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
formation paper (USUN 10694 and 1290).5 In seeking to work out a gen-
erally acceptable formulation, the Delegation should attempt to:
A. Keep the number of items to a minimum and as broad as pos-
sible; each item (other than general debate) should constitute a frame-
work for a final document or section of document (if there is only one).
B. Avoid inclusion of specific arms control topics as agenda items.
C. Avoid tendentious, prejudicial, or judgmental language (such
as the reference in the Non-Aligned paper to “stagnation” in disarma-
ment or possible Soviet efforts to have an item on the “need” for con-
vening a WDC).
D. Avoid language that might create false expectations by ap-
pearing to promise more than is possible; specifically, we believe it
would be inadvisable at this point to commit the Session to adoption of
a “declaration of principles of disarmament.” While it may be possible
to develop some generally acceptable “principles” (or more modest
“guidelines”) we believe this prospect should be kept open for the
present by referring to the basic “declaration” as a declaration on disar-
mament or a political declaration.
All of these considerations have a bearing on the handling of the
particular and probably contentious question of a World Disarmament
Conference (WDC). The Delegation should make clear to others that
our position on WDC has not changed. We continue to consider the
Special Session a separate and self-contained proposition unrelated to a
WDC and we do not believe its status and significance should be un-
dermined by efforts to make it subordinate to or a step toward a WDC.
The Delegation should seek to discourage inclusion of a WDC on the
agenda. If such inclusion appears inevitable, we are prepared as a tac-
tical measure to accept mention of the WDC question on the agenda as
one of the institutional and organizational issues to be discussed at the
Session, on a par with the UN First Committee, the CCD, the UNDC,
and the UN Secretariat. We would not, however, favor isolating WDC
as a special topic for consideration.
4 Telegram 1069 from USUN, April 8, reported that the 10-member Non-Aligned
steering group had given the Mission a paper containing a potential agenda for the SSOD
or a World Disarmament Conference. The agenda included four elements: “(A) review
and appraisal of the present international situation in light of the stagnation in the field of
disarmament, the continuing of the arms race and close interrelationship between disar-
mament, international peace and security and economic development; (B) adoption of a
declaration of principles on disarmament; (C) adoption of a program of action on disar-
mament; (D) review of the role of the UN in disarmament, of disarmament mechanisms,
including the question of convening a WDC.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770124–0635)
5 Telegram 1290 from USUN, April 28, reported that “recent conversation with
other Dels indicate general expectation that second meeting of Special Session PrepCom
will not go much beyond development of skeletal agenda for the Session along lines pro-
posed in Non-Aligned ‘information paper’.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770150–0251)
