162
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ghan, Prime Minister Pierre Elliot Trudeau of Canada, President Vale´ry
Giscard d’Estaing of France, Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of the Federal
Republic of Germany, Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti of Italy, and
Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda of Japan. Documentation on the summit
meeting, including the minutes of the sessions, is in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy. Related documentation is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVI,
Arms Control, and Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western
Europe. The text of the Downing Street Summit Conference declaration
and its annex, issued on May 8, is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977,
Book I, pages 819–824. In the declaration, the leaders pledged to create
additional jobs while reducing inflation, undertake stated economic
growth targets or stabilization policies, seek additional resources for
the International Monetary Fund, expand opportunities for trade to
strengthen the international trading system, conserve energy while re-
ducing nuclear proliferation, and achieve a successful end to the Con-
ference on International Economic Cooperation. For Carter’s remarks
following the reading of the joint declaration on May 8, see ibid., pages
825–826.
On May 9, Carter met with Giscard, Schmidt, and Callaghan at 10
Downing Street to review questions relating to the status of Berlin. Al-
though no record of the meeting has been found, the four leaders, at the
conclusion of the meeting, released the text of a “Joint Declaration on
Berlin.” The text is printed ibid., pages 840–841. Following the conclu-
sion of the four-party meeting, Carter departed for Geneva to meet
with Syrian President Asad before returning to London that evening.
For Carter’s remarks upon arrival at Geneva, see ibid., pages 841–842.
For the text of Carter and Asad’s exchange of remarks preceding their
meeting, see ibid., pages 842–844. For the memorandum of conversa-
tion of the Carter–Asad meeting, which took place at the Interconti-
nental Hotel, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli
Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, Document 32.
Carter and Vance attended the sessions of the North Atlantic
Council meeting on May 10. During the morning session, which began
at 11 a.m. in the Long Gallery at Lancaster House, Carter addressed the
participants. After brief introductory remarks, Carter underscored the
importance of relations among the industrial democracies in light of
potential military and political challenges of the upcoming decade:
“At the center of this effort must be strong ties between Europe
and North America. In maintaining and strengthening these ties, my
administration will be guided by certain principles. Simply stated:
“—We will continue to make the Alliance the heart of our foreign
policy.
“—We will remain a reliable and faithful ally.
