238 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII they were engaged while in Afghanistan that their review went into the logistics of the situation, the effectiveness of such organs as the police, intelligence, the ministerial level offices, and communications security. A main feature of this study certainly must have been an assessment of the course of the insurgency and the ability of the DRA forces—military and political—to deal with it. 4. Our own assessment shows an Afghan army which is having great difficulty in maintaining its manpower strength, experiencing erosion of morale leading to desertions, mutinies, and outright defections. The DRA forces have produced no lasting gains against the insurgents. They have been able to win most pitched battles—when the insurgents permit a pitched battle to occur—but cannot consolidate gains. Among the reasons for this inability are (a) the shrinking strength of the armed forces, which forces them to be constantly shifting forces to meet the various outbreaks and thus allowing rebel forces to seep back into areas from which they had been driven, and (b) the deterioration of morale in DRA forces left to hold the positions gained by military action. At the heart of the problem is a regime rent by factionalism, for which mutiny is a constant problem, and which is demonstrably unable to promote the kind of cohesion and efficiency in its own military and political machinery that would be needed to deal effectively with the insurgency. What all this adds up to is a situation that could fly apart at any time, with a revolt of the armed forces being the most serious potential problem. 5. Moreover, the prognosis is that things will continue to go downhill. During last winter, a mild one, the insurgency gained strength. This summer, analysts both in Embassy Kabul and here in Washington forecast that if the regime could survive until winter the insurgents would have to pull back and the DRA forces could pull themselves together. The reverse appears to be happening. It is the DRA forces that seem to be pulling back and the insurgents who are gaining. The largest DRA offensive of the insurgency has recently been completed, yet the DRA forces ultimately pulled back and the rebels seeped back into the areas from which they had been driven by the offensive. The action must clearly be seen as proof that advisors and technicians, logistical support, and tactical guidance is not going to turn the situation around. 6. The Pavlovskiy mission had ample opportunity to study the situation first hand, and in all likelihood came to the same conclusion. The decision which led to the actions we are beginning to see would have been made on the basis of a dismal assessment of the present situation and of its likely course if something were not done about it, together with an evaluation by a team of high level authorities as to what would have to be done if the USSR wanted to solidify its politicostrategic objectives in Afghanistan.
