96
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Our recovery has also meant that we have a high trade deficit—
roughly $20 billion, which means a current account deficit of roughly
$10 billion. One point in this is not fully understood. The large invest-
ment by the Saudis and others in the US and the high demand for
dollars keeps our exchange rate higher than would otherwise be the
case and thus contributes to our current account deficit. It gives us a
higher exchange rate than otherwise. If we did not have such large in-
vestment, the dollar would decline in value.
Schmidt: In July of 1972 the dollar was worth 3.20 marks, now it is
2.25 marks, so that the dollar has weakened and not strengthened.
Blumenthal: All I am saying is that the dollar would have been
lower without Saudi investment.
Apel: They invest in the Federal Republic too.
Blumenthal: I understand that, but the higher exchange rate con-
tributes to our current deficit because of Saudi investment. On condi-
tionality, we believe it is important and must be retained, but with flex-
ibility. Political leaders must say what they can bear with respect to
conditionality. We are trying to be helpful in our bilateral relations to
Mexico and Portugal. There are various ways of dealing with these
problems in which the IMF is not the most appropriate vehicle.
Healey: I agree, but if other ways are used too often, it could erode
the IMF. We should soften IMF conditionality rather than have new
channels.
Callaghan: I am not sure I agree with Denis on this. I think politi-
cians should say to the IMF that, for instance in the case of Jamaica, if
you insist on these conditions, you will throw them into the hands of
the Cubans. Our technicians and officials should be tough. It is leaders
who should intervene for political reasons.
Blumenthal: Just to finish up on our energy program, which was
mentioned earlier, it is true that we place primary emphasis on conser-
vation and savings, but we also place strong emphasis on the develop-
ment of other sources of energy.
Jamieson: Do I take this to mean that the US wants less Saudi
money? You should be aware that you were the Saudis of Canada for
years.
Blumenthal: Yes, we still want Saudi money. I was just pointing
out one implication.
Carter: Following up a point on energy, our target calls for an in-
crease in coal of 60% and new uranium enrichment through use of the
centrifuge. We expect to get 600 million to 1 billion tons of coal per day.
The centrifuge plant is a big investment—perhaps $4–5 billion. So our
program is not just conservation but it also has a strong emphasis on
production. We feel that our overall program can reduce the world bal-
