Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  375
53.	
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in 
Geneva1
Washington, October 14, 1989, 0054Z
329252. Subject: Official—Informal
1. Secret Entire Text.
2. SNP intends to put together a weekly Official-Informal report to 
you as state reps on your respective delegations. The intent is to keep 
you abreast of intra-­state, interagency, and other events and trends in 
SNP’s purview. The information is drawn from the DARs of the past 
few days. Please treat this information as sensitive and for state eyes 
only. Following is the first such cable, covering the 2–6 Oct period. Let 
us know if it is useful.
3. START
Work Program. The PCC subcommittee met Oct 6 to discuss the 
START Work Program. The meeting went about as expected with state 
being given the lead on RV counting for future types and mobile ICBM 
verification. Two issues—ALCMs and NDMs—­were deferred pending 
some additional “top-­down” direction. On NDMs, the issue is whether 
we can reach a decision on an NDM position without knowing what 
U.S. numerical requirements would be under different options. High 
level guidance may be needed on this question before we again plunge 
into making an NDM decision.
Early PPM. There was a START verification WG meeting 6 Oct at 
Pentagon on developing a plan for “early PPCM walk-­through tours.” 
WG also worked on a guidance cable on plan for “early PPCM.” Next 
version of this very much simplified plan should be ready this week.
START sooner or later? With OSD in the chair. A START work-
ing group reviewed issues remaining in the design and production of 
RV covers for the VSM demonstration and START. The Joint Staff Rep 
stated that covers for the MX would be ready for interagency viewing 
in November or December, and the D–5 “no earlier than May 1.” We 
will work with NSC to speed up the process.
4. D&S
Ad-­hoc committee to be set up for Cooper Initiative visit. The NSC 
is leaning towards setting up an ad-­hoc interagency committee to pre-
pare the Soviets’ visit to SDI facilities. The plan is for the committee to 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D890888–0353. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Walpole; approved by PM/SNP staff.
