1144 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Batlle would be thinking of keeping himself free to jump either way as may suit his political purposes here. If the Nixon visit is a great success, particularly if it generates or is accompanied by economic and financial assistance from the United States, then he can jump on that band wagon. If, however, no assistance is forthcoming and it suits his political purposes to renew his attacks against the United States, he will be free to do so since he will not have been associated personally with the Nixon visit. You will recall your visit here last August and particularly the stand taken by Uruguayans at the Buenos Aires conference thereafter which put Secretary of the Treasury Anderson in a rather difficult spot. It is too early to say what Battle will do; except we should keep constantly in mind that in all likelihood he wants to be president of Uruguay beginning next year. Should Ambassador Lacarte’s report here convince Batlle that he, Batlle, has something to gain out of the Nixon visit and that it would be to his advantage to be around when the Vice President arrives, he may not take his leave of absence or cut it short following Frondizi’s visit. Interestingly enough, since I have been here he has twice threatened to take leave of absence saying he was going to Europe. Neither time did he do so. So we cannot tell which way he is going to jump on this occasion. In view of the foregoing, I think what we would want particularly to try to do and to lay our plans for in the best long term interests of our relations with Uruguay is to set the stage as well as we can for a successful mission of our new Ambassador. In this light I should like to pose the following three alternatives: (a) that we make known to the Uruguayans in one way or another the straight news before Bob arrives here or through Vice President Nixon’s visit that there are concrete proposals for assistance to Uruguay. I think we may rest assured that the Uruguayans are bound to expect something tangible from the Vice President’s visit, their lack of reasonableness to the contrary notwithstanding. Perhaps even before he comes here the news can be gotten out so that Bob Woodward can get a large measure of the credit and the Vice President merely reaffirms such news. After all it will be Bob or any other Ambassador who will have to stay here to carry on the job and take the blame or the approval. (b) If there is nothing we can do for the Uruguayans the straight news be gotten out on this score before Bob Woodward arrives here so that none of the unpleasantness be attached to him for the same reasons as above; and (c) what may be a combination of the foregoing two alternatives, to avoid if at all possible to raise in the minds of the Uruguayans any false hopes which would later be dashed after Bob gets here and makes his already difficult task that much more so. In other words, if he comes here without any hopes or expectations on the part of the Uruguayans and if the Vice President merely generates a broader atmosphere of public good will but without pledging the
