Human Rights 441 135. Memorandum From Roberta Cohen of the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Schneider)1 Washington, April 17, 1978 SUBJECT Congressional Hearings on Human Rights Institute Bill, April 13, 1978 Hearings on the Fraser-Fascell bill to establish an Institute for Human Rights and Freedom began April 13. They were held jointly by the Subcommittee on International Operations and the Subcommittee on International Organizations of the House Committee on International Relations. Five witnesses were heard and all testified in favor of the bill. They were: Frank Newman (Justice, Supreme Court of California); Alan U. Schwartz (Counsel, International Freedom to Publish Committee); Leonard Meeker (Director, International Project, Center for Law and Social Policy); Stephen I. Schlossberg (Director of Government and Public Affairs, UAW, accompanied by Leo A. Suslow, Director of International Affairs Department, UAW); and Jan Nowak (former Director of Polish Broadcasting, Radio Free Europe). Functions of the Institute (Section 3 (a)) Several amendments and suggestions were made with regard to the functions of the Institute: 1) Conferences and Seminars—One amendment was the deletion of the provision that the Institute support or sponsor conferences and seminars on human rights (3 (a) (2)). Frank Newman argued that there had already been too many conferences and seminars. If the provision were not deleted, it should be re-worded to provide for conferences and seminars that “would not just talk about human rights” but give serious consideration to “how to promote increased respect for and observance of human rights.” In contrast, Jan Nowak proposed that in addition to the holding of conferences and seminars in the United States, they should be held around the world in order to encourage the establishment of an International Institute on Human Rights. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 15, Human Rights Center. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Derian, Morin, Jennone Walker, Oxman, and Runyon. David Kenney (H) also prepared a synopsis of the hearings in an April 19 memorandum, which he sent to Bennet, Derian, Oxman, and Walker. (Ibid.)
