1956  1211
Lead off with McCarthy case as typical example of Communist dis­
regard of pledged word. First point out McCarthy and other nine 
Americans should have been released long ago if clear language of 
Agreed Announcement had any meaning. Now one of nine belatedly 
permitted write British Charge stating he is unjustly prevented from 
leaving and requesting representations his behalf. When Charge 
endeavored investigate case as provided in Agreed Announcement his 
representative prevented from seeing McCarthy, after Communists had 
authorized interview and made appointment. Statement by prison offi­
cial that McCarthy did not wish interview is not credible. Note written 
evidence that McCarthy wanted interview and ask why prison official 
refused permit Charge’s representative verify McCarthy’s wishes.
In course of your presentation also press Communists for reply 
which they promised some time ago to British Charge’s letter August 23 
requesting permission visit all American prisoners. Communists have 
no valid reason refuse this. In connection with Chou En-­lai’s statement 
to British Charge December 9 that Communists could not permit visits 
all Americans because US would not permit Indians visit Chinese pris­
oners this country, point out US has offered permit Indians interview 
any Chinese prisoner this country, which Indians declined to do upon 
instructions from Peiping.
State that US Government has been extremely patient in face of 
inexplicable refusal Communists carry out their commitment release all 
Americans. U.S. Government seriously concerned at this latest attempt 
to evade obligations of Agreed Announcement, and is considering 
making public statement.
FYI We believe Communists can be put on defensive both in Geneva 
meetings and publicly by using McCarthy case to dramatize Communist 
violation public pledges. Their plea for closer cultural contacts with the 
US can be made to look ridiculous in light of their behavior in McCarthy 
case. We are requesting British Charge to (1)  make representations 
requesting immediate release McCarthy on basis his letter stating he 
being unjustly prevented from leaving; (2) write McCarthy explaining 
circumstances last attempted interview and offering arrange another 
interview; (3) write Communist Foreign Office asking reply to his let­
ter of August 23 requesting permission interview all jailed Americans. 
END FYI
2. Reject attempts to draw you into discussion of Communist 
cultural exchange or trade proposals, stressing resentment American 
government and people at continued detention American citizens 
and inability rely on public commitments made by Communists. 
Communist refusal agree to meaningful renunciation of force should 
also be cited. FYI In view Wang’s statement last meeting we agree it 
would be consistent Chinese Communist previous practice for them to
