486 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX serve the cause of peace in general. The Secretary informed Puja that the press coverage of the Crown’s return in the U.S. had been both positive and extensive. The return is a real step forward in public perception of the state of bilateral relations. It will facilitate further steps, which the USG is prepared to take. 3. MFN: Puja referred to the Hungarian proposed language of Dec 16,2 as well as the Hungarian procedural proposal.3 From the U.S. reply it can be seen that both sides take a positive approach on the question of emigration assurances and the two positions are growing closer. As to procedure, the GOH agrees to exchange letters on assurances, as long as the exchange of letters deals not only with MFN but also with other issues. The GOH is prepared to table a draft, in which reference would be made to the Secretary’s visit and other issues. While the competent authorities still must be consulted on the question of publication of the letters, Puja personally had no objection. On the assurances themselves, Puja referred to the U.S. insertion of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR) into the Hungarian language. Puja noted that this Declaration was adopted by the UN in 1948, when Hungary was not a member. Those Socialist countries who were members abstained. In light of this history, the GOH would prefer to refer to a more recent document, such as the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Hungary has ratified and signed the Covenant; the U.S. has signed but not ratified. In that this Covenant refers to the UDHR, the GOH hopes its use would present a practical solution. 4. In reply the Secretary agreed that an exchange of letters between Ambassador Kaiser and the Foreign Minister covering the assurances would be an acceptable way to proceed. He personally thought that references to additional subjects would be satisfactory and he would 2 In order for Hungary to receive MFN, the administration sought to receive assurances that the Hungarian Government would continue to interpret its emigration law— considered strict in its letter—liberally. In telegram 4358 from Budapest, December 16, 1977, the Embassy reported that the Hungarian Government proposed changes to the U.S. draft statement. For initial instructions on MFN provided to Kaiser, see Document 149. Rather than the U.S.-requested promise that cases would be solved in a satisfactory manner, the Hungarian Government proposed the U.S. language be replaced with: “Concerning cases of emigration, both parties undertake to act in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770469–0765) 3 In a December 16, 1977, conversation, reported in telegram 4358 from Budapest, Nagy informed Kaiser that, on procedure, “assurances should be made publicly in the form of a joint communique issued upon the occasion of a meeting at ‘higher level,’” later clarifying that to mean at the Foreign Minister level. (Ibid.)
