Romania
575
about gestures to Sadat. He said Dayan had been invited to visit
Bucharest.
10. Pungan said that he did not rule out a helpful Syrian gesture
to Sadat. When the Secretary questioned this, Pungan said that he had
reached this conclusion on the basis of the last Romanian meetings
with Assad. Assad could eventually move to the point where Hussein
is now, he conjectured, although slowly and step-by-step. The Secretary
commented that this would be helpful, and noted that Atherton would
be visiting Damascus during his Middle East trip.
11. Pungan said that the Romanians were apprehensive about unex-
pected explosions in the area as well as the unpredictable nature of
Sadat’s diplomacy. They were concerned with Begin’s habits of talking
to the press and allowing Israeli points of view to become ironclad
through premature public disclosure. The Secretary agreed. With Sadat,
we had made clear the need to consult in advance and not to be faced
with such unexpected steps as the Egyptian delegation’s withdrawal
from the Jerusalem talks. In Israel there was a disposition to put to the
Cabinet all important issues, and this resulted in almost instant leaks.
We had urged the Israelis to discuss sensitive issues in the Defense
Committee, which has only five or six Ministers.
12. Pungan noted that the Romanians had the impression that the
people on both sides in the Military Committee did not believe the
security argument for the Sinai settlements was important. The Secre-
tary said that—in the end—these were basically political questions
which had to be resolved at a political level.
13. Before turning to certain bilateral issues, the Secretary thanked
Pungan for this exchange and said he would communicate any further
information, if it developed, through Ambassador Nicolae.
14. The Secretary and Pungan briefly discussed the Soviet position
regarding the Basket III formulation at the Belgrade Conference on
European Security and Cooperation. They noted that a date had been
set for special U.S.-Romanian consultations under the disarmament
program. The Secretary mentioned the French idea for a “new forum,”
noting he wasn’t sure what they intended or whether they had worked
it out fully in advance.
15. Pungan concluded the meeting with a request that the U.S.
develop an appropriate financial facility for handling U.S. exports to
Romania before Ceausescu’s Washington visit. This could be an impor-
tant new step in U.S.-Romanian relations.
Vance
