International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 209 Commission is now committed to seek greater tariff reductions than previous EC proposals and US to greater degree of harmonization. End summary. 2. Ambassadors Strauss, McDonald and Wolff, accompanied by Ambassador Hinton and STR staffers Feketekuty and Wynne,4 met with EC President Jenkins, Vice Presidents Haferkamp and Gundelach, Commissioner Davignon, Director General for External Relations Sir Roy Denman, and other high-level EC officials during series of meetings September 21–22. Prior to leaving Brussels, Ambassador Strauss gave press conference presenting joint communique´ and answering questions (see reftel for transcript). Although all areas of MTN negotiations received some attention during US–EC meetings, bulk of discussions was devoted to effort to obtain a joint position on tariff reductions which would allow agreement to be reached by all potential formula participants in the MTN by early October. Meetings were marked by US assertion and eventually EC recognition that failure to reach agreement would threaten entire US–EC understanding to conclude present phase of negotiations by January 15, 1978. Ambassador Strauss emphasized the necessity of agreeing upon specific common language on an approach to tariff reductions and that, failing this, he would feel it necessary, in order to preserve credibility, to state publicly that we had reached an impasse on tariffs with the EC. 3. After September 21 preliminaries,5 during five-hour series of negotiating sessions September 22 US and EC worked together to produce an agreement, embodied in the joint communique´ contained in reftel. US side also insisted that joint communique´ be buttressed by an internal understanding which would not be revealed in its entirety publicly but which would prevent any further misunderstanding about what had been agreed with respect to tariff reductions. Denman reading from rough notes set it forth at final session with President Jenkins present when it was accepted by all participants subject to being polished by Ambassador McDonald and Denman in Geneva. It is to indicate that both sides agreed to work toward adoption of the Swiss formula,6 with an average depth of cut of 44 percent, as the goal for tariff reductions, plus or minus 5 percent. This left open the possibility that some participants might adopt a deeper cutting formula or higher formula cuts than the other participants to offset a greater number of 4 Gordon Wynne. 5 Telegram 12571 from USEC Brussels, September 23, reported on Strauss’ September 21 meetings with EC officials. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770346–1304) 6 Telegram 6090 from Geneva, July 21, summarized Switzerland’s positions on various MTN issues, including its tariff reduction proposal. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770259–1259)
