872  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
550.	 Telegram 1668 from Geneva1
Geneva, March 22, 1956, 10 p.m.
1668. From Johnson.
1. Wang opened 41st meeting saying statement I made last meeting 
entirely unsatisfactory. He gave only points to lack sincerity my side to 
reach agreement proposed declaration. One would not fail see it was 
attempt my part by distorting statement he made March 1 to evade 
reply his question as to which of two drafts his side I prepared accept.
2. Wang said at that meeting I even termed his proposal for FonMins 
conference a prerequisite and war-­like ultimatum, such assertion entirely 
unfounded. Exactly contrary my allegation, FonMin conference has been 
accepted throughout world as proven means resolving international dis­
putes. Their insistence FonMins conference is manifestation their sincere 
desire peaceful settlement disputes. However, in light my unjustified 
insistence confusing international disputes and matters China’s internal 
affairs as well as US intent continue seizure Taiwan and offshore islands, 
it clear it exactly my side which making threats and ultimata.
3. Wang said recently for instance Chief Operations FEAF Maj General 
Hunter Harris known to have declared that in event outbreak fighting 
Matsus, joint air support would be out of question (apparent intent of 
Wang was to say, “would be unquestioned”). His revelation amounts to 
declaration to Chinese people that US prepared use force against China. 
That is another flagrant example of war clamoring. Against this he must 
lodge serious protest. If my side will not promptly stop such provoca­
tive actions, situation could only be interpreted attempt disrupt talks and 
grave consequences must be borne entirely my side.
4. Wang said I had also said at March 1 meeting I found hard rec­
oncile his statement that meeting with his previous position. This again 
distortion fact. After 21 sessions between us could it be possible posi­
tion their side this regard not been amply clear? Was it not consistent 
stand their side to insist removal self-­defense clause and to categori­
cally reject any attempt interject China’s internal affairs into negotia­
tions or make them subject negotiations between us? It consistent also 
with their insistence on FonMins conference. As regards their proposal 
FonMins conference, he been stressing on more than one occasion that 
without such conference no way to carry out declaration and declara­
tion would consequently become scrap paper.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/3–2256. Confidential; Limit 
Distribution.
