January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1151 The President said that they negotiated a paragraph at Camp David on Jerusalem. It is the most likely basis for agreement. No one will like it; but people will live with it. The next difficulty is getting Begin to carry out Camp David (not new proposals). There are many difficulties. The day Begin gives the order to the military authorities to withdraw will be tough for him (Begin). President Sadat said he knows. January 25, the last withdrawal, was a funeral in Israel. 90% of the people are for peace, as he saw in Haifa. But Israel says: “what did we receive.” Compare what Israel gives up: it is tangible, a lot. But if Camp David fails, Israel loses, and its future would be in danger. If it carries it out in good faith, then Israel can turn to the world for approval, with the West Europeans, the Canadians, the Japanese, the Australians, and get a lot of approval. Maybe in 100 years the Palestinians will still be demanding a separate state. But most Arab leaders would accept what is being done, de facto, while still insisting. Secretary Vance asked, if there were agreement on the West Bank and Gaza, what will Assad do? President Sadat said that Assad continues to raise dust. We are waiting for civil war. Assad is in grave danger. Assad is of no significance, now, following his Lebanon fiasco and the civil war. See him and Iraq. Assad provides arms. Therefore, he is of no significance. The President said that, except for South Yemen, Syria is most subservient to the Soviet Union. President Sadat said that it is also most despised in the Arab world. We have the upper hand despite Soviet actions, in Libya, Afghanistan, etc., because of the Soviet agents—South Yemen is despised in the Arab world; Assad will have a civil war by next summer, with the fall of Assad and the Alawites or a quagmire in Syria; and Qadhafi the Soviet Union knows is moody. We have the upper hand, therefore should not lose the moment. With any Soviet move, we must check it. We (Egyptians) must do it, or help the U.S. The President concluded by saying it is good to have President Sadat as a partner. (The meeting concluded at 4:18 p.m.)
