Arms Control and Disarmament 1495 for the duration of the session. The conference, subject to the provi­ sions of this treaty, shall adopt its own rules of procedure. Each party to the treaty shall have one vote. Decisions on budgetary matters shall be made pursuant to Article (blank) and decisions on amendments pursuant to Article (blank). Decisions on other questions, including the determination of additional questions or categories of questions to be decided by a two-­thirds majority, shall be made by a simple majority of the parties to the treaty present and voting. 4. The conference may discuss any questions or any matters within the scope of this treaty or relating to the powers and functions of any organs provided for in this treaty and may make recommendations to the parties or to the Commission or to both on any such questions or matters. 5. The conference shall: (A) elect states to serve on the Commission in accordance with Article IV; (B) consider the annual and any special report of the Commission; (C) approve the budget recommended by the Commission in accordance with paragraph (blank) of Article (blank); (D) approve reports to be submitted to the United Nations as required by any relationship agreement between the organization and the United Nations; or return them to the Commission with the recom­ mendations of the conference; (E) approve any agreement or agreements between the organiza­ tion and the United Nations or other organizations as provided in Arti­ cle (blank) or return such agreements with its recommendations to the Commission for re-­submission to the conference. (F) approve amendments to this treaty in accordance with Article (blank). 6. The conference shall have the authority: (A) to take decisions on any matter specifically referred to the con­ ference for this purpose by the Commission; (B) to propose matters for consideration by the Commission and request from the Commission reports on any matter relating to the functions of the Commission. Article VIII—Administrator and International Staff 1. The administrator shall be the chief executive officer of the sys­ tem and shall be responsible to the Commission in the performance of his duties. 2. The administrator shall implement procedures established by the Commission for the installation, operation and improvement of the system.
