Human Rights However, I realize that there is movement toward such a foundation, and if it is to be created, it would be useful for your Administration to play a role of leadership and to help shape its charter. I recommend that in the speech you give during Human Rights Week you state that you have directed the National Security Council to explore the possibility of such a foundation. Zbig would follow up on this by convening a meeting of Congressional leaders, scholars and representatives of private foundations to discuss the proposal. The language in your speech should be designed to identify you as taking an important initiative while at the same time leaving open the door that the decision on establishment of the foundation will depend on the results of the NSC exploratory process.3 2. Relations with the Congress. I am fully in favor of chairing a series of meetings with members of the Congress to discuss our human rights objectives and the need to shape legislation genuinely to advance our human rights goals around the world. I will immediately get to work with Zbig and his staff to set up these meetings with members of the Congress.4 3. Targeting of Foreign Assistance to Countries that Respect Human Rights. I concur with this proposal as a basic Administration objective and the language on this issue in the draft Presidential Directive attached at Tab A does a good job of stating this objective. In my opinion, it is important to keep such guidelines general.5 The Administration will have to live with them; we will be measured by our compliance with them; and flexibility will be required if we are to comply satisfactorily. 4. Speech for Human Rights Week. I fully endorse the recommendation that you deliver a speech next week on human rights. One of the real strengths of your administration has been the manner in which you have underscored repeatedly the fundamental importance of human rights and the fact that this is not an issue of passing interest. As mentioned above, in your speech you may wish to make reference to the fact that you have directed the NSC to explore the possibility of a foundation. It would also be useful to note the steps being taken to establish a High Commissioner on Human Rights.6 3 The President wrote at the end of this paragraph: “I’m leery of this. We may publicly support a group organized privately—& privately we can help to organize or bolster one.” 4 The President wrote “do so” in the margin next to this paragraph. 5 The President underlined the words “guidelines general” and noted in the margin “I agree.” 6 The President underlined the second half of this sentence, beginning with the word “establish.”
