1979  721
aircraft could improve our RDF capability in the short term, whereas 
efforts such as development of the CX transport would have an effect 
only much later. Gen. Jones supported the notion that reengining the 
KC–135 would help our RDF capabilities. Secretary Brown said that Aar-
on’s point concerning short term versus longer term improvements in 
the RDF is a legitimate concern, but also noted that the new interthe-
ater transport he proposed to develop would increase our capability to 
carry outsized cargo. (C)
Reggie Bartholomew noted that the effectiveness of the RDF can be 
enhanced through arrangements with other governments for overflight 
and basing rights. He suggested a study of the objectives of the RDF in 
order to understand where we should be making diplomatic efforts to 
gain such rights. He noted that an understanding of our RDF objectives 
would be important as we entered into negotiations next year with 
Spain and Portugal over basing rights. (TS)
Harold Brown responded by saying that studies of such issues were 
already going on in DOD, and that the President would be receiving a 
memorandum today on some of the questions involved.2 He agreed, 
however, that State should be involved in these studies. (U)
David Aaron noted the dangers that would be involved if we let 
the notion get out that defense programs trade off against base and 
overflight agreements. Finally, Stan Turner remarked that the RDF 
would probably be the most significant feature determining how the 
budget is perceived in other countries. He noted that the Allies will 
probably like the RDF, provided they don’t see it as challenging NATO 
improvements—­the Soviets clearly won’t like it. (S)
Harold Brown opened the discussion on shipbuilding by noting that 
the central issue is numbers, and more specifically, should we reduce 
the number of AEGIS ships that provide air defense capabilities that the 
Navy says are its greatest need in favor of more frigates, which can be 
bought in greater numbers and may provide more presence? (S)
Reggie Bartholomew noted the fact that the decreasing size of the 
Navy will create pressures for reducing the numbers of ships that are 
committed to NATO. He also noted that many people in the world are 
impressed by fleet size—­a measure of naval capability that even influ-
ences our own debates. (S)
David Aaron remarked that he was in favor of improving per-
ceptions of our military strength, but that he was not willing to trade 
off real military capabilities to meet the most worrisome threat to the 
Navy, just to get ship numbers up. He noted that there are other ways 
2 See Document 163.
