1980 799 1980s, at which time, it would have unused ICBM RVs available for other purposes. —Soviet mobile ICBMs would be vulnerable to a US ICBM attack if deployed at fixed support bases like those used for the SS–20 IRBM. Their survivability could be increased if, as we think likely, the Soviets dispersed them in a crisis. The charts show that with dispersed mobile launchers, the Soviets could have as many as 1,500 additional surviving ICBM RVs if the USSR elected a 10-RV missile as its new ICBM and deployed a number of them on mobile launchers. A single-RV new ICBM would not offer this advantage because even a large force of mobiles would carry relatively few RVs. 41. The foregoing charts indicate that in SALT-­limited circumstances the Soviets could expect a substantial number of their silo-­based ICBM RVs to survive in the early and middle 1980s even if they rode out an attack. Under No-SALT circumstances, the Soviets could MIRV virtually all of their ICBMs, and therefore could expect a somewhat greater number of ICBM RVs to survive a US attack in the early and middle 1980s. In the late 1980s, however, the number of expected Soviet ICBM RV survivors probably would still decline to relatively low levels, unless the Soviets were to change their force mix more dramatically than we believe likely even under No-SALT circumstances. 42. It should also be noted that the highly accurate US bomber and ALCM weapons would pose an additional threat to Soviet silo-­based ICBMs. The Soviets would be concerned about this additional capability but would be aware that the US aerodynamic systems would be subject to attrition by Soviet air defenses and that their long flight times would give the USSR more time to decide whether to launch its silo-­ based ICBMs. 43. With regard to the survivability of the other elements of Soviet intercontinental striking forces, roughly 75 percent of the Soviet SSBN force is normally in port and no bombers are kept on alert. Therefore, both elements are vulnerable to surprise attack. [3 lines not declassified] With [less than 1 line not declassified] warning, the Soviets could put [less than 1 line not declassified] of their modern SSBNs to sea in combat-­ready status. At full combat readiness, the survivability of bombers would be increased because they probably would be dispersed and placed on alert. E. Quasi-Dynamic Analysis of Soviet and US Intercontinental Striking Forces9 44. Comparisons of the aggregate size of strategic forces provide important insights into significant trends in US and Soviet 9 For the view of the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior Intelligence Officers of the military services on the validity and propriety of this analysis, see paragraph 47. [Footnote is in the original.]
