946
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
tainly primarily concerned with attempting to maintain an effective
organization.
36. The recent spy ring discoveries have not yet established the ex-
tent of Tudeh penetration of the Iranian armed forces, and Tudeh
strength in the bureaucracy remains unknown. Even at a minimum,
however, indications are that Tudeh penetration of the armed forces
was sufficient to carry on an effective intelligence collection effort, to
develop a capability for strategic sabotage and political assassination,
to acquire weapons and equipment, to protect Tudeh members from
the police, and to facilitate clandestine transit across Iran’s borders of
Soviet and Iranian Communists. The extent of this Tudeh penetration
of the armed forces reinforces previous indications that various minis-
tries, notably Justice and Education, also have been infiltrated. It also
points up both the weakness of Iranian security against espionage and
the success of the Communists in recruiting Iranian personnel for their
covert operations. The fact that the Tudeh ring in the armed forces ap-
parently confined its efforts to espionage and the development of a sab-
otage potential suggests that in present circumstances the USSR recog-
nizes that its program must be confined to developing assets rather
than fostering an early attempt to seize control of the armed forces.
37. At least for the short run, recent stringent measures against the
Tudeh Party have reduced its ability to promote overt opposition to the
oil agreement and the Western position in Iran and have stimulated
public and official awareness of the Tudeh threat. If these measures are
continued against Tudeh adherents and not used to harass political op-
ponents, the dependability of the armed forces and the bureaucracy
will increase. On the other hand, the severity of official action against
Tudeh members may adversely affect popular attitudes toward the
government, which is already condemned in many quarters for oppres-
sive measures, and as a result may enable the Tudeh Party to share in
popular sympathy for other opposition elements which also have been
targets of the government crackdown. The government’s long-range
chances of success in its anti-Tudeh measures will depend both on its
readiness to remain consistently firm and alert, and on its ability to
make some progress in allaying social, political, and economic griev-
ances which make Iranians vulnerable to Tudeh exploitation. The gov-
ernment’s effectiveness, in both of these respects, will in turn depend
on firm backing from the Shah.
II. Economic
Present Situation
38. The chief economic accomplishment of the Zahedi government
has been the agreement between Iran and a consortium of eight
