34  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
to policy, but that the drafting would help to sharpen up the issues for 
decision. The pattern for the Bank, he continued, should be considered 
different from the pattern of other regional banks in that the United 
States would be a member. The pattern announced for the Arab Bank, 
that the United States would support it if the Arabs would take the ini-
tiative but that the United States should not be a member, would be the 
pattern for all regional banks except the Latin American. He suggested 
that the role of the Export-Import Bank and the International Bank be 
protected.
Referring to the paper, the Chairman thought that the draft of II 
(Purposes of Financing) should be along the lines of point 5, the flexi-
ble approach, and that the draft of III (Currency of Loan Repayment) 
should follow point 3, the flexible policy. On IV (Capitalization) the 
drafting should follow B, the partially paid-­in approach, with the ini-
tial United States contribution not exceeding $100 million or 1/3 of 
total paid-­in capital. On VI (Voting Rights) he preferred alternative (b) 
or (c), with policy decisions to be made by the Governors under the 
requirement of 2/3 of the votes, and other decisions to be made by the 
Executive Board, possibly with a lesser proportion of votes required. 
Under VII (Technical Assistance Activities) the draft should be respon-
sive to Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s suggestion that the Institution counsel 
and advise applicants to the Export-Import Bank and the International 
Bank. The Chairman concluded that the drafting along these lines 
should take place with a minimum of consultation with foreign gov-
ernments and with no indication that any decisions had been reached 
by the United States.
Mr. Waugh suggested that Section VII should be called “Financial 
and Development Planning,” and should be moved to a place earlier in 
the paper. He also commented that if the Bank did not sell securities, the 
Latin American countries would have to make contributions annually.
Mr. Dillon agreed that the Inter-American Institution should be 
considered different from other regional financial institutions. With 
respect to voting rights and policy decisions, he agreed that policies 
should be made by the Board of Governors, probably by a two-­thirds 
vote, but he noted that this raised the question of a U.S. weighted vote, 
which needed careful consideration. In order to avoid the necessity 
of seeking the support of any Latin American country on any major 
issue, the United States might seek a 34 percent vote in the Board of 
Governors. He expressed general agreement with the procedures sug-
gested by the Chairman, but noted that it also might be desirable that 
the Staff prepare position papers for later negotiations with the Latin 
American countries.
The Chairman stated that the drafting should deal specifically 
with such questions as whether loans would be made to wholly-­owned
