24
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
conditions by recipients; skepticism that the two-year life of the FSF
was adequate to deal with what is obviously a longer-term problem.
State continues to support the idea of the FSF, arguing that it has
been ratified by nearly all other participants and should not now be
abandoned by the US, that it can provide a substantial amount of offi-
cial financing relatively quickly, that the terms of the FSF are already
agreed upon and negotiated, and that it can be put into action immedi-
ately upon ratification by the US. Treasury opposes the FSF citing
strong Congressional opposition to it on the grounds that the FSF com-
petes with the IMF, is linked to a non-existent energy cooperation ef-
fort, that there would be a divergence between FSF conditionality and
IMF conditionality raising the possibility of conflicts in program and
approach, that the FSF excludes many important third-world countries
with potential financing needs, and that it will not be able to take ad-
vantage of key OPEC donors.
Treasury believes that we should strengthen the role of the IMF ei-
ther through an ad hoc borrowing facility, expanding the General Ar-
rangements to Borrow (i.e. borrowing additional funds directly from
industrialized and perhaps the OPEC nations) or forming a new cred-
itors club. All of these have various degrees of merit. All would clearly
be better able to induce Saudi Arabia to provide financial support to the
weaker economies than the FSF—an important objective which I have
been pushing for a number of months.
This memo is intended primarily to acquaint you with the
problem, and secondarily to solicit your political judgment among the
two approaches. A US contribution to the FSF would require a major ef-
fort on the Hill. On the other hand, it would generate new resources
quickly (which might be essential to aid Portugal, Italy, or even
perhaps Spain over the coming year). It would also be a major manifes-
tation of financial cooperation among the Trilateral nations,3 although
with the admitted drawback of not including important third-world
countries. Abandoning this approach for an IMF-oriented approach
would serve the essential objective of bringing in third-world nations,
but might take a considerable amount of time to negotiate.
My preliminary view is that a number of industrialized nations
may need assistance over the next year; there would need to be funds
available to avoid our having to scurry around for money as we are
now doing in the case of Portugal. The British specifically warned Mon-
3 Apparently a reference to countries represented on the Trilateral Commission, a
non-governmental organization founded in 1973 by Chase Manhattan Bank Chairman
David Rockefeller as an organization devoted to promoting strong relations among the
countries of North America, Western Europe, and Japan. Zbigniew Brzezinski was a
founding member, and Jimmy Carter was a member before his presidency.
