“But we have had for many years an understanding with Japan, by which the Japanese government has voluntarily undertaken to prevent the emigration of laborers to the United States, and in view of this historic relation and of the feeling which inspired it, it would have been much better in my judgment, and more effective in the actual control of immigration, if we had continued to invite that co-operation which Japan was ready to give and had thus avoided creating any ground for misapprehension by an unnecessary statutory enactment. “That course would not have derogated from the authority of the Congress to deal with the question in any exigency requiring its action. There is scarcely any ground for disagreement as to the result we want, but this method of securing it is unnecessary and deplorable at this time. “If the exclusion provision stood alone, I should disapprove it without hesitation, if sought in this way at this time. But this bill is a comprehensive measure dealing with the whole subject of immigration and setting up the necessary administrative machinery. The present quota act of 1921 will terminate on June 30 next. It is of great importance that a comprehensive measure should take its place and that the arrangements for its administration should be provided at once in order to avoid hardship and confusion. “I must therefore consider the bill as a whole and the imperative need of the country for legislation of this general character. For this reason the bill is approved.” Recently occasion arose at the Assembly of the Interparliamentary Commercial Conference at Rio de Janeiro for the United States to reassert its position regarding immigration. Certain proposals advanced by the Italian delegates regarding control of Italian emigrants on foreign soil impressed the South American delegates as threatening to infringe upon the sovereignty of their States and upon their exclusive control of immigration. For obvious reasons they looked to the United States to be the spokesman for the thesis of immigration as a matter of purely domestic concern. On
