3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
623
Human Rights
Finally, the President wanted to say a few words regarding human
rights. He had been very careful while in Vienna4 not to make any state-
ment that would embarrass Brezhnev or aggravate the situation. The
people of our nation had been warmly gratified by the actions the So-
viet Union had taken on its own initiative and without any pressure
from us. The President pointed out that he was a Baptist. Fourteen mil-
lion Baptists had been very happy to welcome Mr. Vins in our country.
Nothing the Soviet Union could do to increase friendship between us
would be as significant as allowing Mr. Shcharanskiy to come to our
country. The President recognized the difficulty for the Soviet Union
posed by the human rights question. He simply wanted to let Brezhnev
know that the more liberal human rights attitude5 referred to had been
gratifying to us, once it became known that the Soviet Union had taken
the action referred to.
Reading from another typed brief, handed him by his interpreter,
Brezhnev said that the Shcharanskiy matter dealt with a man who had
been convicted by a Soviet court for espionage for the benefit of a for-
eign nation. He said that he could not do anything that would violate
Soviet laws.
General
Summing up, Brezhnev thought this morning’s discussion had
been very good.
The President acknowledged that he, too, believed they now un-
derstood each other better as a result of the Vienna meetings. There
were some things of particular importance to us and some things that
were important to the Soviet side.
Brezhnev said that he had been told a great many things about
President Carter and President Carter had probably been told as much,
if not more, about Brezhnev. Now that they had seen each other and
spoken to each other, they knew that they could speak frankly without
offending each other. If at times some question or other did not lend it-
self to immediate solution at their level, it might best be left for discus-
sion and, if possible, action by the experts of the sides.
Brezhnev presented President Carter with a few copies of the
books he had written, in the original and in English translation, each
copy autographed by himself.
4 Carter added “while in Vienna” to this sentence by hand.
5 Carter crossed out the typewritten word “occurrence” and inserted “more liberal
human rights attitude” by hand.
