Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1025
11. Nazarkin said the Soviet side had received the impression that 
the U.S. side was willing to drop right of refusal SSI. Brooks said this 
was not the case. Nazarkin said there was a problem in Moscow with 
the term “suspect site” inspection. The Soviet side did not rule out 
such inspections, but thought there might be a less pejorative way to 
describe them. Brooks said he would think about whether an alterna-
tive formulation might meet U.S. needs. The two agreed to return to the 
subject in the near future and to decide at that time whether it should 
be dealt with at their level or in the inspection protocol working group.
12. Brooks said that the U.S. side could confirm the agreement 
reached in March on inspection quotas, whereby the U.S. side dropped 
its proposal for percentages in return for Soviet acceptance of fifteen data 
update inspections, ten reentry vehicle inspections, and three formally 
declared inspections. Brooks noted, however, that he was under instruc-
tions to make clear that, if the number of facilities changed drastically in 
the future, the U.S. side reserved the right to reopen the question of the 
number of inspections. Thus, Brooks explained, if ten years from now 
there were only a handful of facilities, the United States might propose 
in the JCIC that the quota be reduced. If the number of Soviet facilities 
increased drastically, a larger quota might be appropriate. Nazarkin said 
he understood. In response to Brooks’ question, Nazarkin said that he 
could not yet confirm the agreement on inspection quotas, but that he 
hoped to do so in the future. Brooks urged Nazarkin to make clear to 
Moscow that the U.S. side had accepted the agreement.
13. Brooks said that he assumed that Nazarkin’s statement before 
the working recess that the Soviet side could accept hard covers for reen-
try vehicle inspections was still valid. If so, the U.S. side would be pre-
pared to resolve the issue largely, though not exclusively, along the lines 
the sides had discussed in March. The two agreed that this issue could be 
resolved in the inspection protocol working group.
14. Brooks discussed the impending visits by Senator Lugar and 
the Senate Arms Control Observer Group. Nazarkin said that the 
Soviet people’s deputies were anxious to make a visit to Geneva when 
U.S. Senators were present. Brooks said that he would keep Nazarkin 
informed of the senators’ schedule, but cautioned that senate travel 
plans often were changed at the last minute.
15. Brooks recalled that at their March 19 lunch3 he had provided 
Nazarkin with talking points on why the Soviet side should shift its 
point of entry in the Asian portion of the Soviet Union from Ulan Ude to 
Khabarovsk. Nazarkin said his delegation had tried to gain Moscow’s 
3 In telegram 3439 from NST Geneva, March 20, the Delegation to the Nuclear and 
Space Talks transmitted an account of the March 19 lunch between Brooks and Nazarkin. 
(Department of State, Central Foreign Policy, Electronic Telegrams, D910272–0435)
