Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 295 and it would help balance a SALT agreement politically both in China and at home. Subsequently, I believe the Vice President should visit China later this year after the Congressional elections.22 We can offer the Chinese little else but visits, until concrete progress on normalization opens up. —Soviet Union. We have invested a great deal of effort in the expansion of the U.S.-Soviet negotiating relationships. Some of these have been moving forward in a promising fashion. There is thus some real hope for a more stable and more generally reciprocal U.S.-Soviet relationship. At the same time, either by design or simply as a response to an apparent opportunity, the Soviets have stepped up their efforts to exploit African turbulence to their own advantage. The Soviet/Cuban military presence in Ethiopia is particularly dangerous and could then produce a reaction in this country which could jeopardize not only SALT but the wider fabric of the emerging U.S.-Soviet relationship. Accordingly, at some early opportunity, you should communicate your concerns to Brezhnev, emphasizing to him that there is no such thing as a selective or compartmentalized detente. —Greece and Turkey. The new Ecevit Government opens up the prospect of real progress on Cyprus and the Aegean.23 However, for Congressional reasons related to Panama, we don’t want to move too quickly. We need a quiet planning session with the Turks to map a coordinated strategy with respect to progress on Cyprus and associated progress on the Turkish DCA. Bearing in mind last year’s experience, as well as our overall appraisal, it might also be noteworthy in this connection to note the following. We confront a danger of an alliance developing for the purpose of stalemating our foreign policy as a whole. The linkage of such issues as Panama, SALT and the Middle East, not to mention priority issues of the second order, or a crisis in Ethiopia, could generate a coalition which might effectively make the case for a “tougher” foreign policy. Different constituencies would emphasize different aspects but the total effect could be one of stalemate. Accordingly, you should: —Somewhat toughen your rhetoric on foreign policy issues, emphasizing more the theme of national security and human rights. —Stand firm in the negotiating process in SALT by insisting on Soviet concessions regarding Backfire and the numerical aggregates. 22 Mondale did not visit China until August 1979. 23 Ecevit served as Prime Minister of Turkey from June to July 1977, whereupon he was succeeded by Demirel. Following a no-confidence vote in the National Assembly in late December 1977, Demirel resigned, and Koruturk appointed Ecevit as Prime Minister. Ecevit won a vote of confidence in the National Assembly on January 17, 1978. Documentation on these developments is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXI, Cyprus; Greece; Turkey.
