108 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Carter: I sense a concern about additional aid. There is a difficulty in the US about different pockets of aid. We have confidence in the IMF and the World Bank. But it will be hard to sell US participation of 37.5% on a multilateral basis. There is a proliferation of too many different institutions. We need an analysis of the world development aid situation. We should get the World Bank and the IMF to say what the developing countries need most, and the objectives of aid which need to be assured. The developing countries would trust the World Bank and the IMF to do the analysis. We need a structured sort of analysis to help get increased support in the Congress and public opinion. There are a vast array of different organizations. I am not trying to delay action here. In fact, we are excited about it—but we must begin to develop a structured aid program to pinpoint the needs. I would like to see the Socialists join the effort. It might be an appropriate time to get the Soviet Union to consider participating. If they join with us in these discussions, we might use these discussions as a mechanism to bring them into future aid programs. They might welcome some alleviation of tension. I agree with Helmut on the requirement that LDCs agree not to confiscate property without compensation. We could help more if investment could be protected. I am willing to go the second mile in the US to sell these ideas. But we need a comprehensive analysis and it would help to bring the Soviet Union into the structure. Jamieson: Roy, are you suggesting that the G–8 should all agree on a CIEC package? How much will the package be affected by separate contributions? You depend one way or another on others to make up the $1 billion sum. The important thing is that it should be seen as something distinct. But this means the US will have to make up the other 37.5%. Jenkins: A positive result is needed. We can put some things of a bilateral nature into this particular area. We have to erect a package. We will try to meet our target figure. Giscard: We should be clear on the point that this must be an additional effort and we should not use existing aid programs. It is not useful today to address how this should be organized. We should pay; we will pay $1 billion by means suitable to each country. The US could do it bilaterally and others multilaterally. We should be flexible on ways and means. We should say we all agree on the principle, size, and objectives. Vance: The fact that we do that bilaterally rather than in a common pot should not be a result inconsistent with the principle we are trying to achieve.
