192  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Secretary Quarles rose to defend Mr. Johnson. He first described 
his own difficulties during his testimony before the Lyndon Johnson 
committee, and explained that Mr. Roy Johnson had been led into a trap 
of words. He was quite sure that Mr. Johnson did not disagree with the 
fundamental proposition of civilian control of the space program.
Mr. Dulles pointed out that the report of Dr. Killian and Dr. 
Kistiakowsky again brought up the matter which he had earlier pro­
posed to the President and the Council, of the desirability of relative net 
estimates respecting U.S. and Soviet programs. Since that time, some 
weeks ago, he, General Twining, Dr. Killian, and General Cutler had 
had some conversations on this subject and were still working on a 
possible procedure to provide such comparative estimates. In a certain 
sense, the report today constituted the first trial of such a relative esti­
mate. The President expressed his very strong approval of this kind of 
comparative estimate.
General Twining inquired of Dr. Killian whether he thought that 
there were any measures by which we could speed up the procedure 
for testing U.S. ballistic missiles. Dr. Killian replied that we were build­
ing a new test area on the West Coast to supplement the test facilities at 
Cape Canaveral. On the other hand, our immediate problem was not to 
provide more room for ballistic missiles tests, but to solve the propul­
sion problem in our ballistic missiles.
The President observed that Dr. Kistiakowsky’s report clearly 
showed that the Soviets were ahead of us in developing propulsion sys­
tems for their missiles. They may not, however, have been so successful 
in other aspects of their missiles program. Secretary McElroy wondered 
whether this report did not tend to over-­emphasize Soviet capabilities 
for the reason mentioned by the President. It might be well if we did 
so over-­estimate their capabilities, but we should bear the matter in 
mind. Dr. Kistiakowsky stated that every effort had been made to avoid 
over-­emphasis.
At the conclusion of the presentation on this subject in the Cabinet 
Room, the President and certain members of the Council adjourned to 
the President’s office, where Dr. Killian and Dr. Kistiakowsky discussed 
for a quarter of an hour the intelligence material on which their report 
on Soviet ballistic missile developments had been based. A list of the 
persons attending this meeting is filed in the minutes of the NSC meet­
ing; another is attached to this memorandum.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted and discussed an oral report on the subject by the Special 
Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, assisted by Dr. 
George B. Kistiakowsky.
b. Noted the comment by the Director of Central Intelligence that 
this report was an example of the comparative estimates of U.S. and
