North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
805
several members of Congress to discuss the CIEC. He later reported to
President Jimmy Carter: “Most of the discussion centered around our
proposal to seek from the Congress authority to double our bilateral
aid over the next five years. A large majority of the group said that if we
made such a statement in Paris now we might prejudice the current aid
bill. They suggested we make a general statement about increases and
work to develop support for doubling our aid later on the basis of the
results of the CIEC meeting.” (Memorandum from Vance to Carter,
May 25; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Subject File, Box 18, Evening Reports (State): 5/77) As a result, in his
May 30 address to the CIEC, Vance announced that “President Carter
will seek from the Congress a substantial increase in the volume of our
bilateral and multilateral aid programs over the coming five years.” For
the text of Vance’s address, see the Department of State Bulletin, June
20, 1977, pages 645–648. (Quotation is on page 646.) Vance sent Carter
frequent reports on the status of the negotiations; these reports are in
the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Sub-
ject File, Box 18, Evening Reports (State): 5/77 and Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 18, Eve-
ning Reports (State): 6/77.
Telegram 16350 from Paris, June 3, summarized the conclusion of
the Conference on International Economic Cooperation thus: “CIEC
came to a satisfactory conclusion during the early morning hours on
June 3. The two sides reached agreement on a number of issues in the
four areas of CIEC: energy, raw materials, development, and financial
affairs. Gap in package was lack of agreement on on-going energy con-
sultation process. While the areas of agreement fell short of G–19 aspi-
rations, the substantive outcome was generally favorable. The tone and
atmosphere of the CIEC conclusion should have a positive impact on
future North/South relations.” The telegram noted that the Conference
communique´ announced agreement “on guidelines for energy supply
and cooperation, on the principle of a common fund, for increased and
more effective official development assistance, for enhanced public fi-
nancing for energy and raw materials development, on the special ac-
tion program of one billion dollars to assist the poorest countries on a
relatively fast-disbursing basis, as well as other subjects related to
transfer of technology, industrialization, and food and agriculture. The
key disappointment was failure to get conference agreement on an
on-going energy dialogue.” According to the telegram, “an integral ele-
ment in the final CIEC compromise, which the G–19 reluctantly ac-
cepted was that the results of CIEC could not be pocketed by the G–19
and then condemned in a unilateral declaration.” As a result, the com-
munique´ balanced reference to the lack of progress on certain devel-
oping country goals with reference to the belief that the negotiations
had increased mutual understanding. (Telegram 16350 from Paris, June
