1955  137
110.	 Telegram 582 to Geneva1
Washington, August 19, 1955
582. For Johnson.
1. Your 540. Department believes principal objective is obtain Chi­
nese Communist agreement our version paragraph 1 as set forth Sec­
retary’s 569. In order facilitate Wang’s acceptance satisfactory version 
paragraph 1, we would be willing make some concessions on textual 
points enumerated your 540. While in each case our language believed 
somewhat preferable there is no fundamental issue involved as we see 
it and we would yield in order afford additional face saving to Wang if 
he agrees on our proposed paragraph 1. Specifically we would accept 
paragraph B PAREN insertion of QUOTE USA agrees that UNQUOTE 
PAREN, C PAREN omission word QUOTE official UNQUOTE PAREN, 
E PAREN rewording of paragraph 2  A PAREN subject clarification 
garble following words QUOTE if desired by the UNQUOTE, and 
F  PAREN substitution QUOTE PRC UNQUOTE for QUOTE China 
mainland QUOTE PAREN. Regarding D PAREN substitution QUOTE 
Office of Charge d’Affaires of UK UNQUOTE for QUOTE British 
Embassy UNQUOTE PAREN British Embassy perceives no objection 
but has queried Foreign Office.
2. Your 543. As to Wang’s proposed supplementary statement Legal 
Adviser is working on this and we will not have anything definitive for 
you in time for tomorrow’s meeting. Expect to send definite instruc­
tions by early next week. Believe this delay not important inasmuch 
as it seems unlikely that final agreement will be reached at tomorrow’s 
meeting. Our preliminary reaction to paragraph 1. A. is that we could 
accept some sort statement making clear that each side is acting entirely 
on its own and that no question interference jurisdiction arises on either 
side. We will naturally desire avoid language which would imply US 
recognition CPR attributes of sovereignty.
As to paragraph 1.B. you should take position this point is ade­
quately covered by representation provisions agreed announcement 
and it therefore is unnecessary.
3. Your 547, New Delhi’s 333 repeated Geneva 28. We will respect 
wishes Indian Government in regard nomenclature. Presume Wang 
will introduce this question. You should be prepared accept language 
QUOTE Government of the Republic of India UNQUOTE in place of 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1855. Secret; Niact. Drafted 
by McConaughy and Sebald; cleared in substance by Dulles. The time of transmission 
is illegible.
