Panama 957 Governor of the Canal Zone The Secretary said that we had given careful thought to the problem of the Governor of the Canal Zone and it was our firm opinion he should be a civilian. Secretary Brucker observed that there was nothing in the statutes which would prohibit this but stated the Governor of the Canal Zone, who was also the President of the Panama Canal Company, had traditionally been a Corps of Engineers officer. He thought this precedent was a good one, that it should be continued and that it was very proper. The Secretary said he knew that the leading candidate for nomination as the new Governor next month was an engineering officer of great stature and that he would have no quarrel with his designation. However, the problem was one of principle and he thought that, in principle, the Governor should definitely be a civilian. Secretary Brucker said that it was such an important thing to have a Corps of Engineers officer heading up the Zone and Company, that the Corps of Engineers’ tradition was a great one in Panama. He said that certainly we would not want to have a run-­of-­the-­mill politician as Governor and that we would not want to have two civilians, the Ambassador and the Governor, involved in Panama and Canal Zone problems. It was most important to have a professional engineer giving professional advice on the Canal Zone. The Secretary responded that he did not quarrel, of course, with the efficient operation of the Canal itself but that he might argue on the issue of a military officer as Governor and involved in relations with the Government of Panama. He said that, while he took absolutely no exception to the prospective nomination from the Corps of Engineers for the new Governor, he thought we would have to reserve our positions on this issue. He said that, assuming a civilian candidate and a military candidate were of equal stature, we would prefer the civilian. It was a question of judgment. Secretary Brucker responded that the nominee for Governor would have to be confirmed by Congress where of course the Corps of Engineers was very powerful. The Secretary then said “we agree to disagree”, that he thought it important that we settle this matter in principle for the future. Mr. Merchant said the problem essentially was that the U.S. exercises sovereignty over a narrow strip of land bisecting the Republic of Panama. In these modern times it was essential from the standpoint of our political relations with Panama to avoid the image of military occupation, which the concept of a military man as Governor of the Zone represented psychologically. He said that certainly the Corps of Engineers would continue in its respected technical capacity. The Secretary agreed that the problem was essentially a psychological one. Secretary Brucker replied that he just did not agree with the Department of State’s position on this and he strongly recommended reconsideration of it. He stated
