1044 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 6. Brooks then turned to the notification of the flight testing of a new kind of strategic offensive arm. He recalled that Nazarkin had said that he would have some thoughts on this subject. Nazarkin said he was not yet ready to make a specific proposal but that he hoped to be able to do so in the future. (Comment: The Soviet side objects to waiting one year after initial flight testing prior to receiving a new kinds notification. It claims this delay could result in insufficient time for JCIC deliberation. End comment.) 7. Nazarkin said that Colonel Koltunov would return to Moscow the following day to join the party accompanying the Soviet chief of general staff Moiseyev to Washington. Brooks said that the U.S. side did not anticipate significant discussion of START during the upcoming meeting. The best thing that could be done next week to facilitate START, Brooks continued, was to resolve the CFE issues. Nazarkin said that Koltunov was accompanying the party because he was also the general staff expert on the Vienna talks. (Comment: This is a new insight and very difficult to believe. Koltunov is stretched very thin in covering his START responsibilities. If he is also a CFE expert, he is superhuman. End comment.) 8. Brooks informed Nazarkin that he had that morning announced the selection of Mr. Timothy R. Sample as his new deputy. Nazarkin asked Brooks to convey the congratulations of the Soviet side to Mr. Sample. Brooks 214. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, May 22, 1991, 1007Z 5758. Subject: START: Brooks-Nazarkin Coffee, May 21, 1991 1. This is NST/START Memcon-XV-­M-109. Secret—Entire Text. 2. Meeting Date: May 21, 1991 –Time: 10:05 a.m.–11:00 a.m. –Place: Relais de Chambesy Restaurant, Geneva 1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Lot 02D360, Edward M. Ifft Files, Baker-Nazarkin Memcons 1991. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent Priority for information to Moscow, the Mission to NATO, and USNMR SHAPE. Drafted by Brooks; cleared by Kangas; approved by Brooks.
