International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
259
84.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, December 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Briefing Paper on Trade Issues for Your Visit to Paris and Brussels in
January 1978
BACKGROUND
The multilateral trade negotiations should feature prominently in
your discussions with EC President Roy Jenkins and French President
Giscard d’Estaing during your upcoming visit to Europe.2 Your visit
will be extremely helpful in persuading the EC Commission to support
a substantial negotiating package by the mid-January target date for
completing the preparatory phase of the negotiations and in per-
suading the French government to support (or at least not to veto) such
a package in the Council of Ministers. The Council is expected to meet
on January 17 to decide whether the Commission should be allowed to
proceed on the basis of the initial negotiating documents.
The London Summit produced the political will necessary to move
the MTN off dead center. Since then, the EC Commission (Jenkins, Haf-
erkamp, Gundelach, Davignon) has worked well with us in developing
a plan for reducing industrial tariffs by 40 percent, and I would suggest
that you commend the Commission for their leadership in this area.
At the same time, you should press the Commission to maintain
their leadership role in working out other elements of a substantial
MTN package, including agreements of substantial benefit to agricul-
ture and a comprehensive solution to the subsidies/countervailing
duty issue. I would hope that you could conclude your session at the
Commission with a forceful communique that will pledge the U.S. and
the EC to provide the leadership necessary to negotiate a substantial
MTN package before the summer holidays.
KEY ISSUES
1. Tariffs.—The U.S. and the EC Commission have worked out a
plan for reducing industrial tariffs by 40 percent. Formal adoption of
the plan, and the exchange of offers, is scheduled for the week of Jan-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 6, President, Europe and Asia, 12/29/77–1/6/78: Stop Papers, Brussels, 1/6/78. No
classification marking. Forwarded to Carter under cover of a December 20 memorandum
from Owen. (Ibid.)
2 Carter visited France January 4–6, 1978, and Belgium on January 6.
