Chapter 5, May–June 1990  729
with CFE. Would like you to begin, both because you are our guest and 
because we want your views on the ideas we put forward in Moscow 
on CFE. Finally, I propose that we move to a smaller group, with the 
others available on standby as needed.
Karpov: We believe we have already laid good groundwork in the 
draft joint papers for the summit. Perhaps it would be a good idea to 
finalize work on those papers, and proceed to negotiations on further 
issues. What I have in mind is that the document on START is basically 
agreed, but portions require additional work. This has been largely 
worked out with Amb. Burt in discussions in Geneva. In addition, 
there could be a more concise document for the press, etc. We share that 
approach, and have some ideas to propose.
We also have not yet completed work on a statement on future 
negotiations on strategic arms and strategic stability. And we have 
a number of proposals and considerations to raise for discussion. It 
would be a good idea to establish a working group to close on those 
two statements, and report back to us. We need not involve Burt and 
Nazarkin in that endeavor. On our side would be Masterkov and 
Koltunov. That group could report back to us tomorrow, perhaps with 
an agreed text.
Second are chemical weapons and non-­proliferation. Almost all 
points are agreed upon, there is one outstanding issue. Lehman and 
Batsanov can put their heads together. There is a minor point with 
regard to CW, whether on not Presidents will issue an appeal to the 
Conference on Disarmament to accelerate work on the Chemical 
Weapons Convention. The US and USSR have demonstrated a desire 
to complete the CWC, and others should accelerate work as well. We 
have in mind a brief, concise, energetic call on others to accelerate their 
work on the CWC.
We also have a statement on SLCMs that is almost agreed upon. We 
have some editorial changes. The group with Masterkov and Koltunov 
could work on that as well.
Turning to the joint statements on Open Skies and CFE, with regard 
to the Vienna negotiations, it is not only the Soviet side that owes an 
answer. During the ministerial in Moscow the US proposals were not 
the only proposals, there were Soviet ideas as well. I hope you have 
come up with responses. I note regretably that on some CFE issues I did 
not have complete clarity when I left Moscow. I hope to have answers 
by 5:00 to 6:00 this evening.
Finally, another issue that should be addressed is a statement by 
Presidents that the two sides meet in September to discuss further lim-
its on the number and yield of nuclear tests.
Bartholomew: We have raphrochment on ideas on how to prodeed. 
I ask as a point of information what the one issue is on CW.
