Comprehensive Test Ban
597
try to turn back the clock. In particular, US wants to continue bilateral
discussions with the UK on the NSS question, pursuant to the Carter-
Thatcher3 and Vance-Carrington4 talks in Washington, at which US un-
dertook to look into possibility of providing equipment for 3 stations in
UK dependent territories, while UK looked into possibilities for lo-
cating them. US and UK should work expeditiously to develop a
common position on this issue, and then consult closely on the tactics of
how and when to use this move with the Soviets in Geneva.
4. Moberly said UK ministers would regard this statement of USG
policy as important. He said that although UK ministers had not specif-
ically reviewed future of CTB post Afghanistan there was no intention
to halt negotiation or to disengage from the talks as a result of the crisis
in Afghanistan. He inquired regarding the meaning of the phrase, “pro-
ceed at a slow pace.” Marcum responded that US plans to continue
with CTB, but expected that the agreement would not be completed
prior to SALT II ratification. This meant that the work remaining would
be stretched out over a longer period. Marcum stated that the US did
not intend to halt progress in the talks, or to delay the talks. At present
we believe the talks should resume on Feb 4 as scheduled. Also, in
preparation for the NPT REVCON, negotiations should show some
limited progress over the next few months, even though US forsees ac-
tual CTB completion in a much longer time frame. The essential thing
now, he suggested, was for US and UK to make progress bilaterally as
soon as possible, so the Soviets cannot exploit differences between us.
5. Moberly said Soviets may try to raise CTB in the CD and asked
how we should respond. Both US and UK participants agreed that one
should try to insure that CD has other issues to work on in order to
keep pressure off CTB. UK side asked whether US could permit multi-
lateral negotiation in the CD of the CTB preamble or review conference
language. Marcum replied that while the preamble might be a possi-
bility eventually, the review conference language is much more sensi-
tive. UK side pointed out that even if we succeeded in holding off CD
pressures, US and UK face a multilateral problem with the coming
NPTRC. US side acknowledged this, and pointed out that it is therefore
important for US and UK to be on the high ground in the talks.
6. UK/NSS issues: UK presented US with preliminary working
paper on NSS issues.5 Moberly said NSS is not necessarily the key issue
to get the talks moving and could possibly be saved for later. US side
responded in general terms that US sees broad range of verification
issues as crucial, and did not want separation of multilateral treaty
3 See Document 242.
4 Not found.
5 Not found.
