Afghanistan 443 2. Military Assistance to Pakistan (the subject of a separate paper to you).3 3. Bases. Survey teams will depart on January 14 to assess the adequacy of existing facilities for U.S. use.4 4. Military Exercises/Deployments. We will review the planned U.S. Marine deployment scheduled for late summer and the possibility of rapidly deploying a brigade to the region in late spring or early summer as a demonstration of our ability and will to project effective military power into the region. 5. U.S.-Saudi Security Consultations. The Saudis have agreed to the deployment of AWACS through Saudi airspace. We will determine if the Afghanistan situation has changed the Saudi view of security cooperation with the U.S.5 6. U.S.-Turkish Security Consultations. We will review the possibility of sending a mission to Ankara to consult with the Turks on the situation resulting from the Iran and Afghanistan situations.6 7. U.S.-Indian Security Consultations. We will review the possibility of sending a high-level mission to India to consult on the changed circumstances in the region.7 B. Multilateral Actions 1. Covert Assistance to Afghan Rebels. We will raise the question whether our European allies, in addition to the Chinese, should become involved in support for the Afghan rebels. 2. Security Assistance Consortium. We will pursue this concept with the allies. We might want to organize along the lines of the old Berlin Task Force (U.S., France, UK and FRG) to implement the lines of action agreed upon. 3. PRC. We will follow up on the Harold Brown mission.8 4. ASEAN. We will ask the ASEAN states to talk to the Indians about the appropriate Indian role in the region.9 3 See Document 151. 4 In the left margin next to this sentence, Carter wrote: “I’m ready to expedite & take a chance on Somalia.” 5 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula, Document 207. In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Good.” 6 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXI, Cyprus; Turkey; Greece, Document 147. Carter underlined “mission” in the second sentence, and in the left margin wrote: “a person—to explore Turkish attitudes first.” 7 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Goheen assess, then Clifford.” Robert Goheen was Ambassador to India. Clark Clifford often served as the President’s special emissary. See Document 190. 8 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “PRC (Huang Hua) should go to India.” 9 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Good.”
