Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 the Department of State has recently reported that the American public’s willingness to defend our principal allies has risen steadily since 1974. Taken together with the changes in foreign opinion, this evidence suggests that—whatever the ups and downs of day-to-day alliance affairs—the psychological underpinnings of our central alliances are in improving shape. (U) [Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.] 107. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Priorities for 1979–80 It is quite possible that, in addition to normalization with Peking, we will achieve in the next month or two both a SALT II agreement and completion of the Tokyo Round of the MTN. An Egyptian-Israeli treaty is also possible if the next few weeks produce greater flexibility. Success on even three of these four issues, on top of the Panama Canal Treaty, would represent historic foreign policy achievements for the first two years of your Administration. At the same time, it becomes especially important to look at some of the implications of such successes for our foreign policy priorities and activities over the next two years. I have been reviewing these priorities in some detail, and thought it would be useful to present for your consideration a summary of this review. SALT, MTN, and the Middle East agreements, as well as China normalization, would mean that foreign policy issues will have a high visibility here in the U.S. as we head into 1980, despite the attention domestic priorities will receive in a time of fiscal austerity. The success of your first term will be greatly affected by our ability to gain Congressional approval of SALT and MTN agreements and measures related to 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 39, State Department Evening Reports, 1/79. Secret; Nodis. Carter wrote “cc Cy Zbig—No other copies—Let Fritz, Ham [Jordan] read mine. J” in the top right-hand corner of the memorandum. A notation on
