Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
515
the Department of State has recently reported that the American
public’s willingness to defend our principal allies has risen steadily
since 1974. Taken together with the changes in foreign opinion, this evi-
dence suggests that—whatever the ups and downs of day-to-day alli-
ance affairs—the psychological underpinnings of our central alliances
are in improving shape. (U)
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
107.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Priorities for 1979–80
It is quite possible that, in addition to normalization with Peking,
we will achieve in the next month or two both a SALT II agreement and
completion of the Tokyo Round of the MTN. An Egyptian-Israeli treaty
is also possible if the next few weeks produce greater flexibility.
Success on even three of these four issues, on top of the Panama
Canal Treaty, would represent historic foreign policy achievements for
the first two years of your Administration. At the same time, it becomes
especially important to look at some of the implications of such suc-
cesses for our foreign policy priorities and activities over the next two
years. I have been reviewing these priorities in some detail, and
thought it would be useful to present for your consideration a sum-
mary of this review.
SALT, MTN, and the Middle East agreements, as well as China
normalization, would mean that foreign policy issues will have a high
visibility here in the U.S. as we head into 1980, despite the attention do-
mestic priorities will receive in a time of fiscal austerity. The success of
your first term will be greatly affected by our ability to gain Congres-
sional approval of SALT and MTN agreements and measures related to
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 39, State Department Evening
Reports, 1/79. Secret; Nodis. Carter wrote “cc Cy Zbig—No other copies—Let Fritz, Ham
[Jordan] read mine. J” in the top right-hand corner of the memorandum. A notation on
another copy of the memorandum in an unknown hand reads: “12/28/78: orig. to Secy
Vance.” (National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director,
Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981: Lot 82D298, Box 1, Misc: re Issues & Priorities ’78)
