450 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 101. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, October 28, 1978 SUBJECT ICBM Vulnerability, MAPS, and Verification As we discussed at our midterm review, the growing numbers and increasing accuracy of Soviet missiles will give them the capability to destroy [less than 1 line not declassified] of our Minuteman silos by 1982– 1983.2 In a paper sent to you last week,3 I discussed the unique value of the ICBM leg of our Triad and the risks of giving up our ICBM force—­ especially under this pressure from the Soviet Union. I also noted at the midterm review that while we should improve our attack assessment system, we should not allow our ICBMs—­at least not all of them—­to be so vulnerable that it would be necessary to launch our force out from under an attack in order to save it. Our ICBM force has had the ability to ride out any conceivable attack on it. This is far preferable to a situation where, because the ICBM force cannot survive, we embark on a course whose outcome is that a computer decides whether we launch a nuclear attack. The alternative to the sobering options of retreating to a dyad, or being forced into a launch-­under-­attack policy, is to provide survivable basing for our ICBMs. We still are studying the various alternatives, but already it is clear that there are no simple, quick or cheap solutions. Leaving aside political and perceptual problems, as well as the very important problem of uncertainties in counting the number of Soviet launchers (or missiles) if they go to MAPS or some other mobile concept—­the best solution, both from a technical and from a cost point of view, appears to be MAPS. This is not to say MAPS is an inherently attractive solution; the problems just referred to cannot be left aside. But all of the other basing systems we are considering either cost more or compromise away some important characteristic of the present ICBM force (e.g., no dependence on strategic warning), or both. In most cases they also, like MAPS, involve counting uncertainties if the Soviets 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, Ermarth, Box 2, Defense (Items in the System): 9–12/78. Top Secret; Sensitive. An undated paper prepared in the NSC entitled “Comments on Harold Brown’s 28 October Memo on ICBM Vulnerability, MAPS, and Verification” is ibid. 2 Refers to the September 29 Mid-Term Defense Review meeting. See footnote 2, Document 90. 3 See Document 97.
