Czechoslovakia
307
required.OtherstatesareresponsivetoUSgestures,buttheUSperceives
little interest in Prague in improving relations. Czechoslovak media
attackson thePresidentand thecountry,the GOC’shuman rightspolicy,
its treatment of Western journalists, its handling of the normalization
program, and its policy on visas for former Czechoslovak citizens such
as Vosicky lead to bad feeling and make progress impossible. Nimetz
said he was pessimistic that much could be done to improve relations in
thenextfewmonths. Perhapsinthefallorearly nextyear,relationscould
beimproved.HeemphasizedthattheUSwouldliketoimproverelations
and wants both a claims settlement agreement and a cultural exchanges
agreement. The public’s attitude toward Czechoslovakia is favorable, as
it has been since 1918. The GOC’s attitude is the problem.
3. In response, Johanes said the GOC’s perception is completely
different, that it wants to improve relations but the US is unwilling to.
His discussion with George Vest on June 5 (septel)2 convinced him
that the US does not want improved relations. Johanes denied that
the problems Nimetz mentioned were really obstacles to improved
relations. The GOC is prosecuting dissidents only when they violate
Czechoslovak law. On the other hand, in some countries allied to the
US, people are shot on the street. The GOC’s policy on visas for former
Czechoslovak citizens has greatly improved; almost everyone can now
visit Czechoslovakia. The GOC’s media treatment of the US simply
reflects the US media’s treatment of Czechoslovakia. Johanes men-
tioned that, 1½ years ago, he complained about an article in the New
York Times attacking Husak (Gaulaiter Husak). In his two years here,
he has seen nothing positive about Czechoslovakia in the US press. Re
Helsinki, Johanes said that the GOC knows that problems exist in the
US, but they do not influence the GOC’s desire to improve relations.
A foreign policy requiring another state to take specific actions before
relations can be improved is childish; the GOC rejects such require-
ments. Other Western countries which value human rights have found
it possible to improve relations with Czechoslovakia. Why not the US?
The GOC does want a cultural exchanges agreement with the US, in
accord with the Helsinki Final Act. The GOC was told that the agree-
ment could not be signed before August, 1978 due to public opinion,
but Johanes wondered if the elections in November are also a factor.
2 On June 5, Ambassador Johanes met with Assistant Secretary for European Affairs
George Vest. Vest informed Johanes that the bilateral relations between the two govern-
ments were “characterized by differing perspectives on such issues as divided families
and dissidents” and that, because of their present state, no improvement was likely to
occur. On the claims/gold issue, Vest informed the Czechoslovak Ambassador that
“even if we had an agreed proposal ready to present, we would not now do so due to
the state of relations.” (Telegram 143296 to Prague, June 6; National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780237–0846)
