696 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 203. Memorandum of Conversation1 Alexandria, March 9, 1979, 7–8 p.m. SUBJECT President Carter’s Meeting with President Sadat PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President Herbert Hansell, Legal Adviser, Department of State William Quandt, NSC Staff Member President Anwar al-Sadat Muhammad Husni Mubarak, Vice President Mustafa Khalil, Prime Minister Lt. General Kamal Hasan Ali, Minister of Defense and War Production Hasan Kamil, Chief, Office of the President Butrus Butrus Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Hamid Abd al-Latif al-Sayeh, Minister of Economy, Economic Cooperation and Foreign Trade President Carter: My visit here and your reception of me and the reception shown by your people has been an inspiration to me and has been very reassuring. I am convinced that we cannot fail to give the people what they want. We recognize that in going to Jerusalem2 you started the whole process. You knew there will be divisions in the Arab world. Other Arab leaders have condemned you and this is not unprecedented. But whatever happens in the future, my life is bound to yours, and that of the United States to Egypt. We hope for success. It would be a tragedy if we failed. Success would be great for us. Prime Minister Khalil and others have had good talks with Secretary Vance. We understand your concerns. When I go to Israel, within the bounds of propriety, I’ll represent the Government of Egypt as I often did at Camp David. Then we would agree on our views, with some flexibility, and the results showed that we prevailed, because we gave Israel little things. I’ll leave you with the commitment to honor your concerns and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 16, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 3/1–11/79. Secret. The meeting took place at the Maamura Rest House. 2 See footnote 3, Document 4.
