International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 269 quotas (or fees) could reduce payments by $5 to $10 billion, depending on the stringency of the program. • Would constitute dramatic evidence of our determination to deal both with the trade deficit and with our energy problem. • Some argue that rationing is fairer means of inducing conservation than price increases. Con: • Rationing in the absence of a major supply interruption would be perceived as a drastic, and probably unnecessary step by the public. • Reduction in oil import availability could have a significant negative impact on economic growth. • Any rationing system is cumbersome and expensive administratively. • Revised rationing plan (and other contingency plans) is still in preparation. These require congressional approval after submission, and implementation of the plans is subject to a one-house veto. • Other steps, short of rationing, are available to cut back consumption. • No rationing system can be completely equitable. Hardships would be caused in certain sectors of our society. COMMENT: You have the legal authority to impose import quotas for balance of payments reasons. You also have the authority to impose gasoline rationing (subject to Congressional disapproval). None of your advisors recommends rationing at this time. All agree, however, that development of rationing and contingency plans (and analyses of import quotas or fees) should continue expeditiously. Continue plan preparation, but avoid rationing (all recommend)11 Proceed to develop rationing plan for immediate implementation 5. Expand CCC budget by $1.5 billion per year In the FY 1979 budget session on agriculture you decided to increase the CCC budget from $750 million to $1.5 billion.12 6. Expand Eximbank lending by about $4 billion This issue will be reviewed in detail in the Eximbank budget session on December 20 so will not be treated in this memo.13 11 Carter indicated his approval of this option. 12 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. 13 Carter wrote “$3.6 Total” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
