World Hunger and Food Policy
693
the past due to joint management arrangements and the consequent
lack of a single point man. There are strong reasons to strive for joint
domestic-international management but this may prove to be infea-
sible. A more precise definition of who will do what can probably be ar-
rived at during the process of drafting the PRM tasking memorandum.
D. Timeframe: There are several studies in progress now which bear
on this review, PRM–8 (end of July),7 AID (September 1), Brookings
(October 15).8 The conclusions of these studies should be digested be-
fore another is begun. Therefore, we would expect to issue the PRM in
late October for a study requiring several months.
II. A Role for Chip Carter
A. Chip Carter, following his father’s initiative, is anxious to get
started and do something about world hunger. He will be a valuable
asset after a policy is defined. However, until we have a policy, his ef-
forts should concentrate on drawing attention to the broad dimensions
of the problem, and stressing the notion of a world responsibility to
solve it.
B. Chip will need some staff assistance in whatever he undertakes.
Given the nature of his efforts, the best points of contact are probably in
the Office of the Assistant to the President for Public Liaison.
C. Specific activities might include:
—Attendance at public hearings by various interest groups.
—Travel as a concerned member of the “world community”.
—Sponsorship of an information clearing house.
D. Care must be taken so that Chip is not seen as a government
spokesman during the early stages. His exposure should give him cred-
ibility as a spokesman on the issue, and later, when we have a policy for
him to support, he will be an effective advocate.
III. A Focus of the Study
A. The concern of the President and Chip Carter is hunger. We
have learned through painful experience in this field that well meant
efforts to produce short term benefits (i.e., by trying to directly feed
people) can often produce counterproductive results. To avoid a “quick
fix” solution to an emotional and pressing issue, the study must be
broadened to include the full scope of international agricultural policy
and many central aspects of domestic agricultural policies so that an ef-
fective long-term policy can be developed. While the issue of world
7 Documentation on PRM 8, issued on January 21, is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
volume III, Foreign Economic Policy.
8 See footnotes 8 and 9, Document 216.
