274 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II tional human rights struggle. We must do it because that is the dynamic nature of this society; and we must do it because the Soviet Union accepts us only in this broader context of the international class struggle. As every Leninist knows, revolution cannot be exported. As every clearminded human rights supporter should know, human rights cannot be exported. Revolution and human rights thrive only on the domestic conditions and dynamics of a society. That does not, however, relieve either the Soviets or us of cheering for the social values and forces we prefer in the other’s society. And it obligates us to use our power—military, economic, political, and moral—in pursuit of our ideological ends with the greatest skill and pragmatism possible. There is no reason why the President cannot continue to talk about human rights as the backdrop for pragmatic conduct of our foreign policy. The establishment of an “agency” strikes as a very important tactic for extracting the President from the “exhortation and penalty” syndrome. Such an agency could take that role. But the President, if he is to avoid the reaction of cynicism in the country to his policy, must continue to talk about it, to relate it to our foreign commitments and to the East-West competition. Given our power, our values, and our choices, does it make sense to continue to defend South Korea? That is a fair question, and it can be answered, “yes” even if Park puts innocent people in jail. But the “yes” is never final. It must be answered again periodically, and the answer may be reversed. 83. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, October 21, 1977 SUBJECT Implementation of New Human Rights Legislation Title VII on human rights of Public Law 95-1182 raises certain questions that I believe should be considered by the Inter-Agency Group on 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 21, Human Rights Interagency Group V. No classification marking. Oxman sent a copy of the memorandum to Christopher under an October 28 covering memorandum and attached an October 29 letter thanking Bergsten for his memorandum, which Christopher signed. (Ibid.)
