International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
607
would be balanced by a statement of the US intent to reduce its account
deficit by following appropriate economic policies. Both statements
would be included in the communique to be issued after Ohira’s visit.
b. The two countries would agree on regular economic follow-up
discussions. These discussions would focus on quantitative trends in
Japan’s current accounts and imports of manufactures. We have made
clear to the Japanese that they will face damaging US counter-action if
these trends do not march in the right direction, i.e., if the trend goals
foreshadowed by the declaration are not fulfilled. (C)
c. A US-Japanese Wise Men’s Group, made up of distinguished
private citizens on each side, would be set up to advise you and the
Prime Minister about long-term economic trends and problems in the
US-Japanese relation. Mike Mansfield believes that advice from such a
group would make it easier for the Japanese to accept the kinds of
structural changes we want. (C)
3. Other Agreements would also be concluded during the Ohira
visit, in order to meet Japanese concerns—regarding US-Japanese agri-
cultural trade, energy research and development, and cooperation in
providing technical aid to Asian LDCs. (C)
State, Treasury, and STR have participated in developing this sce-
nario, which tracks the memo on US economic strategy toward Japan
that I sent you, after discussion with these agencies, some time back.4
The agreement with Japan described in paragraph 2 follows the pro-
posal that Mike Blumenthal made to you when he returned recently
from Japan.5 (C)
Underlying this scenario is a belief that the Japanese want to get
their current surplus down to manageable proportions, and are pre-
pared gradually to open up their market to foreign manufacturers. But
powerful domestic obstacles are involved; and it will be a matter of
years, at best, before the process is completed. So we need to create a
framework within which this process can work itself out, and to show
continuing progress in the meantime. That is the purpose of the pro-
posals described above. (C)
On the basis of talks on the Hill, I believe that these actions would
defuse Congressional protectionist pressures. Senator Bentsen and
Congressman Jones,6 two members of Congress much interested in
4 Apparently a reference to Document 203.
5 Blumenthal met with Carter on March 6; see footnote 6, Document 203. Blumen-
thal’s proposal is contained in the March 5 memorandum to Carter in which he reported
on his recent trip to China and Japan. Carter approved the further exploration of the pro-
posal on the copy of Blumenthal’s memorandum in the Carter Library, Records of the Of-
fice of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 122, 3/7/79 [2].
6 Representative James R. Jones (D–Oklahoma) was Chairman of the House Ways
and Means Committee task force on Japanese commercial practices.
