Non-Proliferation These countries are allies, have accepted NPT or equivalent obligations, and have large electric grids and advanced nuclear programs. Their investigation or pursuit of breeders and other advanced fuel cycle option is understandable. The proposed strategy involves private negotiations with these countries aimed at achieving a bargain that helps meet their wish for more predictable use of U.S. origin spent fuel, our wish to avoid precedents which could lead to premature spread of plutonium, and our mutual interest in an improved nonproliferation regime.7 In addition, the strategy seeks to reduce apparent discrimination by providing (i) for new benefits to those accepting NPT or equivalent obligations and (ii) for the possibility of additional countries joining the preferred group when their programs and nonproliferation assurances warrant.8 The highlights of the strategy are:9 1. To seek supplier and other support for (a) making NPT or equivalent full-scope safeguards (FSS) a condition of new supply commitments; (b) relating reprocessing and plutonium use to well defined, reasonably safe and limited, programs (breeders and advanced reactors) and deferring commitments to commercial thermal recycle; (c) an effective international plutonium storage (IPS) regime; and (d) enhanced cooperation in dealing with countries posing significant proliferation risks.10 2. To provide U.S. agreement for a period of years for the advanced countries (in EURATOM and Japan) to reprocess U.S. origin spent fuel and use the resulting plutonium in well defined breeder and advanced reactor programs. 3. To provide new benefits, including longer term and possibly up to “life-of-reactor” fuel assurance (LEU), to countries which accept NPT or equivalent FSS and do not otherwise demonstrably pose a significant proliferation risk.11 7 An unknown hand bracketed the first three lines of this paragraph in the left-hand margin. 8 Vance underlined the words “new benefits to” and wrote in the left-hand margin next to this paragraph “we move from sticks to carrots and back and forth, depending on what has not worked recently.” 9 See Tab A for details. [Footnote is in the original.] 10 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph an unknown hand wrote “Do tab on breeder thermal—Adv Reac.” 11 Vance bracketed the phrase “to countries which accept NPT or equivalent FSS and do not otherwise demonstrably pose a significant risk” and wrote in the left-hand margin “Who are these countries—I doubt they are the ones we should pay much attention to.” An unknown hand wrote “Korea, Yugoslavia, Rumania (politically important in NPT context).”
