872
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The international financing institutions’ soft windows are gener-
ally well managed and have a reputation for apolitical professionalism.
Our contributions to these institutions evoke larger total contributions
from other countries. The fact that these institutions are international
and disburse large resources enhances their influence on the receiving
countries’ economic policies.7
Bilateral aid has had substantial successes, e.g., in Korea and Tai-
wan. These successes took place at a time when the US provided large
resources and the receiving countries needed and welcomed US advice.
Neither condition now obtains in the same degree. The opportunities
for exerting policy leverage through US bilateral assistance programs
thus hinge on an increase in its scale and a close linkage between that
aid and the policies of the international lending agencies. US will-
ingness to exert bilateral pressure for economic reform and the recip-
ient country’s ability to yield to such pressure are now sharply
constrained.
Measuring the effectiveness of US aid in promoting political objec-
tives depends on the specific objectives involved. If aid is given as part
of a base rights negotiation, its effectiveness can be judged by whether
we do or don’t get the base, and at what price. But the effectiveness of
aid in advancing more general objectives, such as peace in the Middle
East, is more difficult to appraise: No one can be sure whether that
peace would be further removed if we had given less aid. The effec-
tiveness of aid in promoting good relations with the receiving country
is even more difficult to assess. The United States probably gets more
political credit from recipients for bilateral than for multilateral aid. But
it is hard to define whether, and if so how, this credit gets translated
into policies of benefit to the US. Countries’ gratitude tends to be
short-lived.8 Providing aid for generalized political purposes is partly
an act of faith—or of fear that things would be even worse without aid.
IV. Strategies
Although the funding levels discussed later in this paper treat both
bilateral and multilateral aid, the strategies presented below focus
largely on bilateral US assistance, since US influence over the policies of
international financial institutions is limited. The question of how best
to use this influence is being examined in a separate study of multi-
lateral aid strategies and funding levels being conducted by the Treas-
ury Department, in close consultation with the Congress.
7 Carter underlined these words and phrases in this paragraph: “international fi-
nancing institutions”; “well managed”; “larger”; “contributions”; “other countries”; and
“enhances their influence.”
8 Carter underlined the words “gratitude” and “short-lived” and wrote “amen” in
the margin adjacent to this sentence.
