ITEM 4. Relief of all Army, carbineer, police and secret service personnel from duty as sub-delegates, district inspectors, and in general from duty in any civil executive capacity whatsoever, in the plebiscitary territory; such functionaries to be replaced during the plebiscitary period by civil officials appointed by proper Chilean authority. ITEM 5. Relief, upon request of the Commission, of each and every public functionary in the plebiscitary territory, military, carbineer, police, secret service, or civil executive,58 who, in the judgment of the Commission, has used, is using, or pending the completion of plebiscitary operations shall use his position or powers in a manner designed to repress or prevent legitimate expression of views touching issues to be determined by the plebiscite; each functionary so relieved to be replaced by another appointed by proper Chilean authority. ITEM 6. Transfer from the plebiscitary territory of every relieved sub-delegate, district inspector, or other civil executive, who is a member of the military, carbineer, police or secret service personnel and is not a native of the plebiscitary territory.59 ITEM 7. Removal of all restrictions upon entering or leaving the plebiscitary territory that may be inconsistent with the free return, presence, or departure of persons claiming to be plebiscitary electors, and of such other persons as may desire to engage in any legitimate form of propaganda, publicity, or other form of electoral activity in the plebiscitary territory, in the interest of either of the two candidates for ultimate sovereignty; and like freedom for press representatives. This shall not be construed so as to preclude reasonable supervision and limitation by the Chilean Government in a manner and for a purpose not deemed, by the Commission, inconsistent with a fair plebiscite. ITEM 8. Removal of all restrictions upon travel within the plebiscitary territory, and modification of hotel and guest laws and regulations applicable in that territory so that such laws and regulations may not interfere with the freedom essential to a fair plebiscite. This shall not be construed so as to preclude reasonable police and sanitary regulations prescribed by the Chilean Government and not deemed, by the Commission, inconsistent with a fair plebiscite. ITEM 9. Establishment of equal opportunity and equal protection from molestation or interference for public meetings, parades, addresses, and other forms of legitimate public propaganda touching the plebiscite, as well as for legitimate private discussion of plebiscitary issues, in the plebiscitary territory, irrespective of whether the effort is made in the interest of Chile or
