North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 983 maintaining a dialogue and assuring the developing countries of our genuine interest in their problems. But so far we have been able to make only limited progress in getting the G–77 as a group to be more flexible. The third obstacle to reconciliation concerns our difficulty in persuading the Congress and more generally the public to contemplate seriously taking steps that seem to run so strongly against present U.S. conceptions of domestic and world order, and often seemingly against U.S. interests. Even when they may be in our interests, Congress is reluctant to spend funds for these purposes. I conclude from these considerations that we cannot reconcile our positions with those of the G–77 in the near future on most issues. But we must continue to engage in constructive discussion with them, since the process of discussion reinforces the moderate voices within the G–77. There are, moreover, some things which we can and should do which will be well received by the developing countries, and others which we could do if we thought it necessary in the interest of mollifying them. These actions are called “accommodating moves” in the material at Tab A and are pulled together in the summary introducing them. The G–77 can perhaps be persuaded over time to move their positions, so that accommodating moves may eventually involve a reconciliation. (We have already actually made a number of accommodating moves since you have taken office, and these are listed at Tab B.)4 The most important areas for us to focus on, in terms of substantive value to the developing countries and our own long-range interests, are trade and aid: —On trade, a) we should make our MTN offers on products of special interest to developing countries as generous as possible. We should also press advanced developing countries to make contributions to the MTN, and to encourage this we should be prepared to enrich the offers which we have already put on the table. Second, we should undertake not to impose countervailing duties against LDC export subsidies unless we can show injury to the domestic economy. Third, we should seek tight, internationally managed procedural rules around the European Community’s insistence on the introduction of “selective safeguard action” against individual countries. b) More generally, we should maintain our markets open to the products of developing countries. We actually have quite a good record here, although developing countries are reluctant to acknowledge it. They focus especially on textiles. Our policy toward sugar is of great, 4 Tab B, not attached, is an undated paper entitled “North/South Activities of the Carter Administration.”
