North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
983
maintaining a dialogue and assuring the developing countries of our
genuine interest in their problems. But so far we have been able to
make only limited progress in getting the G–77 as a group to be more
flexible.
The third obstacle to reconciliation concerns our difficulty in per-
suading the Congress and more generally the public to contemplate se-
riously taking steps that seem to run so strongly against present U.S.
conceptions of domestic and world order, and often seemingly against
U.S. interests. Even when they may be in our interests, Congress is re-
luctant to spend funds for these purposes.
I conclude from these considerations that we cannot reconcile our
positions with those of the G–77 in the near future on most issues. But
we must continue to engage in constructive discussion with them, since
the process of discussion reinforces the moderate voices within the
G–77. There are, moreover, some things which we can and should do
which will be well received by the developing countries, and others
which we could do if we thought it necessary in the interest of molli-
fying them. These actions are called “accommodating moves” in the
material at Tab A and are pulled together in the summary introducing
them. The G–77 can perhaps be persuaded over time to move their po-
sitions, so that accommodating moves may eventually involve a recon-
ciliation. (We have already actually made a number of accommodating
moves since you have taken office, and these are listed at Tab B.)4
The most important areas for us to focus on, in terms of substan-
tive value to the developing countries and our own long-range in-
terests, are trade and aid:
—On trade, a) we should make our MTN offers on products of spe-
cial interest to developing countries as generous as possible. We should
also press advanced developing countries to make contributions to the
MTN, and to encourage this we should be prepared to enrich the offers
which we have already put on the table. Second, we should undertake
not to impose countervailing duties against LDC export subsidies
unless we can show injury to the domestic economy. Third, we should
seek tight, internationally managed procedural rules around the Euro-
pean Community’s insistence on the introduction of “selective safe-
guard action” against individual countries.
b) More generally, we should maintain our markets open to the
products of developing countries. We actually have quite a good record
here, although developing countries are reluctant to acknowledge it.
They focus especially on textiles. Our policy toward sugar is of great,
4 Tab B, not attached, is an undated paper entitled “North/South Activities of the
Carter Administration.”
