300 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 are making a key issue over their demand that the agreed steps be conducted with no publicity, although they are well aware that leaks are possible. The package of technical steps, however, is now virtually complete, and Mr. Solomon saw no requirement for a U.S. representative in Europe. The SCC discussed this and agreed that initial followup on the package of economic steps could be handled by cable, but that it would be desirable to have a senior representative in Europe to be available for close consultations and to deal with the kinds of questions which are certain to arise during the announcement and debate of economic sanctions in the UN, which will start about next Wednesday.3 The SCC recommended that a follow-up cable be prepared by Treasury and State seeking final implementation of the agreed economic steps, but that, unless circumstances warrant otherwise, we would plan to send someone to Europe on about next Wednesday to follow through and deal with technical questions associated with Chapter VII sanctions. All agreed Mr. Solomon would be the most appropriate candidate.4 (C) 2. UN Sanctions. The President wants the allies to begin to impose sanctions at the time when the sanctions are initially requested at the UN, probably in mid-week.5 Secretary Vance said that the Europeans were planning to implement the technical steps on oil, bank deposits and the like; many of these were already being implemented. He wished to raise with the President the broader subject of when and how our allies can implement Charter VII sanctions. The list of the sanctions which we would request is still not fixed. Ambassador McHenry noted that it would be far preferable to have the UN resolution “emerge” 3 December 26. 4 Carter approved the item with a checkmark. On Sitrep #102 by the Iran Working Group, December 23, Turner circled a paragraph on economic sanctions and underlined the clause that states that sanctions would “mean major difficulties and dislocation in the Iranian economy,” and the clause that notes that the effect of sanctions would be “as much psychological and political” since Iran’s economy was “fairly resilient.” In the margin he wrote that “this is becoming a key issue—was debated by SCC Sat [December 22]. This formulation is poor—the 2 underlined portions are almost contradictory—we should attempt to help here.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81M00919R, Executive Registry Subject Files (1976–1979), Box 14, Folder 13: Iran) 5 On December 21, Carter announced his intention to ask for an early meeting of the Security Council to impose international economic sanctions on Iran. He also quoted part of a Christmas carol written by Henry Longfellow in 1864 to express his desire for peace and goodwill. (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 2277–2278) In telegram 330500 to USUN, December 22, the Department transmitted the text of a letter to the President of the Security Council requesting “that the Security Council meet at an early date to consider the measures which should be taken to induce Iran to comply with its international obligations.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, UN and Security Council)
