to certain of the paragraphs in the Article as originally drafted or to a
proposal for the signing of a Protocol or Exchange of notes dealing with
these matters at the same time that the Treaty is signed. The Department
hopes to be able to instruct you definitely in regard to this matter at an early
date. Pending the receipt of further instructions in regard to Article VII you
may, in your discretion, either renew the negotiations in regard to that
Article in respect of the two paragraphs which are hereinabove considered,
reserving a right to make suggestions in regard to the above-mentioned
matters after the receipt of further instructions, or, entirely suspend
negotiations in regard to Article VII, in either event explaining to the
Austrian negotiators in so far as you may deem it to be advisable the reason
for your action.
Article VIII. This Government desires that the words “internal taxes,” be
inserted in the seventh line of Article VIII, after the word “to.” This
amendment also was made during the negotiations with Germany. The
Article will then read:
“The nationals and merchandise of each High Contracting Party
within the territories of the other shall receive the same treatment
as nationals and merchandise of the country with regard to
internal taxes, transit duties, charges in respect to warehousing
and other facilities and the amount of drawbacks and bounties.”
The Article as herein amended is included in the treaties signed with
Hungary, Salvador and Esthonia as well as in the Treaty with Germany.
Articles VIII and XIII. The Austrian experts seem to be under the
impression that Article VIII is inconsistent with Article XIII in that the
former provides for national treatment with respect to transit duties and the
latter provides that persons and goods in transit shall not be subjected to any
transit duties. This apparent inconsistency will doubtless disappear when it
is explained to the Austrian experts that Article VIII relates to goods
imported into the United States or Austria and Article XIII relates to goods
or persons moving through the territory of either High Contracting Party to
territory beyond.
