3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
211
raised the question of the OAU’s seeking to mediate and whether there
was anything that anyone could do with Ethiopia that would be
helpful. He also raised the question of how the Nigerians could be
helpful in working out a ceasefire acceptable to both sides. Dobrynin
did not think that any outside intervention would be useful. He said
that although an autonomous solution for the Ogaden was a reasonable
basis for a settlement, the Somalis want to remain in place and the Ethi-
opians’ position was that Somalia should first withdraw. The Secretary
asked about the possibility of greater restraint on what is furnished to
the Ethiopians. Dobrynin replied that the level of supplies had not
reached the level formerly supplied to the Somalis. He said that the
problem was that the Ethiopians did not have enough trained people to
use the material they had received. Dobrynin made it clear that, in his
opinion at least, it would be shortsighted for the Soviet Union to send
technicians or military advisers. He cited the experience of the Soviet
Union and Egypt as a case in point.
4. Rhodesia—The Secretary filled in Dobrynin on the Anglo-
American initiative on Rhodesia, saying that the UN representative
might go to London first and then to Africa to consult about internal se-
curity problems and what should be done during the transition period
with the Rhodesian army and the Liberation Forces in setting up a secu-
rity force.
55.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, October 22, 1977
SUBJECT
US-Soviet Relations
PARTICIPANTS
US
[USSR]
The Secretary
Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin
Marshall D. Shulman
Ambassador Dobrynin came in at his request, saying he had some-
thing to present which would be useful. It turned out to be a non-paper
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 3, CV–Dobrynin, 10/22/77. Secret. Drafted by Shulman on October 25. The meeting
took place at the Department of State.
