3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 235 63. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, November 29, 1977 SUBJECT Middle East PARTICIPANTS US USSR The Secretary Mikhail Solomentsev, Chairman Marshall D. Shulman of RSFSR Council of Ministers, Candidate Member of CPSU Politburo Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin Meeting in the Secretary’s office before a luncheon in honor of Solomentsev, Dobrynin expressed the hope that the US would not take unilateral action with respect to developments in the Middle East; rather he hoped the US and USSR could move ahead together. He said the Soviet Union would welcome a US representative in Moscow on December 5 to discuss future courses of action in the Middle East. He informed the Secretary that he had not yet received any definite word on how the Soviets would respond to the invitation to the talks being organized in Cairo. The Secretary told Dobrynin that we had delayed our announcement of US participation in the Cairo meeting, but that we would now proceed to do so. He proposed to indicate that we would have a representative at the expert level. We are weighing the intention of having our ambassador in Cairo serve in this capacity, although this would not be announced at the present time. The UN Secretary General had informed us that he would name Gen. Siilasvuo2 as an observer at the Cairo meeting. (In translating the foregoing for Solomentsev, Dobrynin commented favorably on the fact that both the US and the UN might be represented by people who are already in the area.) Dobrynin acknowledged that the Soviets had recently held talks with a PLO official and with the Syrian Foreign Minister; he said he hoped to have further information to report on these talks soon. 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 3, CV–Solomentsev, Dobrynin, 11/29/77. Secret. Drafted by Shulman; approved by Anderson on December 6. The meeting took place in Vance’s office. 2 Ensio Siilasvuo, Finnish general and former Commander of the Finnish contingent to the U.N. peace-keeping force in Cyprus.
