922 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX However, he was convinced that the basic elements of agreement on autonomy had been hammered out at Camp David and that it should be possible to reach agreement on how to implement those elements, so long as the whole agreement is treated as an entity and no effort is made to separate it into various “chapters”. Begin went on to say that he agreed with Sadat that their relationship had greatly improved, beginning with their meeting in Washington the night before the Treaty was signed (March 25). He then reviewed at some length the ups and downs in their personal rapport. He seemed both pleased and somewhat bemused by the fact that Sadat and he were now able to disagree sharply about the issues without it affecting their friendship. 8. After some further discussion of Sadat’s personality and their increased ability to communicate with one another, Begin again said that since we had now heard both from him and Sadat strong objections to our proposed course of action, the whole idea of a US sponsored resolution should be dropped. He counted on Secretary Vance’s statements to Ambassador Evron and to Senator Stone that the Kuwaiti resolution would be vetoed if put forward. He said that we should continue to work energetically in the working groups and plenary on the various autonomy issues and put aside all UN action. He then asked me what I would recommend to you when I returned. 9. I told him I would report faithfully his views and Sadat’s to you in detail, along with the suggestions from both of them that we abandon our resolution option. However, I could not say that I would recommend a change in our position on the resolution. I left Begin in no doubt that that position still stands and that I could only assure him that I knew you would give careful thought to his views and to Sadat’s. Begin then reverted to the subject of his relationship with Sadat, describing in some detail their discussion in El Arish, and more recently in Alexandria, about Jerusalem. He took considerable satisfaction in the fact that in Alexandria he had been able to explain in detail the Israeli view of the Jerusalem problem without exacerbating their personal relationship, and that indeed it was after Begin’s explanation that Sadat had insisted that Begin and he use first names with one another (I have now heard this account from both Sadat and Begin. Sadat sounds as if he believes an arrangement on Jerusalem is nearly within reach; Begin on the other hand talks about their positions as being far apart but takes pleasure in fact that they can be frankly discussed without rancor.) 10. Begin also raised with me the subject of oil supply, describing the original commitment Sadat had given him in Washington which was covered in your letter.6 He said that the Israelis were now anxious 6 See Document 236.
