196  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
This is the perennial question, how much is enough? Defense 
approaches the problem by aggregation of specific programs, infra-
structure and overhead aimed at fulfilling your strategic guidance, and 
the services’ missions. OMB’s fiscal guidance is based on a judgment 
of how much we ought to spend in comparison with other federal pro-
grams and where the “fat” lies in the Defense budget. I want to give 
you a third perspective: what level of U.S. defense effort is needed to 
deal with the strategic, foreign policy, and domestic political effects 
of the continuing Soviet buildup—­particularly in light of your deter-
mination to aggressively pursue improved relations and arms control 
arrangements with the Soviet Union.
I am assuming that the seven alternative levels proposed by OMB, 
ranging from $114 B TOA to $136 B all encompass worthwhile pro-
grams and that the question is not waste but how large an effort we 
want to make. I also understand that the real range of choice involves 
about $5 B out of a potential budget of $125 B to $130 B—­about 4 per-
cent of the budget.
The Soviet Buildup
The CIA estimate of Soviet defense spending which is commonly 
accepted as a comparable index of Soviet capability does not show a 
crash Soviet program. Rather it shows a steady average annual increase 
of 3–4% in real terms over the last decade and more. This growth is evi-
dent in nearly all parts of the Soviet military establishment, including 
investment.
The compound effect of this level of effort has been impressive:
—[4 lines not declassified] They have erased their strategic inferior-
ity of a decade ago but show no sign of slackening efforts.
—They have reequipped their ground forces facing NATO, includ-
ing a new armored personnel carrier, new self-­propelled artillery, and 
now a new tank.
—They have modernized their tactical air forces in Europe, sig-
nificantly narrowing the disparity against them in qualitative factors 
(range and payload) while retaining a substantial advantage in num-
bers of aircraft.
—They have moved their navy to sea, challenging us for control 
of the Mediterranean, conducting intense surveillance and operations 
throughout the Atlantic and in the Far East.
During the same period, US defense spending declined in real 
terms at a steady 4% rate from the wartime peak as the US disengaged 
from Vietnam. Moreover, the high rate of expenditure during the Viet-
nam war did not find its way into investment but was eaten up by 
combat operations. The result at the end of the war was low readiness, a 
backlog of major maintenance and obsolete equipment. Finally, in FY 76
