March 27–December 31, 1979 1041 by you. (Evron himself said that a written message would probably not be helpful, given Begin’s sensitivity and inclination to pick it apart word by word.) What is your guidance? 320. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, undated Subject Following up on Prince Bandar’s Approach The Issue Prince Bandar saw the President secretly on December 52 and made a two-part proposal: —In return for a U.S. statement of his policy toward the Middle East along lines he specified, The Saudis would be willing to lift the boycott, provide recognition to Israel, engage in a comprehensive regional economic plan (with a figure of up to $20 billion being mentioned) and assure a freeze of oil prices for a couple of years. —In return, the U.S. would make a statement on its policy (which Bandar apparently had someone draft) in which the U.S. would (a) state its commitment to protect the integrity and security of Israel within [approximately] her [pre-1967] secure3 borders, (b) call for an Israeli end to military occupation with safeguards in the context of Arab 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 68, Saudi Arabia: 12/79–1/80. Secret; Eyes Only. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Cy. J.” 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Bandar in the Oval Office from 2:04 p.m. to 2:31 p.m. on December 5. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. In his personal diary for December 5, Carter provided the following account: “I met with Prince Bandar, who brought a message from Crown Prince Fahd. They were eager to pursue the Mideast peace settlement by establishing a Marshall Plan-type fund of about $20 billion, recognizing and lifting the embargo against Israel, reestablishing ties with Egypt provided Israel would carry out the spirit of the Camp David Accords and pledge to take care of the Palestinians and withdraw from occupied territories. They made it plain they were not talking about all occupied territory.” Commenting on the entry in the published version of the personal diary, Carter wrote “the Saudis were inclined to tell me what I wanted to hear, but this was a profoundly important offer.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 376) 3 An unknown individual added the handwritten word “secure” here. The words “approximately” and “pre-1967” also bear handwritten brackets.
