we are by a natural evolution solving our problems of economic and social
justice.
THE NEGRO
These developments have brought about a very remarkable improvement in
the condition of the negro race. Gradually, but surely, with the almost
universal sympathy of those among whom they live, the colored people are
working out their own destiny. I firmly believe that it is better for all
concerned that they should be cheerfully accorded their full constitutional
rights, that they should be protected from all of those impositions to which,
from their position, they naturally fall a prey, especially from the crime of
lynching, and that they should receive every encouragement to become full
partakers in all the blessings of our common American citizenship.
CIVIL SERVICE
The merit system has long been recognized as the correct basis for
employment in our civil service. I believe that first, second, and third class
postmasters, and without covering in the present membership the field force
of prohibition enforcement, should be brought within the classified service
by statute law. Otherwise the Executive order of one administration is
changed by the Executive order of another administration, and little real
progress is made. Whatever its defects, the merit system is certainly to be
preferred to the spoils system.
DEPARTMENTAL REORGANIZATION
One way to save public money would be to pass the pending bill for the
reorganization of the various departments. This project has been pending
for some time, and has had the most careful consideration of experts and the
thorough study of a special congressional committee. This legislation is
vital as a companion piece to the Budget law. Legal authority for a thorough
reorganization of the Federal structure with some latitude of action to the
Executive in the rearrangement of secondary functions would make for
continuing economy in the shift of Government activities which must
follow every change in a developing country. Beyond this many of the
independent agencies of the Government must be placed under responsible
