Arms Control and Disarmament  1331
The President then expressed real distress that releases apparently 
approved by the Department of Defense should have led up to the pro­
test lodged by the Soviets. He called Secretary Quarles expressing his 
unhappiness with regard to these approved releases, and apparently 
Secretary Quarles said he would institute a very thorough review as to 
what had led up to them. I had told the President I did not think there 
was any security violation involved but that I thought the release of the 
type of information which had caused the difficulties should be care­
fully reviewed with the Department of State and the President in the 
future because of the international implications involved.
I have today sent to General Goodpaster a memorandum, with 
attachments, which showed that the whole “Fail Safe” concept had 
been made public as early as November 1957.
Christian A. Herter
Enclosures:
Three draft resolutions.
315.	 Record of Telephone Conversation Between Lodge and John 
Foster Dulles1
April 20, 1958, 12:07 p.m.
The Sec. said he was having a meeting on the Soviet item. He 
said we are disposed to feel here that we ought to follow this up by 
positive action of our own which would involve a resolution by the 
SC calling on the parties to accept the principle of an Arctic zone 
along the lines of our proposal of last fall and to have the US, the 
Soviet Union and others involved designate technical people to study 
how to carry it out. Sec. said it seemed quite obvious that the SU was 
launching a new major propaganda theme. The Soviets may not have 
anticipated the rapidity of their defeat but they knew, they were not 
that stupid, that their resolution would be defeated in the SC. The Sec. 
said the theme would constantly reappear. It was present in Khru­
shchev’s latest note—how we were sending these planes, etc. The Sec. 
said they can make big propaganda out of it. The Sec. said we could 
say surely this is a dangerous situation and the only sensible thing to 
1 Source: Follow-­on to defeat of Soviet resolution. No classification marking. 2 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
