Arms Control and Disarmament 1553 420. Letter From McCone to John Foster Dulles1 Washington, February 2, 1959 Dear Foster: With further reference to our letter of December 23, 1958, addressed to the Under Secretary of State and signed by Acting Chairman Vance, and to the press release of January 5, 1959, by the President’s Science Advisory Committee, and to the report of January 7, 1959, by the Panel on Seismic Improvement chaired by Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, the Atomic Energy Commission believes that it should convey to you at this time our views with respect to the position of the U.S. in the negotiations now in progress in Geneva. There seems to be complete agreement within scientific circles in this country that the detection system proposed last summer by the Confer­ ence of Experts in Geneva is inadequate in the light of data subsequently developed from the HARDTACK series of tests in Nevada in October. However, there is a difference of opinion among informed scientists as to whether the system can be improved sufficiently by additional, better and different types of stations and instrumentations so that it can with assurance detect and identify nuclear explosions of the proportions indi­ cated by the Geneva Conference of Experts in their Report. The improvements recently suggested by the Panel on Seismic Improvement unquestionably would improve the capabilities of the system, but many of these proposed improvements are as yet only the­ oretical. The Panel listed ‘‘four promising approaches” that are “within the present limits of technology” and pointed out that vigorous research in seismology is indicated. With respect to one of the recommendations, namely, placing seismometers in holes at depths of several thousand feet, it said: “The method offers possibilities for improving the detectability of small signals by a factor of the order of ten, provided that the technolog­ ical problems of operating instruments at the required depths can be solved.” (Underscoring supplied).2 Also, the Panel made, inter alia, the following statements: “It is noted that the data on nuclear Shots used in these estimates was from Rainier and HARDTACK II and thus has all the limitations of that small sample of nuclear test conditions. The PSI has not concerned 1 Source: U.S. should not agree to cessation of tests that cannot be reliably detected. Secret. 4 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/2–259. 2 Printed here as italics.
