September 18–December 16, 1978
305
ident wants to move on the West Bank and Gaza. He sees the two sets of
issues as interrelated. He urged the Egyptians through their contacts
with Palestinians to start to encourage Palestinians to sit down and ne-
gotiate, even without Jordan. Perhaps there could be Egyptian, Israeli,
and Palestinian talks at a minimum.
Mr. al-Baz stated that the Egyptians are already in contact with
moderate Palestinians. Some have come to Cairo and seen Sadat. They
have come from the West Bank and from Gaza. The Egyptian assess-
ment is that the situation will improve for Palestinians participating in
the negotiations as time goes by. It is hard now for them to participate
openly, but they believe that it will become easier. The opposition to
the Camp David agreements has just about reached its peak. Secondly,
the attitude of King Hussein will probably improve in the next two to
three months. The United States and Saudi Arabia can influence them
to be more positive. Hussein will realize that he has no other good alter-
native. More Palestinians will want to accept the agreements on a de
facto basis and will respond to the argument of trying to improve the
agreements from within. Hussein wants to try to improve the frame-
works to justify his participation. This is the purpose of his questions.
He can then justify joining the talks. The people from the West Bank
and Gaza who have talked to the Egyptians think that it will take an-
other two or three months for the situation to ripen. The people in Gaza
are more willing to participate than those in the West Bank. They feel
closer to Egypt and their interests are tied more to Egypt. Jordan has
little influence in Gaza, whereas it has great influence in the West Bank.
Some moderates in the PLO leadership have even tried to discuss the
positive aspects of the Camp David agreements, but the PLO leader-
ship has overruled this approach and their attitude will remain nega-
tive for some time. Some in the West Bank and Gaza are intimidated by
the extremists outside the area.
The President said that he would appreciate receiving suggestions
on what might be done before the Palestinians and the Jordanians join
the negotiations and what could be done if Jordan did not participate.
Minister Boutros Ghali said that we should find some way to get prac-
tical advantages to the Palestinians quickly even before the conclusion
of the peace treaty with Israel. Dr. Brzezinski noted that military rule
could not be brought to an end before some Palestinian authority had
been formed. This would require talks. Minister Boutros Ghali agreed,
but said that some steps short of ending military rule should be found,
such as some redeployment of Israeli forces. Dr. Brzezinski added that
there might be a lifting of the ban on political meetings, but that Pales-
tinian participation would be important to produce “partenaire val-
able” to whom authority could be bequeathed.
President Carter said that we are as interested in the West Bank and
Gaza as in the peace treaty negotiations, but we do not want to see the
