Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 There may in fact have been something to the personal rapport established between Brezhnev and Nixon, particularly since after the first meeting there were no major divisive issues on the agenda. The assumptions of “detente” were under fire, however, when Nixon resigned a little over a month after his July meeting with Brezhnev. It was the concern that the relationship might rapidly deteriorate after Watergate that led Ford to a quick meeting in Vladivostok.33 Another purpose of that meeting was to salvage the SALT discussion which had more or less stalemated in the Nixon summit. Ford picked up an easy personal relationship, helped in part by the “success” of reaching an agreement at Vladivostok. The last “summit” was the Ford-Brezhnev meeting [in] Helsinki, it lasted only a few hours.34 By then Brezhnev was beginning to show signs of wear; he was particularly fatigued by the round of meetings at Helsinki and not pleased by what seemed a western success in the speeches, publicity and documents. A few general observations on Summits may be in order: 1. There is little to be gained by philosophical discourse or ideological debate with the Soviet leaders; they are not psychologically confident enough to engage at the philosophical level as the Chinese do; in particular, trying to debate rules of conduct becomes frustrating because of the gap in perceptions;35 2. Concrete issues, however, are more easily resolved but only if they have been well prepared and the Soviets do not have to contend with surprises that have not been aired by the collective leadership; 3. Soviet leaders are quite sensitive to their personal treatment; they are particularly concerned over any slights reflecting the inferiority of the USSR. 4. Meeting the “people” is of little interest to the Soviets. Their preoccupation is with those who have the power of decision (this, incidentally, is why Congressional delegations do so poorly in the USSR); 5. There is no basis for “personal trust”; the Soviet system breeds power struggles; it is unlikely they would trust foreigners if they do not trust their own colleagues; expecting western leaders to act against their class or national interest would subject a Soviet leader to ridicule, if not worse, in the politburo;
