Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
621
There may in fact have been something to the personal rapport es-
tablished between Brezhnev and Nixon, particularly since after the first
meeting there were no major divisive issues on the agenda. The as-
sumptions of “detente” were under fire, however, when Nixon re-
signed a little over a month after his July meeting with Brezhnev. It was
the concern that the relationship might rapidly deteriorate after Water-
gate that led Ford to a quick meeting in Vladivostok.33 Another purpose
of that meeting was to salvage the SALT discussion which had more or
less stalemated in the Nixon summit. Ford picked up an easy personal
relationship, helped in part by the “success” of reaching an agreement
at Vladivostok.
The last “summit” was the Ford-Brezhnev meeting [in] Helsinki, it
lasted only a few hours.34 By then Brezhnev was beginning to show
signs of wear; he was particularly fatigued by the round of meetings at
Helsinki and not pleased by what seemed a western success in the
speeches, publicity and documents.
A few general observations on Summits may be in order:
1. There is little to be gained by philosophical discourse or ideolog-
ical debate with the Soviet leaders; they are not psychologically confi-
dent enough to engage at the philosophical level as the Chinese do; in
particular, trying to debate rules of conduct becomes frustrating be-
cause of the gap in perceptions;35
2. Concrete issues, however, are more easily resolved but only if
they have been well prepared and the Soviets do not have to contend
with surprises that have not been aired by the collective leadership;
3. Soviet leaders are quite sensitive to their personal treatment;
they are particularly concerned over any slights reflecting the inferi-
ority of the USSR.
4. Meeting the “people” is of little interest to the Soviets. Their pre-
occupation is with those who have the power of decision (this, inciden-
tally, is why Congressional delegations do so poorly in the USSR);
5. There is no basis for “personal trust”; the Soviet system breeds
power struggles; it is unlikely they would trust foreigners if they do not
trust their own colleagues; expecting western leaders to act against
their class or national interest would subject a Soviet leader to ridicule,
if not worse, in the politburo;
33 See footnote 5, Document 2.
34 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XVI, Soviet Union, August 1974–December
1976, Documents 171–174.
35 In the right-hand margin next to this point and the next six points, the President
placed a checkmark.
