66 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Israel. The challenge at Camp David is to find a formula part way between the PLO’s position and the Begin plan that Hussein and reputable West Bankers can be brought to swallow. 5. What West Bankers would settle for. Given the bitterness and frustration engendered by 11 years of occupation, they would be powerfully attracted by the prospect of an end to the occupation. Bona fide moderate West Bank leaders cannot and will not act alone: the key to their participation isn’t Hussein’s participation, something that Dayan reportedly realizes. Thus, the best way for Sadat to make headway on the Palestinian problem is to insist he cannot make a separate peace in Sinai and to maintain he must have enough to persuade Hussein to take the plunge thereby also engaging moderate Palestinians in the occupied territories. 6. West Bankers would assume that Hussein would not be willing to join negotiations unless he was certain of obtaining Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and restoring an official Arab presence in Jerusalem. This would give them confidence and enable them to counter radical criticism. 7. The most sensitive burning issue is settlements. A halt to further settlements would have a great positive impact for it would demonstrate concretely the peace process can work in Palestinians’ interest. Withdrawal is also a sine qua non. Although West Bankers could reluctantly be brought to accept adjustments in the 1967 lines, this fundamental point would have to be presented in terms consistent with Resolution 242. Stress should be put on mutually acceptable modifications (perhaps lines could be extended somewhat in the north and south in order to permit adjustments elsewhere). Refugee return or family reunions with de facto Israeli controls would also be a powerful endorsement to participate, because it would allow local Palestinians to demonstrate they were acting for the benefit of expatriates as well. On sovereignty, we believe moderate West Bankers would reluctantly accept a limited form of self-determination whereby at the end of an interim period they would vote to ratify a link with Jordan. They (and we assume Hussein) would not accept Israel’s position that the question of sovereignty can be discussed at the end of the interim period thereby permitting an Israeli veto over any change in the interim regime. They remember Begin’s categoric statements about no foreign sovereignty in the West Bank and, in the absence of flexibility, the whole exercise could come to grief on this issue. 8. On security arrangements, West Bankers are pragmatic. After 11 years of living with Israelis they recognize Israel has legitimate concerns and are willing to accept an IDF presence for the interim period and perhaps beyond as long as their minimal requirements outlined above are met.
