66
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Israel. The challenge at Camp David is to find a formula part way be-
tween the PLO’s position and the Begin plan that Hussein and repu-
table West Bankers can be brought to swallow.
5. What West Bankers would settle for. Given the bitterness and
frustration engendered by 11 years of occupation, they would be pow-
erfully attracted by the prospect of an end to the occupation. Bona fide
moderate West Bank leaders cannot and will not act alone: the key to
their participation isn’t Hussein’s participation, something that Dayan
reportedly realizes. Thus, the best way for Sadat to make headway on
the Palestinian problem is to insist he cannot make a separate peace in
Sinai and to maintain he must have enough to persuade Hussein to
take the plunge thereby also engaging moderate Palestinians in the oc-
cupied territories.
6. West Bankers would assume that Hussein would not be willing
to join negotiations unless he was certain of obtaining Israeli with-
drawal from the West Bank and restoring an official Arab presence in
Jerusalem. This would give them confidence and enable them to
counter radical criticism.
7. The most sensitive burning issue is settlements. A halt to further
settlements would have a great positive impact for it would demon-
strate concretely the peace process can work in Palestinians’ interest.
Withdrawal is also a sine qua non. Although West Bankers could reluc-
tantly be brought to accept adjustments in the 1967 lines, this funda-
mental point would have to be presented in terms consistent with Reso-
lution 242. Stress should be put on mutually acceptable modifications
(perhaps lines could be extended somewhat in the north and south in
order to permit adjustments elsewhere). Refugee return or family re-
unions with de facto Israeli controls would also be a powerful endorse-
ment to participate, because it would allow local Palestinians to dem-
onstrate they were acting for the benefit of expatriates as well. On
sovereignty, we believe moderate West Bankers would reluctantly ac-
cept a limited form of self-determination whereby at the end of an in-
terim period they would vote to ratify a link with Jordan. They (and we
assume Hussein) would not accept Israel’s position that the question of
sovereignty can be discussed at the end of the interim period thereby
permitting an Israeli veto over any change in the interim regime. They
remember Begin’s categoric statements about no foreign sovereignty in
the West Bank and, in the absence of flexibility, the whole exercise
could come to grief on this issue.
8. On security arrangements, West Bankers are pragmatic. After 11
years of living with Israelis they recognize Israel has legitimate con-
cerns and are willing to accept an IDF presence for the interim period
and perhaps beyond as long as their minimal requirements outlined
above are met.
