Bolivia  141
leader of the dominant party in Bolivia. Although he enjoys widespread 
approval, his authority rests heavily on organized labor—­a vociferous 
minority which has been the standard bearer and principal beneficiary 
of social and political change. Siles has demonstrated considerable skill 
in consolidating his position by taking advantage of the struggle for con-
trol of the labor movement between rival leftist labor leaders Lechin and 
Sanjines, with the latter providing influential support for Siles. However, 
Sanjines’ checkered and opportunistic background, including past associ-
ations with Communism, gives cause for some concern as to the reliability 
of his support. Further, some of Siles’ labor support will almost certainly 
be lost as he proceeds to apply the austerity measures necessary to his pro-
gram. Nevertheless, we believe that with continued U.S. aid the chances 
are somewhat better than even that the present moderate regime will, bar-
ring Siles’ death or resignation, survive until the expiration of his term in 
1960. The chief threat to the regime is the possible loss of Siles’ leadership 
since there is no indication of a strong moderate MNR successor.
3. Either a deterioration in the economic situation or too severe 
austerity would probably unite the labor movement against Siles. If 
labor unrest led to riots and violence on a large scale, the government 
probably could not preserve order. In any case, the resulting political 
turmoil would greatly improve the prospects for the assumption of 
control by a leftist labor regime and would enhance the influence of the 
small but militant Communist groups.
DISCUSSION
BACKGROUND
4. Bolivia has some potential for agricultural development and pos-
sesses sizeable petroleum resources which are beginning to be exploited. 
However, development has been and will continue to be hampered 
by great social and geographical obstacles. Hence Bolivia is today an 
exceedingly poor country; its standard of living is the lowest in Latin 
America, except for Haiti. Mining, principally of tin, is still the backbone 
of Bolivia’s money economy and provides the bulk of foreign exchange. 
Most of Bolivia’s three and one-­half million people are Indians. They are 
largely illiterate and are engaged in subsistence agriculture.2
5. The dominant political force in Bolivia is the government party, 
the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement (MNR), which came to power 
in 1952 through a revolution. The new regime under the presidency of 
Victor Paz Estenssoro stripped the old ruling group of power in favor of 
labor and middle class groups. The principal tin mines were nationalized 
and large landholdings expropriated. Civilian militias were organized 
as a counterbalance to the army, the political role of which was sharply 
2 Agriculture and cattle raising employ about 64 percent of the population but con-
tribute only slightly over 27 percent of GNP. [Footnote in the source text.]
