Non-Proliferation
793
It is for these reasons that I—as well as the Department of State,
ACDA, the CEQ and the Domestic Council—strongly recommend that
you either zero out the Clinch River budget item or make a much more
meaningful cut in the program than ERDA contemplates. The funding
level they have recommended in no way slows the heart of the Clinch
River program and in fact entails a $41 million increase in spending over
FY ’77. I submit that this will not be seen as a serious action on our part by the
Germans, the French, the Brazilians, the Pakistanis or the Japanese.
At the same time, the course of action I am advocating does not re-
quire any concrete sacrifice in our domestic energy situation. If either
PRM–152 or the breeder program review3 indicate that the Clinch River
Reactor is not inimical to our efforts in the proliferation field or is essen-
tial to our domestic energy needs (both extremely unlikely), then a
budget supplemental can be sent to Congress in plenty of time for action before
the beginning of the new fiscal year, with no interruption in the program.
At your request I will be forwarding to you first thing tomorrow, a
paper on what we can do in regard to international restraints with the
hope of getting other nations to join in our efforts. By far the most potent
option available to us is exactly this one: to clearly tell the rest of the world that
we consider the dangers of proliferation seriously enough to halt for the time
being our own progress toward commercialization of the breeder by stopping
or dramatically slowing the first big step—further work on the Clinch River
Reactor.4
2 See Document 317.
3 See Document 337.
4 In his memoirs, Carter wrote “My first veto” of a congressional bill was a “$6 bil-
lion authorization bill for energy research,” including “$80 million for commencing con-
struction of a nuclear breeder reactor on the Clinch River near Oak Ridge, Tennessee. Be-
cause it was enormously expensive and unnecessary, and would open up a new and
dangerous plutonium industry in our country, I was determined to prevent construction
of this prototype plant.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, pp. 101–102)
