National Security Policy  955
4. One of the panels of the PSAC made this fall a very thorough 
study of the Nike-­Zeus AICBM problem. It confirmed the findings of 
two independent recent technical studies in DOD and extended the 
conclusions further. Specifically, they are that the presently conceived 
Nike-­Zeus system, even if it performs according to expectations, is 
not a worthwhile investment. If it is considered as a defense of mis­
sile sites, it turns out to be cheaper to increase our deterrent strength 
by adding more such sites than by buying Nike-­Zeus, the cost fac­
tor being very substantial in this case, of the order of 10 to 1. On the 
other hand, if one thinks of Nike-­Zeus as a defense of population, it 
turns out to be useless because the enemy can kill people by explod­
ing warheads upwind, of the cities out of the range of Nike-­Zeus. 
Hence, only a comprehensive fallout shelter program in conjunction 
with the Nike-­Zeus could achieve this objective. Because of these very 
thoroughly documented arguments, our Panel recommended against 
going into production with Nike-­Zeus—a recommendation which 
was accepted by the Secretary of Defense. We urged further research 
effort on Nike-­Zeus in the hope that this weapons system could be 
dramatically improved. In the Army there seems to be a sharp split on 
the issue of our recommendations; people lower in the echelons, who 
have had an opportunity to look into the technical factors involved, 
agree with our recommendations, but top echelons are most unhappy 
about them.
5. I should like to tell you now, Mr. President, about the present 
status of the so-­called Project Corona. So far it has not functioned, but 
every successive launch has resulted in some progress, one difficulty 
after another being eliminated. All of them are of comparatively trivial 
engineering nature, and there is a substantial degree of optimism that 
the next launch, which is scheduled for early February, will see a com­
plete technical success of the entire system.
6. You are already aware in a general way, Mr. President, of the dif­
ficulties of the Titan Project. I have made a considerable effort to analyze 
these difficulties and have reached the conclusion that the Air Force is 
completely correct in its evaluation. This is that the missile is soundly 
engineered and should show the planned performance. On the other 
hand, the managerial situation at the Martin Company is very bad and 
the failures of the last eight months can all be traced to human factors: 
lack of staff training, low competence, lack of adequate instructions. 
The Air Force, with a little help from me, has put a heavy pressure on 
the Martin Company to remedy these weaknesses; changes have been 
made and we have hopes that the program will shortly get going. If 
this is the case, Titan could still be operational by mid-’61 as planned, 
but there is little doubt that in Congress a great deal will be made of the 
present situation by the critics of the Administration.
