Options Identified
211
growing. Lopez Portillo of Mexico has been critical of our economic
measures.
Begging others will not help. We must be pragmatic and take into
account other nations’ interests in Iran so long as they stay with us. If
he were Schmidt, for example, he would try to stay out of this as long
as possible. But if Schmidt had to choose between Germany’s relations
with us on economic, military and political areas as opposed to their
temporary interests in Iran, he would choose the U.S. Some economic
matters must come to a head. If we cannot depend on others, the
President wanted to know it. He wanted to insure that the status quo
hurts Khomeini. He felt that Khomeini was benefiting from continued
trade and diplomatic presence. The presence of our naval forces was
a major factor in his reticence to do damage to the hostages.
We must act carefully, not lash out in a way that would embarrass
us. We should leave no peaceful stone unturned, but we must have
our allies on board—which they are not. The President had outlined
his ideas in his comments on the SCC notes each day. No timing had
been established yet for next moves. There was one thing he feared,
that the status quo would be established on a permanent basis. Domes-
tic support will not last. He had deliberately withheld some actions to
have them in reserve. We do not know if they have moved the hostages.
It is time to inform our three major European allies about the options
we may take in the future. Eventually we will have to draw the line,
through Chapter Seven sanctions and trade by our allies with Iran. It
will be good to know their attitude. The President did not fear a rebuff
if we are in the right and have a good case. We have worked to try to
find a way out, but we have found no flexibility from Khomeini except
for the release of the 13 hostages.4 In that case he chose only women
and blacks to try and divide the country. We need to find a place for
the Shah to go.
Dr. Brzezinski proposed discussion in the first, larger half of the
meeting first of internal economic steps, then the status of political
negotiations, and additional sanctions against Iranian diplomats. We
should also discuss how to respond to Mexico. On economic matters,
Secretary Miller could speak on possible collective actions—either a
full embargo or cross default—as well as the status of court proceedings
in London and the special problems with the French.
Secretary Miller said he had some good news. One case involving
Citibank in London had resulted in an important legal step. The judge
had ruled that all of these separate cases should be consolidated, and
that they dealt with such grave matters that they deserved full prepara-
4 See footnote 2, Document 35.
