650 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV would be built into the initial basing deployments. He also commented that even if the Soviets did choose to attack our forces, they would have to accept a very adverse exchange ratio in the process of destroying our forces. He went on to remark that if the Soviets choose to build more missiles in order to increase their capability to attack our land-­ based deployment, we would have to build more trenches or shelter arrays, but that calculations done within DOD suggest that the cost to the Soviets to jeopardize our basing deployment with more missiles would be approximately twice as large as the cost to us to maintain our survivability. (S) Admiral Turner disagreed with Secretary Brown’s calculations, [2 lines not declassified] He also remarked that the Soviets may be willing to spend more money trying to overcome our efforts than we will be willing to match, even at an economic exchange ratio of 2 to 1. (S) Dr. Brzezinski noted that we will be better off politically if we build a survivable land based missile force, because it will be easier to increase our forces—­moving to a dyad implies an inherently poor SALT bargaining position. (C) The President suggested that we look at potential Soviet reactions to the various options. He said that his sense is that choice of the dyad will be interpreted as a yielding to them, a sign of weakness. In addition, if the Soviets aren’t interested in further SALT treaties, he would feel better with the MX ready for deployment, even if we had to put it in a basing mode that was not verifiable. He remarked that backing away from the Triad would be an error. He went on to say that he felt our objectives should be to arrange for a situation in which the easiest path for the Soviets would lead to a treaty and a strategic posture that would allow verification and be stable. He said that his guess is that the Soviets would respond best to a strong move on his part. He remarked that in his contacts with the Soviets, he had come to believe that they suffer from a sense of inferiority and that strategic equivalence with us may make them somewhat easier to deal with. Finally, he noted that they would be ahead in conventional forces for a long time. (TS) General Jones remarked that one aspect of arms control that had struck him as having something of an Alice in Wonderland aspect was the fact that during the many years of negotiations we had been engaged in, the number of strategic weapons deployed had continually and rapidly risen. He remarked that in the past we had not wanted warhead limits perhaps because that was our only advantage, but that given the situation that was emerging now, such limits may be far more acceptable. He said that he would like to see warhead limits in SALT III, and that such limits would be far easier to accept with a fully survivable Triad than with the augmented Dyad. [2 lines not declassified] He also remarked that the augmented dyad would lead to increased pressure
