926 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 353. Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, September 2, 1980 SUBJECT Comments on the Holloway Special Operations Review Group My comments, based upon reading the complete text of the Report by the Special Operations Review Group,2 are meant to answer these questions for you with candor that the Holloway Group could not afford. —What were the major flaws in the planning and execution? —Where does the fault lie? —What are the implications for follow-up actions? The evidence in the Report is very disturbing. Unless it is inaccurate, it compels one to devastating conclusions about the JCS’s adequacy for planning and conducting such operations. It also has implications for basic and structural changes in Defense in the longer run. Major Flaws Of 23 issues chosen for extensive review, the Holloway Group singles out 11 as major. I find it difficult to quarrel with any of them, and some strike me as indicative of serious faults in the operation. They are each worth a short elaboration to give you a sense of the evidence in the Report. 1. Operations Security (OPSEC) The Holloway Group says the requirements of secrecy were imposed too extensively to permit adequate coordination, first of intelligence, later of training, and finally of command and control during the execution phase. Their Report is too hard on some aspects of security, but OPSEC restraints exacerbated most of the other ten major 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 27, Iran Special Contingency Group 7/80. Top Secret; Outside the System. Sent for information. In a September 4 memorandum to Brzezinski, Denend wrote “there is not a single conclusion in his [Odom’s] memo to you with which I would take serious issues.” Denend concluded that, based on the Holloway Report, 1) any planning and/ or training underway for a second rescue operation in Iran needed to be reviewed for organizational soundness, 2) that the report was “dramatic evidence” or a change in the Unified Command Plan, and 3) that any efforts to change the independence retained by the military services “must wait for stronger leadership in the Pentagon.” (Ibid.) 2 See Document 321.
