354 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified] The Soviets have sustained some additional casualties in clashes with Afghan Army forces. Over the weekend, Soviet helicopters evacuated wounded from Shindand back to the USSR. Some anti-Soviet incidents have also occurred among the civilian population. On Monday, large groups of armed residents burned shops in Qandahar and demonstrated against the government. The Afghan commander there used tanks to disperse the crowds. Sporadic fighting between the insurgents and the Afghan Army has continued throughout the country, with the rebels exerting heavy pressure on government forces in the northeast and initiating new fighting in the southwest. Soviet forces may have conducted some clearing operations north of Kabul on Monday, but contact between the Soviets and the rebels has apparently been limited. Foreign commentary The new Afghan Government has been trying to justify the Soviet intervention by echoing Moscow’s charges of US interference in Afghan internal affairs. Moscow, for its part, has been saying that US offers of military assistance to Pakistan demonstrate Washington’s intention to continue supporting Afghan insurgents, but it has issued no additional authoritative statements. Conservative Persian Gulf states, with Saudi Arabia in the lead, have issued strong condemnations of the Soviet action. Several states have underscored their sympathy for the Afghan insurgents as fellow Muslims. Although Iraq has not issued any formal response, Baghdad is clearly uneasy over the latest Soviet use of force. One senior Baath official compared the Soviet action to US involvement in Vietnam and said that ultimately Afghan resistance would lead the USSR to withdraw. Baghdad’s reaction, however, is likely to be colored by its deep suspicion of US intentions in the region and its preoccupation with its deteriorating relations with Iran. Reactions elsewhere in the Middle East have been along generally predictable lines. Syria, Lebanon, and the PLO have not commented, while Egypt and other moderate states have denounced the Soviets. China on 30 December issued a government statement—used only infrequently by Beijing—that called the Soviet action a threat to “peace and security in Asia and throughout the world,” and a Vice Foreign Minister told the Soviet Ambassador that the intervention posed “a
