Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III meetings of our Finance Ministers, both bilaterally and in small groups, have been helpful. It is good that we are able to communicate with one another directly, both by letter and by periodic visits. Mid-July sounds fine to me for a Bonn Summit. I agree that this date should not be made public until preparatory work by our personal representatives has progressed further. I am glad to hear from Henry Owen that Dieter Hiss will call a meeting of these representatives in Bonn sometime early next year, to start work on the Summit agenda. I hope that we can find a place on that agenda for a broad review of the European-Japanese-American relationship, in addition to addressing the specific problems that our countries confront. The fact that we have six months in which to prepare for the Summit should give our representatives time to search out imaginative approaches to these problems, as you suggested to Mike Blumenthal when he was last in Bonn. It was good of you to renew your invitation to visit Germany. If the Summit is in July, I would be glad to come two days ahead of that meeting for the visit. I look forward very much to continuing and extending our association. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter Editorial Note In December 1977, Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs Anthony Solomon proposed to West German officials that the U.S. Treasury and Bundesbank conclude a 1-year $1-billion swap arrangement. In an undated message to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Solomon argued that the “arrangement will back up President’s statement on balance of payments and exchange rates, and explicit Treasury involvement will indicate this is a full U.S. Government effort and not just Federal Reserve activity.” Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal, the Federal Reserve Board, and Brzezinski all concurred in this initiative. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 5,
