298
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
meetings of our Finance Ministers, both bilaterally and in small groups,
have been helpful. It is good that we are able to communicate with one
another directly, both by letter and by periodic visits.
Mid-July sounds fine to me for a Bonn Summit. I agree that this
date should not be made public until preparatory work by our personal
representatives has progressed further. I am glad to hear from Henry
Owen that Dieter Hiss will call a meeting of these representatives in
Bonn sometime early next year, to start work on the Summit agenda. I
hope that we can find a place on that agenda for a broad review of the
European-Japanese-American relationship, in addition to addressing
the specific problems that our countries confront. The fact that we have
six months in which to prepare for the Summit should give our repre-
sentatives time to search out imaginative approaches to these
problems, as you suggested to Mike Blumenthal when he was last in
Bonn.
It was good of you to renew your invitation to visit Germany. If the
Summit is in July, I would be glad to come two days ahead of that
meeting for the visit. I look forward very much to continuing and ex-
tending our association.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
94.
Editorial Note
In December 1977, Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary
Affairs Anthony Solomon proposed to West German officials that the
U.S. Treasury and Bundesbank conclude a 1-year $1-billion swap ar-
rangement. In an undated message to the President’s Assistant for Na-
tional Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Solomon argued that the
“arrangement will back up President’s statement on balance of pay-
ments and exchange rates, and explicit Treasury involvement will indi-
cate this is a full U.S. Government effort and not just Federal Reserve
activity.” Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal, the Federal
Reserve Board, and Brzezinski all concurred in this initiative. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 5,
President, Europe and Asia, 12/29/77–1/6/78: Stop Papers, Warsaw,
12/29–31/77)
On January 3, 1978, Blumenthal sent a message to President Jimmy
Carter, who was abroad on a 9-day multinational trip, of the “very dis-
