Arms Control and Disarmament 1409 conclusions paper, which appeared on quick reading to omit politi­ cal issues we had previously claimed inability discuss. (WestDel will transmit text when translation completed.) However, Fedorov made further plea that we explicitly recognize need for “parity” in govern­ ing organization in view of important powers it would exercise and stated that no control organ could be set up until this issue settled. He implied he wished us seek instructions this matter, but did not raise it again when Fisk reiterated that we would not under any circum­ stances be able discuss this matter. Fisk gave Fedorov WestDel draft final report (Denuc 156) and requested comment. Group will meet again informally 3:00 PM August 15. Villard 354. Letter From Kistiakowsky to Killian1 Washington, August 15, 1958 Dear Dr. Killian: On July 14 the President sent a memorandum to the Secretary of State suggesting that he join with the Secretary of Defense and yourself in having a careful study made “to further our preparations for possible negotiations on measures to detect and discourage surprise attack.” He further directed that this study should be made after appropriate con­ sultation with other government agencies and officials, that the Work­ ing Group actually charged with the study be kept quite small, and that it take “full advantage of the analyses and studies of a technical nature bearing on this matter that are being developed within Dr. Killian’s sci­ entific and technical group.” The Inter-­Agency Group that was brought together in accordance with these instructions to the Secretary of State herewith presents its report with Appendices I to IV attached. In addition there is included a J.C.S. document referred to in the report and a memorandum from the Chairman of the Watch Committee. 1 Source: Conveys report of Inter-­Agency Group on Surprise Attack (not included). Top Secret. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Disarmament, Surprise Attack.
