1602  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
We discussed the question of composition of prospective meetings 
with the Soviets, and Mr. Herter recalled that on the question of the 
German peace treaty, the Soviets had suggested 26 nations be partic­
ipants. I said, however, that the Soviets had said that if there was an 
agreement on the full conference that they would then be willing to 
have a preliminary Four Power conference on this subject, eliminating 
all other participation in the preliminary meeting.
The President said that over the week end the group had discussed 
the whole gamut of Soviet probings for weak spots in the free world 
position. He and the Prime Minister then recounted some of the discus­
sion about the Middle East.
It was the view of Macmillan and Lloyd that Nasser by attempt­
ing to array the Arab world against Kassem was forcing him into 
the hands of the Communists. Actually he was not pro-­Communist 
and had not done anything to intensify his links with Communism 
during the past few months. The British felt that some one interme­
diary should be sought who would try to mediate a modus vivendi 
between Nasser and Kassem, whereby both states would exist within 
the Arab world, without the UAR attempting to dominate or absorb 
Iraq. I said Italy would perhaps like to play some such role. Lloyd said 
the Lebanese were, he thought, making this attempt.
I said I felt it was somewhat ominous that we know nothing about 
what the Soviets were doing in relation to Iraq and Iran. It seemed to 
me that it was inevitable that they were doing something and that they 
had momentous plans, and that our lack of any knowledge should not 
be taken as proof that nothing was going on, but rather should make 
us more alert.
On the Geneva test suspension negotiations, the President and 
the Prime Minister noted that the latter attached importance to finding 
some way to keep these negotiations going after they resume on April 
13. He hoped that they could spin out at least until a Foreign Ministers 
meeting with the Soviets. The President indicated his readiness to con­
clude an agreement suspending atmospheric tests; he recounted some 
of the briefing Dr. Killian had given the group at Camp David. This had 
led him to conclude that any explosion greater than 10 kilotons could 
be detected; he thought that it might be possible to get Soviet agree­
ment on unmanned instrument detection stations. The reported Soviet 
“agreement” to our Duration Article makes it appear possible that the 
Soviets might make further concessions.
I recalled that we have made provision for effective mobile con­
trols the sine qua non of any agreement.
The Prime Minister noted that our most recent scientific informa­
tion suggests that there is a risk of disadvantage to us if the Soviets sud­
denly give in on the veto issue. Nevertheless, he thought that our gain
