160
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Aside from a political cooling, the only concrete step we suggest
taking toward Hungary is to cancel a proposed visit by a DOE delega-
tion set for early next year.8
Yugoslavia
—We should move immediately to reassure the Yugoslav leader-
ship (and to warn Moscow) that our policy of support for Yugoslavia
remains firm and steady. Political, and perhaps military, consultations
will help to determine Yugoslav desires and to demonstrate our resolve
to friend and foe alike.
—Yugoslavia has already expressed its opposition to Soviet inter-
vention in Poland and would be expected to follow through after a
Soviet move by attempting to mobilize nonaligned and Third World
sentiment against the intervention. While at present there is no evidence
pointing toward a direct Soviet/Pact military threat against Yugoslavia,
the Yugoslav leadership would be apprehensive about Soviet intentions
and would welcome and perhaps seek out expressions of U.S. political
and military support. At the same time the leadership would be
extremely sensitive to any signals which might provoke Moscow. While
we need not subordinate our interests to those of the Yugoslavs, we
should attempt to consult with the GOY prior to announcing those
steps we have decided to take with regard to Yugoslavia.
Those steps would include:
—Publicly reiterating U.S. policy of support for Yugoslavia’s inde-
pendence, territorial integrity and unity.
—Suggesting immediate political, and if the situation warrants,
military consultations to discuss further steps.
—Consulting with key allies to encourage similar actions.
—Taking steps to hasten delivery of pipeline military items, acceler-
ating projected military training programs, and reviewing previously
denied high technology weapons requests.
—Considering reprogramming to meet possible GOY requests for
FMS credits.
—Intensifying measures against U.S. based anti-GOY terrorism.
—Being prepared to offer currency swap arrangement to bolster
Yugoslav reserves if commercial bank lending dries up in the aftermath
of Soviet invasion;
8 In telegram 6534 from Budapest, December 17, Ambassador Bergold agreed with
the premises of the paper and stressed that the policy of differentiation had served
well U.S. policy in the past in Hungary and had “encouraged Hungary’s diversity and
evolutionary change within the bloc.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800599–1057)
