Chapter 6, June–December 1990  913
above the relatively large number of deployed mobiles allowed under 
START (1100 mobile ICBM RVs) and in excess of the substantial number 
of non-­deployed mobiles (250 missiles) that would be legal. Moreover, 
PPCM is most valuable for monitoring future mobile production; both 
the SS–24 and SS–25 programs are too far along for PPCM to yield an 
accurate accounting of the existing inventory.
The IC, except DIA, believes that PPCM of Soviet mobile ICBM 
assembly facilities is almost as good as PPCM of solid racket motor 
plants. [7 lines not declassified] They believe that the photo signature of 
rocket motor production plants is more difficult to conceal.
Politically, PPCM will be important to demonstrate that the START 
treaty is at least as tightly monitored as INF. There is also an argument 
that the burden of PPCM on U.S. industry will be more easily accepted 
if Soviet rocket motor producers are subjected to the same treatment.
The Soviets have refused in Geneva even to discuss PPCM of rocket 
motor plants. Their principal argument is that many more motors are 
produced than are actually assembled into missiles and that they can-
not accept the overcounting. They have also hinted that they have sen-
sitive activities that they do not want exposed to U.S. monitors.
There are two broad options:
1. Insist on the current U.S. position to PPCM SS–24 SRM pro-
duction, but modify some other provisions to alleviate Soviet concerns.
2. Accept Soviet proposal on PPCM, but add collateral constraints 
on SRMs, and consider alternatives for undeclared assembly facilities.
These options are described in more detail at Tab 2.
Art Kuehne concurs.
Tab 1
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4
Washington, undated
ALCM Inspection Regime
— No inspections for ALCMs at nuclear ALCM heavy bomber 
bases.
— At all other heavy bomber bases, all bunkers within storage 
areas could be inspected to confirm the absence of nuclear ALCMs. 
Such inspections would begin when START enters force.
4 Secret.
