920 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement a crisis situation. The Attorney General indicated that from 30 to 40 FBI agents in the Miami area were spending all their time on Cuban affairs, but were having some difficulties because they did not know whether it was our policy to permit anti-­Castro activities to continue in Flordia or whether such activities should be stopped. Mr. Dulles felt the question of whether anti-­Castro activities should be permitted to continue or should be stopped depended on what the anti-­Castro forces were planning. We could not, for example, let the Batista-­type elements do whatever they wanted to do. However, a number of things in the covert field could be done which might help the situation in Cuba. Disarmament. With respect to disarmament, Secretary Dillon remarked that this Government would be faced with decisions earlier than planned. The Secretary of State and Mr. Lloyd had agreed that detailed planning was necessary. Outer Space. With respect to U.S. policy on Outer Space, the Vice President said he would be very much interested in reading the pro­ posed revision of our Outer Space policy. He felt there would be a great deal of discussion of Outer Space soon after Congress convenes. The Attorney General felt that the Administration should be pre­ pared to present a good case to Congress, not only on Outer Space, but on other matters also. We should think in terms of a persuasive presen­ tation and not permit various segments of the Administration to appear before Congress and talk in different voices. The Vice President agreed that when the President returned from his trip he will have the greatest prestige of any President since Roosevelt. That prestige, properly used and used positively, could have quite an effect. The Attorney General recalled that before 1956 the Administration had had a liaison group which cleared and coordinated presentations to Congress. The Attorney General felt that sometimes the Administration reacted in a frightened manner to Congressional requests; he believed that such reaction was a poor tactic. The Vice President felt the Administration would need a well-­understood, affirmative policy with respect to such things as the National Security Council, Cuban Policy, Outer Space, nuclear test­ ing, disarmament, and nuclear power, all of which would probably be investigated by the Congress next year. Mr. Gray recalled that the Outer Space budget was already set for the next fiscal year and sug­ gested that a summary of this discussion might be communicated to General Persons for legislative liaison purposes. The Acting Director, OCDM, Mr. Patterson, said the subject of legislative liaison was perhaps a proper one for Cabinet consideration. The Vice President noted that the subject would be considered by the Cabinet on Friday. U.S. Foreign Policy and Military Capabilities. Secretary Dillon remarked that this subject should by all means be studied because of its serious implications.
