The amount of $60,000 was set because Mr. Hunt stated to me several times
and stated in my presence to the Minister of the Interior, that the properties
were in such good condition that the necessary repairs could be
accomplished for less than that sum. His statements were confirmed by the
fact that an American engineer under the Military Government the
preceding year had estimated the cost of repairs at $45,000. To be certain,
however, that an appraisal of repairs by the expert a few thousand dollars in
excess of the limit set in the contract would not endanger the execution of
the contract, Mr. Hunt, in accordance with the Government’s request, stated
in a letter to the Minister of the Interior, that should the cost of repairs be
fixed at a sum somewhat in excess of $60,000, he would recommend to his
principals that the necessary sum be advanced by them. The expert set the
value of the properties in their present condition at $533,012 and fixed the
cost of necessary repairs at $323,424. The value of the properties is
$133,012 in excess of the price at which the company was willing to sell to
the municipalities.
2. After some delay the Government, however, would be willing to buy at
this price since this is the price set by the expert in accordance with the
contract were it possible to place the municipalities [properties] in good
condition for a sum within or near the limit set in the same contract. It is
not, however, willing to buy the plant at the price fixed by the expert when
the cost of repairs fixed by the same expert is $263,424 above the limit set
in the contract.
In view of these facts the final sentence of the first paragraph of the
Department’s telegram referred to appears to me misleading since the
Government is entirely willing to carry out its obligations to purchase the
plant at the sum fixed by the expert but is not willing to spend over six
times the amount for repairs when [which] it expressed its willingness to
pay in the contract, which amount as fixed in the contract it was informed
by the representative of the company would be ample to pay for all
necessary repairs.
It is, therefore, my feeling that an attempt on our part to force the
Dominican Government to accept either one of the propositions contained
in the Department’s cable referred to would constitute material injustice; as
