Chapter 1, 1988 11 Walt Slocombe (Harold Brown’s arms control man during the Carter Administration) felt Dukakis would be entirely happy with START but if handed an uncompleted negotiation, he would ­increasingly put his own stamp on START the longer it went on. One senior UK official commented it would be a nightmare if a new Administration set out to improve the Reagan START agreement.7 Walt said they would not go back and reopen settled issues. Walt opined they could hold off the Radical Right (naming Senator Helms and John Lehman). He thought it important to see how INF on-­site inspection goes before nailing down START verification provisions. Walt disagreed with me about looking back at the SS-18 heavy ICBM issue—I said we should focus on highly-­ fractionated missiles as the issue had moved beyond just heavy missiles. I said we should capture the SS-18 with its ten warheads (possibly capable of carrying twelve to fourteen) and also seek special reductions and limits on the new SS-24 which carries ten. Walt thought that negotiations could go through January 1989—“we have only one President at a time”—­though the temptation to meddle during the transition would make negotiations difficult. He said Dukakis would look seriously at Nitze’s proposal (denuclearize the Navy), and question why we’d permit Soviet SS-24 (MIRV’d) and SS-25 (single warhead mobile) while banning our own mobiles. After caveating my comments, saying I would not talk about whether you would do things differently in START, I spoke mainly about future arms control. Laced throughout my comments were reassurances to the allies present that I thought you’d continue the healthy pattern of Congressional and allied consultations done so well over the past seven years. I also left a sense of reassurance that you’d support INF, START, conventional defense, flexible response (MC14/3)8 and close cooperation with our allies. This was well received. I explained I thought you’d want President Reagan to complete START and would cheerfully take on getting it through the Senate. I spoke to the need to look at NATO’s conventional deterrent and defensive capability in conjunction with the Conventional Stability Talks; adding that smaller steps such as confidence building measures and greater transparency might be possible during the CST negotiations. I also urged all there to support negotiations to ban chemical weapons while challenging them to find ways to monitor compliance, or at last study it intensively, rather than just concluding it can’t be 7 Bush drew a vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this sentence and the two sentences that followed. 8 Dated January 16, 1968. (NATO Strategy Documents, 1949-1969, pp. 345–370)
