International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 951 highest growth rate in the world, will double its population to 132 million. India will exceed one billion (610 million in 1976). Egypt will have 64 million (38 million today). The United States, by comparison, will have about 260 million. Global population growth, more than any other single factor, is contributing to the lack of significant per capita income growth in the developing countries. While per capita GDP in the LDCs grew at an average rate of 2.9 percent, the per capita increase in the lower-income countries, where 59 percent of the total LDC population lives, averaged only 0.9 percent during the 1971–75 period. Non-communist LDC per capita food production between 1961–74 did not increase at all due to population growth. There could be a doubling of food import requirements by the LDCs by the late 1980s, placing a major burden on our agricultural capabilities. Population growth promises an even more turbulent setting for the conduct of international affairs. It also entails serious environmental costs for the entire world community, including degradation of soil, and desertification, as well as massive unemployment, and appalling living conditions for much of the developing world. Two million people in Mexico City are living today in miserable shanty towns without sanitation and other services; and yet Mexico City, now at 11 million people, is projected to become the world’s largest urban agglomeration—32 million in the year 2000. The sharpest reductions in birth rates over the past decade took place in LDCs that have experienced broad-based social and economic progress during the last three decades. There is ever-widening recognition that the best strategy for dealing with population growth is through a combination of family planning and other programs that tend to reduce birth rates, such as increased literacy, female education and employment, increasing farm income, community development and increased life expectancy largely through reduced infant mortality. Such components of development tend to influence people to want smaller families. A “basic human needs” strategy on the part of the United States and other developed countries will be vitiated by population growth unless there are more effective efforts and programs to cope with the issue. U.S. Policy The basic U.S. policies to deal with world population are set forth in the NSSM–200 study and NSDM–314, which has now been reaf-
