46 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ETA–13. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1  Washington, December 19, 1958. SUBJECT Priorities for DLF Loans in Latin America. Mr. Turnage2 has invited our attention to the fact that with the scheduled allocation of $21.75 million for Argentina the remaining free balance of appropriated DLF funds will total $73 million. He has requested the views of ARA as to the priorities appropriate for processing outstanding Latin American loan applications in relation to this balance as a guide for the DLF staff. I am pleased herewith to respond to this request. You will recall that last February Mr. Mann and I discussed with you the importance in terms of our relations both with Latin America and with the Congress of assuring adequate consideration for applications from that area in DLF loan approval action. At that time, we suggested the DLF establish an administrative target of 10 to 15% for loans to Latin American applicants. You agreed with this assessment and objective but wisely pointed out the administrative difficulties and potentially inadvisable implications of earmarking any specific percentage of DLF funds for a particular country or region. You emphasized the uncertainties as to the likely volume of meritorious economic development loan applications from Latin America at that time and I fully concurred in your observations. Since then there have been filed with the DLF applications by Latin American countries in volume in excess of our earlier suggested administrative percentage target. These have been recognized by the DLF staff on examination to qualify for DLF financing. This circumstance reflects both the initiative of the Latin Americans and their increased dependency on external financial assistance. In my memorandum to you of November 14 I reaffirmed my concern for the need to assure an adequate flow of DLF funds to the ARA region,3 particularly in light of increasing Congressional interest in this subject. Discussions in the “Committee of 21”, with which you are 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 820.10/12–1958. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Harry Conover, Deputy Director of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. 2 William V. Turnage, Deputy Director, Office of International Finance and Development. 3 Not printed; OAS Files, Lot 60 D 665, “Development Loan Fund.”
