Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I nam.8 Both actions threaten the stability of one of the world’s most important and promising regions—Southeast Asia. We have opposed both military actions. Let me outline very briefly the principles that govern our conduct. First, we will not get involved in conflict between Asian Communist nations. Our national interests are not directly threatened, although we are concerned, of course, at the wider implications of what might happen in the future and what has been happening in the past. We are using whatever diplomatic and political means are available to encourage restraint on all parties and to seek to prevent a wider war. While our influence is limited, because our involvement is limited, we remain the one great power in all the world which can have direct and frank discussions with all the parties concerned. For this reason, we have a useful and important role to play in the restoration of stability. We will continue our efforts, both directly with the countries involved and through the United Nations, to secure an end to the fighting in the region, to bring about a withdrawal of Vietnam forces from Cambodia, and of Chinese forces from Vietnam, and to gain the restoration of the independence and integrity of all nations involved. At the same time, we are continuing to express our deep concern that this conflict may widen still further—with unforeseen and grave consequences for nations in the region and also beyond. In any event, the United States is fully prepared to protect the vital interests of our people wherever they may be challenged. We are in close consultation with our friends and allies in the region, especially the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the ASEAN nations. Their continued stability and prosperity are of great importance to us. The normalization of relations between the United States and the People’s Republic of China is already an accomplished fact and will not be reversed. This was the simple, long overdue recognition of the reality of the government in Peking. In the last few days, we’ve consulted directly with leaders around the world—and with our own congressional leaders, as well—about events both in the Middle East and Southeast Asia. The responsibilities that we face are serious, and they are shared by the administration and the Congress, by our Nation, and our allies—and our common understanding and our adherence to a common cause are vital. All of us know that the internal affairs of Iran or combat even among Communist nations are of concern to us. Many nations are trou-
