1136 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement PE–51. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Robert M. Phillips of the Office of West Coast Affairs1  Washington, December 23, 1960. SUBJECT Proposed Purchase of Military Aircraft by Peru PARTICIPANTS Mr. Jorge Nicholson, First Secretary, Peruvian Embassy Col. Enrique Fuller, Assistant Air Attaché, Peruvian Embassy Robert M. Phillips, WST Following inquiries from the Peruvian Embassy to the Departments of Defense and State, and after consulting with Mr. Lane2 of WST and Mr. McLean of RPA/S, I telephoned Mr. Nicholson and informed him that the United States Government had decided that it could not at this time authorize the sale of the B–26 and B–57 aircraft requested by the Peruvian Government.3 We were sure that the Peruvian Government was fully aware of the delicate circumstances which prompted us to withhold the requested authorization4 and we trusted that the Peruvian Government would agree as to the undesirability of taking any action which might upset the recent relative improvement in this situation. I said I would also call Col. Fuller, who had telephoned while I was out, in order to give him the same information. Mr. Nicholson thanked me for this information and said he understood the Department’s position. He gave no indication that the U.S. decision might be disagreeable to his Government. I then telephoned Col. Fuller and gave him the same information. He betrayed no surprise at the news but merely requested that the Department send a written reply to the Peruvian Embassy’s notes 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 723.5622/12–2360. Confidential. Phillips, the Officer in Charge of Chilean Affairs, presumably acted for Richard A. Poole, the Officer in Charge of Peruvian Affairs, in this case. 2 Samuel O. Lane, Deputy Director, Office of West Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter- American Affairs. 3 Allan F. McLean, Jr., Assistant Officer in Charge of Inter-American Military Assistance, Office of Inter-American Regional Political Department of State. 4 According to telegram 9 to Lima, July 5, the Peruvian Air Force wanted two B–57s. (723.5622/7–560) In a note of October 3 to the Secretary of State, the Peruvian Ambassador specified the eight B-26s the Peruvian Air Force wanted. (723.5622/10–360)
