3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
876
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ceeding to concrete arms controls results is to focus initially on
achieving agreed limits on long-range land-based theater nuclear mis-
siles, because these are the most dynamic and threatening new deploy-
ments. This approach will enhance the prospects of reaching timely
agreement.
—I propose that Secretary of State Muskie and Foreign Minister
Gromyko take the opportunity of their visits to the United Nations in
September to agree upon precise timing and venue for the exchanges. It
is, of course, my earnest hope that now that you have agreed to move
ahead these important exchanges will be productive. Sincerely, Jimmy
Carter. End text.
4. President’s letter should be dated September 2, 1980.
Christopher
300.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
PA M–80–10389
September 8, 1980
THE PROSPECTS FOR SOVIET MILITARY
INTERVENTION IN POLAND
SUMMARY
We do not think that Moscow is now seriously considering military inter-
vention in Poland. Although the Soviets are deeply troubled by developments
there, they probably do not view the concessions granted so far regarding inde-
pendent trade unions as sufficient cause for the use of Soviet military force in
Poland. The Soviets probably also do not consider these concessions irrevers-
ible and will place substantial pressure on Warsaw to curtail them. In fact,
with Kania’s replacement of Gierek as first secretary, their hopes appear
buoyed that the development of political and social chaos in Poland that might
have compelled them to use military force in the near future has been fore-
stalled. Nevertheless, Moscow’s anxieties are still high, and if Kania does not
limit the concessions granted the strikers or if he cracks down too force-
fully and sparks a violent popular reaction which the government cannot con-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 65, Poland: 9/80. Secret; [handing restriction not declassified]. The memorandum
was prepared in the National Foreign Assessment Center by members of the Office of Po-
litical Analysis. Sent under a September 9 covering memorandum from Stansfield Turner
to Brzezinski.
