776
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
291.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, June 23, 1980
SUBJECT
Covert Operations In Afghanistan (S)
I will be doing a full trip report shortly,2 but want to fill you in
on a few points of particular interest on the covert side. (S)
I got an (apparently) good and candid briefing from the Station
Chief in Islamabad. He is very satisfied with the Pak performance
now; the earlier bottlenecks have been dissolved and now the Paks are
prepared to pass through more equipment than we can get to them.
The COS claims that he has several unilateral sources who confirm
that the Paks are telling him pretty much the truth. (It is noteworthy,
though, that the Paks tell him very little. They hold this entire operation
extremely closely and I am impressed by their ability to keep it all
secret. Wish we could do as well.) (S)
On the SA–7: There are two launchers and (I believe) 15 missiles
in country, headed for the Kabul area. The Paks insisted that they not
be used, initially at least, in areas near Pakistan since that would be
too obvious and provocative. That is understandable but unfortunate,
since the border area is where they are needed most. If things go well,
we should soon be hearing of mysterious downing of aircraft. There
is no report-back capability from the people who have the SAMs; we
will have to read it out of battle reports. (S)
The Paks are extending the arms flow now to groups operating
out of Quetta as well as Peshawar. This is another good step, since the
operation should not be too dependent on the faction-ridden Peshawar
leadership. (S)
Both Afghans and Paks with whom I spoke (and none of the latter
at least would have been aware of the operation) commented very
favorably on the increased readiness of the GOP over the past two
months or so to provide assistance to the mujahidin. I don’t know to
what extent this represents our involvement, but it is a good sign. (S)
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–047, Afghanistan: 11 Sep 1979–22 Jul 1980. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.
2 The full trip report was not found.
