country restrictions of all kinds are necessary, but these
restrictions have only been imposed as the result of experience
and by the nation itself in the exercise of its sovereign powers.
The Delegations of the British Empire, Chile, the United States,
Italy, Japan and Sweden consider that restrictions of this nature
should not be contemplated in international engagements except
where absolutely necessary and with the fullest consent and
approval of the nations concerned.
“With regard to this entire declaration, it developed during the
proceedings on this question in ‘Subcommittee A that others
contended that the authors of this declaration in setting forth their
observations had stressed political and psychological arguments
and omitted technical arguments. The signatories of this
declaration are of the opinion, on the contrary, that they have
submitted both technical and political arguments; but in any case
it will be for the Preparatory Commission to make this distinction
if it sees fit’.”
In regard to the second part of the Joint Commission’s answer to this
question, relative to the insertion in a convention for the prohibition of
certain forms of warfare of provisions similar to those in the Charter of the
International Labor Office, it is observed that the recommendations of the
Joint Commission confine themselves to the typical case of chemical
warfare. It is further observed that these recommendations are conditioned
upon agreements among the national industries concerned. The American
Government does not consider that such agreements are in any way
germane to the question of the limitation of national armaments. It is well
known that the great majority of the chemical products which may be
utilized for military purposes in time of war are essential to the daily peace-
time life of industry.
Section III
This Section of the Report relates to questions concerning the convertibility
of chemical factories for the manufacture of poison gas, and means for
hindering their conversion to such use. Proposals to that end are made by
the Joint Commission.
