Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
249
tries, and creating or strengthening international institutions that can
give effect to these interests. This takes time. But if you stick with it (in-
stead of being diverted by media demands for instant and superficial
successes)—in short, if you do as well in the next 3½ years in focusing
on structural problems as you did in the first six months, even the press
will admit by 1980 that your Administration has accomplished more
than any President since Truman, who also focused on architectural
improvements rather than cosmetic gestures.
55.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Your Meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko
Your meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko could be a turning
point. Soviet policy is apparently confused and uncertain.2 Brezhnev
claims he has serious concerns about you and about the general thrust
of our policies. The talks with Gromyko, therefore, are an opportunity
for you to shape the relationship personally and directly. But the talks
will also be the first chance for the top leadership to assess you person-
ally. Gromyko’s report of his meeting here in Washington thus will be a
critical input to the politburo and Brezhnev’s future decisions.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Out-
side the System File, Box 48, Chron: 9/15–21/77. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.
Brzezinski sent the memorandum to the President under a covering memorandum in
which he made two suggestions for the conduct of the upcoming meeting with Gromyko.
He suggested that Carter begin the meeting with a plenary session in which he could “ex-
pound systematically your approach to US–Soviet relations and your view in general of
US foreign policy.” Secondly, Brzezinski offered that the President, at the conclusion of
the meeting, “invite Gromyko to your office for a personal conversation with you alone.
The meeting will thus end on a cordial note (which is more important than the illusion of
cordiality before serious discussions) and you can then convey a final and personal mes-
sage to Brezhnev.” Attached but not printed are a Comprehensive Test Ban background
paper, a Comprehensive Test Ban issues paper, and two papers on the Indian Ocean and
the Middle East.
2 Gromyko met six times with Carter and Vance in Washington September 22–23;
see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 50 and Foreign Relations,
1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Documents 182 and 183.After attending the
UN General Assembly meeting, Gromyko returned to Washington to meet with Carter
and Vance on September 27; see ibid., Document 184.
