572
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
182.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
Geneva, February 15, 1979, 1553Z
2571. For Deputy Secretary, Counselor Nimetz, and Assistant Sec-
retaries Maynes, Vest and Derian from Mezvinsky. Subject: (C) Human
Rights Commission: Genocide Report.
1. (C) Entire text.
2. Having been in Geneva only a few days for the 35th Human
Rights Commission (HRC) session which opened February 12, I have
become even more acutely conscious of the serious implications which
will flow from the position the U.S. delegation will take when the Re-
port on Genocide, which has been endorsed by the Subcommission on
Discrimination and Minorities, is considered by the Commission. The
agenda item under which this report will arise is scheduled to be taken
up by the Commission during the latter half of the week of March 5. I
understand that the issue is now being considered in the Department
on the basis of the draft position paper prepared in IO2 and supported
by HA. The position paper contains all relevant background details of
the simple issue of whether or not the U.S. delegation will publicly state
that the Genocide Report should have retained in it an appropriate
mention of the massacre of Armenians as having constituted the first
instance of genocide in the 20th century. I note that this simple refer-
ence does not assign blame for the genocide to any government.
3. Included as a valued member of the U.S. delegation to the 35th
session of the HRC is Mr. Set Momjian, a public member designated by
the White House. Mr. Momjian, who arrived in Geneva February 13, re-
ports that he has already received numerous queries from Armenian
leaders in Europe and in the United States concerning the position the
USDel will take.3 He also tells me that there appeared in last Sunday’s
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, Genocide—Action File. Confidential; Im-
mediate; Exdis.
2 Not found and not further identified.
3 In telegram 2775 from Geneva, February 20, the Mission noted: “USDel has also
been informally informed that delegations of Cyprus, France, Uruguay, Austria, and the
USSR represented on the Commission as well as observer delegations from Greece and
Argentina are planning to make statements in support of the position that mention of the
Armenian massacres as a form of genocide should have been included in the Special Rap-
porteur’s report.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790078–1091)
In telegram 45276 to Geneva, February 24, the Department provided Mezvinsky with the
text of a statement for use during the HRC deliberations. (Department of State, Bureau of
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102,
Genocide—Action File)
