Hungary 473 157. Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 1, 1977 SUBJECT Secretary Vance’s Intention to Raise the Crown of St. Stephen at Breakfast Tomorrow According to the staff of State Department Counselor Matt Nimetz, Secretary Vance plans to raise the Crown at your breakfast meeting tomorrow at which time he will bring with him a memo in response to your memo to him of November 30 (Tab A) asking for written assurances from the Hungarian government regarding permanent display of the Crown and the question of religious participation in the return ceremony.2 Vance’s response to your memo will be along the following lines: —The Hungarian government has already given us high level assurances (both before and after we informed them of the decision to return the Crown) that the Crown will be placed on permanent display.3 Although these assurances were given orally to our ambassador in Budapest, the Hungarian government has taken steps to implement them and is now considering two possible sites for permanent display. We have proposed, and the Hungarians have agreed in principle, that a joint statement will be issued4 when the decision to return the Crown is publicly announced which specifies that the Crown will be placed on permanent public display. Since the Hungarians will commit them- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 27, Hungary: 1–12/77. Confidential. Sent for action. Brzezinski wrote “good” on the memorandum and noted “he did” in the upper right corner, indicating that Vance had raised the issue with the President at the breakfast meeting. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Mondale, Vance, and Brzezinski from 7:30 to 8:43 a.m. on December 2. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No substantive record of that meeting was found. 2 Attached but not printed. Brzezinski notified Vance: “The President would appreciate an update regarding the assurances we are seeking from the Hungarians. He requests that these assurances be in writing, and that they cover—among other items—the issue of the permanent display of the Crown and the question of the nature and scope of religious participation in the return ceremony.” 3 Brzezinski wrote in the margin next to this paragraph: “We want them in writing.” 4 On December 15, the Department of State released the Joint Communiqué and the exchange of letters between Kaiser and Puja detailing the understanding reached by the two governments on the return of the Crown. For the full text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 1978, pp. 32–33.
