1957 1379 undivided attention to question reciprocal renunciation of force which remains fundamental to successful discussion other items under sec­ ond part our terms reference.” Subsequent give and take largely restatement respective position on renunciation of force. PRC will never agree to any formula which violates its sovereign rights. Many PRC proposals for improvement relations have not raised “response or echo” from US. No surprises or new developments, line taken by Wang being very much along lines anticipated by Deptel 36. His presentation, though, was largely pro forma and carried no intimation any intention break talks or make new move. At one point when I used term “new depar­ ture” in referring to renunciation of force he eagerly picked it up and used it as take-­off point for urging new departure by US in talks. He also pointed out both sides agreed Taiwan area tension is fundamental problem. Gave no indication whether he caught my point on willing­ ness continue talks even if all Americans released. Next meeting August 8. Detailed record by pouch arriving Dept Monday. Gowen 813. Telegram unnumbered from Geneva1 Geneva, July 11, 1957 Unnumbered. From Johnson. 1. Wang opened 68th with prepared statement. As he had repeat­ edly stressed, purpose of talks was for both sides to arrive at peaceful settlement of disputes between two countries. In this desire his side had put forth series of practical and feasible proposals each of which could lessen tensions and open up prospects of improved relations between China and America. But what had history of talks shown? My side had not only shown no intention of contributing to that real­ ization, but had not abandoned its hostility toward China. My side was only interested in working up tension and stepping up threat of armed force against China. This willful policy of U.S. was increasingly 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/7–1157. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Johnson. Sent via pouch. Received on July 18.
