3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
879
decision-making, especially trade with the USSR and defense spend-
ing. In the wake of Cardinal Wyszynski’s meeting with Lech Walesa,
the Soviets will be especially sensitive to any signs that the unions are
developing meaningful alliances with the Catholic Church or political
dissidents, receiving substantial aid from unions and other organiza-
tions in the West, or adopting openly hostile attitudes and policies
toward the Soviet Union. Soviet media are already attacking assistance
provided to the independent unions from Western trade unions. [han-
dling restriction not declassified]
The relaxation of censorship is another issue that the Soviets will
find difficult to live with. Although the media restrictions the Gierek
regime pledged to lift are minimal when compared to the near total
abolition of censorship agreed to by the Dubcek2 regime in Czechoslo-
vakia in 1968, this issue was one of the primary Soviet complaints to the
Czechoslovak party in the months before the invasion. [handling restric-
tion not declassified]
Although it appears unlikely at the moment, the possibility exists
that the present or a future Polish leadership—whether out of fear of
the consequences a crackdown could bring or from a genuine sym-
pathy with the workers’ desires—could assume the lead in the liberal-
ization process and take it much further. This could create a situation
reminiscent of Czechoslovakia in 1968. Soviet party officials have al-
ready noted [text not declassified] that there are trends evident in Polish
society similar to those present in Czechoslovakia during the Prague
Spring. If Moscow perceived these trends in the Polish party leader-
ship, it might feel compelled to take preventive action before the
process reached an unmanageable stage. [handling restriction not
declassified]
An opposite course by the Polish leadership—a crackdown on the
unions and all opposition—while probably more in line with the de-
sires of the Soviet leaders, could inadvertently lead to Soviet interven-
tion. If the workers responded to this tightening by resuming their
strikes, there would be a strong likelihood of violent confrontation
which, if it got out of the Polish authorities’ control, could trigger the
use of Soviet force. [handling restriction not declassified]
Another development that would profoundly disturb the Soviets
is a serious outbreak of labor unrest elsewhere in Eastern Europe or in
the USSR. Unrest appears unlikely in the USSR at the moment, but the
reports of strikes at major automotive plants in Tolgiatti and Gorkiy
earlier this year have to give the Kremlin pause. Strikes and/or calls for
free trade unions in other East European countries will induce the So-
2 Alexander Dubcek, former First Secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party.
