1977 125 forces begins with recognition that strategic nuclear deterrence is the cornerstone of US and Allied military security, and defines US objectives and establishes alternative criteria through which they might be achieved. Specific issues addressed include the requirements for political sufficiency, a hard target kill capability, various levels of retaliatory capability in the face of Soviet offensive and defensive posture, and a strategic reserve force. The Executive Summary conveys a picture of the scope and breadth of the report, and of the issues developed. (S) Relationship of the Net Assessment and Strategy/Force Posture Study The two major parts of PRM–10 were performed simultaneously. The Net Assessment portion was not available for use by the Force Posture Study group. A major consequence is that the notional AIMS are not directly related either to an approved set of overall national objectives or to a national strategy derived from the Net Assessment. In fact, as a consequence of the concurrency of the two portions of the PRM–10 effort, the alternative national strategies and the notional AIMS were developed on independent analytical frameworks; so there is no systemic interconnect between the two. (TS) Limitations There are a number of things which this study does not do, and, for the most part, never intended to do. These include the following: a. The breadth and scope of the study effort required a high level of conceptual abstraction which makes it useful as a vehicle for identifying and considering military strategy issues. The study is not suitable as a basis for definitive selection of any particular strategy. Because they were selected to illuminate subsets of issues, none of the notional AIMS was intended to be, nor is, appropriate as an overall strategy to meet our national security needs. b. The approach to the force posturing and costing required simplifying assumptions and rough estimates which preclude their use in definitive program and budget decisions. c. The complexity of the study prevented in-­depth examination of some of the significant issues relating to NATO that have been raised in Congress. Assumptions were made with respect to warning time, reinforcement and readiness requirements, Soviet build-­up rates and warning indicators, and “lag time” for NATO decision. The implications of a full range of these assumptions must be considered because the differences could be quite substantial in terms of force requirements and costs. d. The contingency assessment of our current military capabilities, summarized in Chapter 11 of the report, deals only with the narrow
