1977  125
forces begins with recognition that strategic nuclear deterrence is the 
cornerstone of US and Allied military security, and defines US objec-
tives and establishes alternative criteria through which they might be 
achieved. Specific issues addressed include the requirements for politi-
cal sufficiency, a hard target kill capability, various levels of retaliatory 
capability in the face of Soviet offensive and defensive posture, and a 
strategic reserve force.
The Executive Summary conveys a picture of the scope and breadth 
of the report, and of the issues developed.
(S) Relationship of the Net Assessment and Strategy/Force Posture Study
The two major parts of PRM–10 were performed simultaneously. 
The Net Assessment portion was not available for use by the Force Pos-
ture Study group. A major consequence is that the notional AIMS are 
not directly related either to an approved set of overall national objec-
tives or to a national strategy derived from the Net Assessment. In fact, 
as a consequence of the concurrency of the two portions of the PRM–10 
effort, the alternative national strategies and the notional AIMS were 
developed on independent analytical frameworks; so there is no sys-
temic interconnect between the two.
(TS) Limitations
There are a number of things which this study does not do, and, for 
the most part, never intended to do. These include the following:
a. The breadth and scope of the study effort required a high level 
of conceptual abstraction which makes it useful as a vehicle for iden-
tifying and considering military strategy issues. The study is not suit-
able as a basis for definitive selection of any particular strategy. Because 
they were selected to illuminate subsets of issues, none of the notional 
AIMS was intended to be, nor is, appropriate as an overall strategy to 
meet our national security needs.
b. The approach to the force posturing and costing required sim-
plifying assumptions and rough estimates which preclude their use in 
definitive program and budget decisions.
c. The complexity of the study prevented in-­depth examination of 
some of the significant issues relating to NATO that have been raised 
in Congress. Assumptions were made with respect to warning time, 
reinforcement and readiness requirements, Soviet build-­up rates and 
warning indicators, and “lag time” for NATO decision. The implica-
tions of a full range of these assumptions must be considered because 
the differences could be quite substantial in terms of force requirements 
and costs.
d. The contingency assessment of our current military capabilities, 
summarized in Chapter 11 of the report, deals only with the narrow
