3. Schüller has never been in the United States. He has long wanted to go there and the Government, as Seipel intimated, has for some time been quite willing to avail itself of an opportunity to send him there. “As its leading economic expert, it is thought that an American visit might be a useful asset for him in the future. He plans to visit New York, Chicago and other places. He will not hang around Washington any more than may be necessary, but he will always be within reach. He will not go to the United States with a brass band and will discourage any dinner or other exploitation. He will remain, unless I am greatly mistaken, very much in the background. This is quite in accord with his own personal preference, for he is a modest man and senses himself the danger of any undesirable publicity. I have always found him to be a man of superior tact and he does not, I may say in passing, lack finesse. I can quite understand Minister Prochnik’s motive in recommending originally that Schüller be sent. The Minister did not conceal from me his desire to have someone to share the responsibility with him nor his desire to have an alibi if anything should go wrong. Schüller’s oral report will help the Austrian Government to understand some aspects of American conditions more clearly than would be possible through written despatches. 4. There is the possibility, and indeed the hope, that Schüller may, before his return, conduct some negotiations with the Morgan firm. Schüller tells me that there has been no interchange of communications with this firm for many months. He says quite plausibly that there has been no reason to negotiate, and had the Austrian Government taken any steps in this direction it would probably have been met with the reply that such a proposal was premature. If Congress should act favorably while Schüller is in the United States he would be useful in discussing the details of the securities to be pledged. The Reparation Commission and the underwriting bankers, whoever they may be, must meet on common ground here. A formula must be found which both will accept. It is Schüller’s idea that with some slight modifications perhaps, the formula which was adopted in 1922 will again serve in 1929. In other words, the new loan will be on about the same terms as the old one—with this difference, that there will be in 1929 no guarantor powers as there were in 1922.
