102
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
balance between the U.S. and USSR. On North-South economic issues,
Yugoslavia champions the interests of the developing countries and
supports demands for a New International Economic Order, while
promoting dialogue between developed and undeveloped countries.
On global political issues, Yugoslavia attempts to exercise a moderating
influence but invariably goes along with the non-aligned consensus.
Within the non-aligned movement, Yugoslavia has shown great con-
cern over Cuban efforts to push the movement toward closer affinity
with the USSR and other Communist countries.
18. Belgrade seeks to maintain good relations with all countries,
particularly the major powers, and has generally managed to do this.
In the past two years, Tito has visited the USSR and the U.S., as well
as China, France and Britain. Tito’s efforts to improve relations with
these countries are intended in large part to insure Yugoslavia’s contin-
ued independence and territorial integrity after his departure from the
political scene. The recent Yugoslav effort to improve relations with
China—including the recent visit of Hua Kuo-feng to Belgrade—has
had an adverse effect on Yugoslav-Soviet relations, despite repeated
assurances by Yugoslavia that its relations with one country were not
directed against any other country.
19. As in the conduct of foreign affairs, the Yugoslav leadership
insists on maintaining independence in its domestic policies, which
are devised to meet the country’s rather singular needs and traditions.
A particular form of federalism has developed to accommodate the
diverse political and regional characteristics of Yugoslavia. From a
rigidly Stalinist state in the immediate post-war period, the domestic
system in Yugoslavia has evolved into the most liberal in Eastern
Europe, with considerable freedom of movement and emigration,
access to foreign publications and radio broadcasts and relative toler-
ance of cultural expression. Significant restrictions exist, however, on
freedom of political expression and activity.
20. In the economic sector the Yugoslavs practice a kind of “market
socialism” not found elsewhere in the communist world; the concept
and practice of “self-management” are particularly unique. Belgrade
maintains ties with both CEMA and the EC. Foreign investment—
within limits—is encouraged in Yugoslavia.
21. Although the leadership is now preparing for the post-Tito
era, with all its attendant uncertainties and imponderables, Yugoslav
leaders insist that long-successful policies—non-alignment and self-
management—will be continued after Tito and that the Yugoslav com-
mitment to independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty will not
be altered.
ROMANIA
22. Romania is the only Warsaw Pact member state which has been
able to reduce significantly its economic and political dependence on
