International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1111 3. The fundamental interrelationships between population matters and socio-economic development are recognized in the World Population Plan of Action (WPPA) adopted by 136 countries at the World Population Conference at Bucharest in 1974.4 The plan recommends, inter alia, that countries wishing to affect fertility levels give priority to implementing development programs which are likely to affect fertility norms and behavior, including expanded opportunities for women in education and employment, improved infant and child health and improved family income. Moreover, all countries are urged to respect and ensure the basic human right of persons to determine the number and spacing of their children, and to make available advice, information, and the means for limiting births. 4. In 1979, the first five-year review and appraisal of the implementation of the WPPA, carried out by the UN Population Commission, was the basis last May for an ECOSOC resolution (E/RES/1979/32) containing specific recommendations for priority action by governments for national implementation of the WPPA. This resolution also calls upon the IDS Preparatory Committee to include in the new strategy “full recognition of the interrelationships of population factors and social, economic, cultural, and political development, and the need for full and urgent action to deal with population problems.” More recently, the Colombo Declaration of September 1979, adopted by the International Conference of Parliamentarians on Population and Development, called on the UNGA 1980 Special Session to recognize the integration of population and development as a “key issue in the IDS to be adopted for the next decade.”5 It is believed that all G–77 members have participated in one or more of these expressions of international consensus beginning with the Bucharest Conference. 5. Prior to the 4th session of the Prepcom, scheduled for February 11–29, USUN should contact anticipated leading personalities in the G–77 who are concerned with IDS and have or will have a role in IDS negotiations, either within group or in Prepcom. USUN Mission should raise population issue with them and encourage their active support for incorporation of appropriate references to population growth in the new IDS. In addition to paras. 2–4, you may, for a full exposition of the dimensions and policy implications of the population problem, draw 4 See footnote 6, Document 284. 5 Parliamentarians from 58 nations met in Colombo, Sri Lanka, August 28– September 1, 1979, to review progress made since the 1974 Bucharest Conference. The Colombo Declaration reaffirmed the linkage of population programs to overall national development plans and recommended holding a UN World Population Conference in 1984 to mark the 10-year anniversary of the Bucharest Conference. For additional information concerning the Declaration, see Colombo Declaration on Population and Environment (New York: United Nations Fund for Population Activities, 1979)
