Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Israeli elections, we don’t know. We are aware of Likud’s previous statements, but we don’t know what position he will take. Kardelj: The Arabs have been evolving in a positive sense, including Syria and the Palestinians. But what has happened in Israel might turn things upside down. V.P.: President Carter had an excellent meeting with Asad, and I am sure this will be true with Fahd. Now it will depend on whether progress is possible with Israel. The President has said there has to be a Palestinian territory and that the Arabs have to evolve a process for peace. It is difficult to commence this process considering the ancient animosity of the Arabs and the Jews. Tito: For Israel, the essential thing is for the Palestinians and the other Arabs to declare that they recognize Israel’s right to exist. V.P.: Correct, that is a part of it. Setting aside the PLO, we believe the other Arabs would be inclined to do so. We don’t know about the Kardelj: After they have something in their hands. . . . V.P.: Those are the rumors we hear. . . . Minic: We have been told so by the PLO directly. V.P.: We are hopeful. President Carter hopes to have progress. As you have observed, it is a hot spot and outside help is needed because of the animosity. Tito: There is big hatred in the region. It is unstable. Since 1947 Israel has occupied territories and not complied with UN resolutions. V.P.: We objected to the most recent Israeli settlements. Kardelj: We assume the US will tell Israel not to continue to lie. Tito: In 1967, I told the Arabs, I told Nasser that they had to recognize Israel, that they couldn’t throw Israel into the sea. They didn’t like it, but they accepted it. V.P.: We will press them. Tito: We don’t know how the situation will develop. That is why I am not optimistic. V.P.: What do you, Mr. President, think of the situation in Ethiopia and Somalia? Tito: Ethiopia sent a delegation to Yugoslavia two years ago after the revolution. We had talks and advised them to have a federation with Eritrea. Nothing happened. They came again at a high level. I told them again that federation was the best possible solution. Succession would not be acceptable; it would cut Ethiopia off from the sea.
