3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 500 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI 2. On cruise missile definition, Soviets agreed to separate definitions in treaty and protocol. Treaty definition would cover only those air-launched CMs limited by treaty; protocol definition would cover GL/SLCMs and would expire with protocol. Gromyko several times underscored that everything in the protocol expires at the end of the protocol. He said this three times. Language is to be worked out by delegations. 3. On multiple warhead cruise missiles, Gromyko recognized that “since the circumstances had changed since the time when they proposed a universal definition,” it would be appropriate to deal with multiple warhead cruise missiles only for the protocol period. However, (perhaps since the Politburo had approved the instructions on this point) he would have to seek approval from Moscow for any change in position. My assessment is that they will agree to include the ban on multiple independently-targetable warhead cruise missiles in the protocol only, and I would recommend acceptance of such a provision in the protocol. 4. On the definition of new types, Gromyko raised a new point, acknowledging as he did so that it was “not on the agenda, but very important.” The new point was a proposal that the definition of new types should ban increases of five percent in the limited categories, but permit decreases of up to twenty percent. (The Soviet position recently tabled permits only five percent increases, but unlimited decreases.) Presumably this is intended to accommodate some Soviet program. In this connection, I observed that the delegations should be given instructions to resolve remaining issues forthwith. 5. On telemetry encryption, I began by reaffirming our view that access to information transmitted telemetrically is relevant to verification. Gromyko did not disagree; nor did he respond affirmatively. I think it significant that for the first time in the course of our discussions of this issue, he, by silence, did not dissent from my assertion of the relevance of telemetry to verification. Following that, he offered to recommend to Moscow new language to deal with the issue, which conformed to the “non-proposal” Ambassador Earle had given the Soviet side a few hours earlier, with the addition of three words, provided I would provide the language he proposed to Washington for consideration. The language, with his insertions, follows: “The sides agree that the negotiating record reflects the common understanding that each party is free to use various methods of transmitting telemetric information during testing, including its encryption, except that, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article XV, neither party shall engage in deliberate denial of telemetric information, such as through the use of telemetry encryption, whenever such denial impedes verification of compliance with the provisions of
