3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
500
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
2. On cruise missile definition, Soviets agreed to separate defini-
tions in treaty and protocol. Treaty definition would cover only those
air-launched CMs limited by treaty; protocol definition would cover
GL/SLCMs and would expire with protocol. Gromyko several times
underscored that everything in the protocol expires at the end of the
protocol. He said this three times. Language is to be worked out by
delegations.
3. On multiple warhead cruise missiles, Gromyko recognized that
“since the circumstances had changed since the time when they pro-
posed a universal definition,” it would be appropriate to deal with
multiple warhead cruise missiles only for the protocol period. How-
ever, (perhaps since the Politburo had approved the instructions on
this point) he would have to seek approval from Moscow for any
change in position. My assessment is that they will agree to include the
ban on multiple independently-targetable warhead cruise missiles in
the protocol only, and I would recommend acceptance of such a provi-
sion in the protocol.
4. On the definition of new types, Gromyko raised a new point, ac-
knowledging as he did so that it was “not on the agenda, but very im-
portant.” The new point was a proposal that the definition of new types
should ban increases of five percent in the limited categories, but
permit decreases of up to twenty percent. (The Soviet position recently
tabled permits only five percent increases, but unlimited decreases.)
Presumably this is intended to accommodate some Soviet program. In
this connection, I observed that the delegations should be given in-
structions to resolve remaining issues forthwith.
5. On telemetry encryption, I began by reaffirming our view that
access to information transmitted telemetrically is relevant to verifica-
tion. Gromyko did not disagree; nor did he respond affirmatively. I
think it significant that for the first time in the course of our discussions
of this issue, he, by silence, did not dissent from my assertion of the rel-
evance of telemetry to verification. Following that, he offered to recom-
mend to Moscow new language to deal with the issue, which con-
formed to the “non-proposal” Ambassador Earle had given the Soviet
side a few hours earlier, with the addition of three words, provided I
would provide the language he proposed to Washington for consider-
ation. The language, with his insertions, follows:
“The sides agree that the negotiating record reflects the common
understanding that each party is free to use various methods of trans-
mitting telemetric information during testing, including its encryption,
except that, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article
XV, neither party shall engage in deliberate denial of telemetric infor-
mation, such as through the use of telemetry encryption, whenever
such denial impedes verification of compliance with the provisions of
