204
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
More attention to basic human needs in economic development may
both take the cutting edge off confrontation and—more importantly—
help the invisible one billion poor of the world. At CIEC and OECD
Ministerials, we opened the door for greater US and global emphasis
on this human dimension of development.8 The US will provide sub-
stantial and effective amounts of foreign assistance, and we will urge
other OECD countries, particularly Japan, to increase their development
assistance. We will also intensify the process begun at the London
Summit, CIEC and the OECD to urge the Comecon countries, particularly
the USSR, to become more constructively involved in North-South and devel-
opment efforts. We will also expect the LDCs to make the tough policy
decisions to implement a human needs strategy. The US will adopt pol-
icies on multilateral trade and technology transfer issues which benefit the
LDCs (or at least the poorest among them) at the same time as they ben-
efit us. We also favor organization of international institutions dealing
with resource transfers to enable the LDCs to have major roles in nego-
tiations on international development issues. We will also increase our
focus on women and the disproportionate deprivation of opportunity
they too often endure, both in considering the ways in which our re-
sources are used abroad and in the nomination of candidates for UN
agency positions.
An important objective of this, as of previous administrations in
the last decade, must be to promote family planning and population limita-
tion in areas of high growth. There is often little we can do about this
problem but our concern, technology, and support should be offered to
anyone who needs it.
—More Coordination and Cooperation Among the Trilateral Economies.
We will make little progress on global concerns or the related North-
South Dialogue without sustained economic growth among OECD in-
dustrial nations. The roster of objectives is as vital as it is familiar:
helping the world trading system work better, via successful conclu-
sion as soon as possible of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations; improving
operation of the international monetary order through general guidelines
on exchange rates and expanded financial facilities (perhaps in both the IMF
and the OECD); and giving more serious consideration to a clearer
global framework for investment. Important as these efforts at systemic re-
form are, we must concentrate particularly on problems that have di-
rect impact on our own citizens: unemployment, inflation, and urban
malaise.
8 See footnotes 3 and 5, Document 41.
