in one of the Committee Rooms of the Monroe Palace, in which the Senate
of Brazil meets, and which was placed at the disposal of the International
Commission of Jurists, the delegation of the United States proposed, on
behalf of the Sub-Commission, that Mr. Pessôa, who had registered in the
section of Public International Law, and who was present, be asked to
assume the Presidency of the Sub-Commission, just as in the morning the
Sub-Commission of Private International Law had requested Mr. Rodrigo
Octavio, the other Brazilian Delegate, to preside that Sub-Commission. Mr.
Pessôa yielded to the unanimous desire of his colleagues, and assumed the
Chair.
Thereupon, the American delegation proposed that a committee of five
persons, with the President as its Chairman, and ex-officio an additional
member, be appointed by the President to examine the projects of
international law, in order to determine those which might reasonably be
considered and passed upon in the limited time at the disposal of the
Commission, it was understood that it would adjourn at least before the
24th of May, at which time Messrs. Bustamante and Pessôa would be
obliged to repair to Europe in order to attend the sessions of the Permanent
Court of International Justice at The Hague, of which august tribunal they
have the honor to be members. It was felt that a small committee could
work more quietly and expeditiously than the Sub-Commission, composed
of the representatives of the seventeen Republics. After discussion, the
suggestion was adopted, and the President named the following members:
Mr. Scott, of the United States; Mr. [Carlos] Saavedra Lamas, of Argentina;
Mr. [Alejandro] Alvarez, of Chile; Mr. [Cesar] Zelaya, of Cuba; Mr. [Julio]
Bastos, of Uruguay. Mr. Reeves, of the American Delegation, and Mr. [Luiz
A.] Podestá-Costa, of Argentina, regularly attended the meetings of the
Committee, with the permission of its President.
The American Delegation further proposed that Mr. Pessôa’s Code of
Public International Law, as presented to the Commission of 1912, be
considered as before the present Commission; that Mr. Alvarez’ projects
likewise be considered as before the Commission. Mr. Pessôa assured the
members that he had no desire to force his Code upon the attention of the
Commission, and Mr. Alvarez finally stated that his project laid before the
Conference of Santiago had been merged in those of the American Institute.
