Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 5. To exploit any opportunities in Africa, or elsewhere, to advance Soviet interests, either directly or indirectly; 6. To intimidate the U.S. and its allies by massive propaganda campaigns, such as the one directed at the neutron bomb, and through general vilification of U.S. motives, policies, and society. Our response, accordingly, must be one in which we stress the importance of the U.S.-Soviet relationship, as well as our determination to compete in all areas of the relationship if cooperation does not in fact develop. We should, in view of the above, tell the Soviets very frankly that their behavior in Africa is intolerable.4 If Soviet/Cuban forces are intruded into the Southern African conflict, this will jeopardize detente as a whole and we will react strongly. This should be stated directly, unambiguously, and forcefully. In this connection, specific reference should be made to the Brezhnev-Nixon communique, in which joint rules of restraint were explicitly defined.5 The Soviets should be told that we view them as having violated these jointly agreed rules. In addition, the Soviets should be told that our relationship is now at a watershed. We are willing, anxious, and ready to try to improve it, to widen the scope of cooperation, and to work together on a wide range of issues. We will not stand for a selective detente, in which the Soviet side arbitrarily defines the rules of the game. Decisions that will be made this summer on SALT as well as on other issues will affect our relationship for many years to come. Subject to your revisions of the above, I would recommend that a letter of instructions from you to Cy be drafted and given to him prior to his departure.6 I do not believe that either U.S. interests, or your own leadership, will be well served if the sessions in Moscow become merely a bargaining exercise on the specifics of SALT.7 The state of U.S. public opinion, as well as the thrust of recent Soviet actions, simply do 4 The President underlined the word “intolerable” and placed a checkmark in the right-hand margin next to this sentence. 5 The President underlined the phrase “Brezhnev-Nixon communique” and wrote “give me a copy” in the right-hand margin next to this sentence. Presumable reference is to the “Basic Principles of Relations Between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,” signed by Nixon and Brezhnev in Moscow on May 29,
