1978  413
B. Improvement in European military balance trends. The PRM–10 
assessment noted a sustained trend in the European military balance 
favoring the Warsaw Pact. It indicated that while the Warsaw Pact 
forces were generally superior quantitatively and were making signif-
icant qualitative improvements, nonetheless neither side could be sure 
that it could achieve its objectives in a war. In the past 18 months, the 
efforts by the U.S. to strengthen its early combat capability in Europe 
plus other collective measures to strengthen the NATO forces have 
slowed and perhaps halted the pro-Pact trend, though in absolute terms 
the West still remains at a disadvantage. Full implementation of the 
Long-Term Defense Program will reverse the pro-Pact trend and create 
a military balance in Europe more favorable to the Allies. At present, 
however, NATO disadvantages in chemical warfare, C3, and radio-­
electronic combat remain, with little effort being made to correct them.
C. More active anti-Soviet, pro-West role of the PRC. In 1976–77 it was 
appropriate to speak of a triangular relationship among the PRC, the 
USSR, and the U.S. During the past year, however, the PRC has turned 
outward and assumed a more active role in countering Soviet influence 
in Africa, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and Eastern Europe. It has 
also decided to promote its economic and military strength through 
the import from the West of technology, equipment, and weapons. In 
pursuit of these goals, it has moderated its position on normalization.
As a result of these developments, the relations between the USSR 
and the PRC have deteriorated, and the relations of the PRC with the 
U.S., as well as with the European countries and Japan, have improved. 
Given the additional strains which have developed in U.S.–USSR rela-
tions in the past year, the triangle is now clearly no longer equilateral.
D. Reversal of unfavorable trends in diplomatic relations and political 
appeal. Between 1960 and 1977, changes in U.S. relations with other 
countries were more likely to be in an unfavorable than a favorable 
direction. This was particularly notable during the Nixon and Ford 
Administrations; between 1970 and 1977, for instance, the U.S. suffered 
51 diplomatic “losses” and scored 36 diplomatic “gains.” During these 
same years, the opposite was true for the Soviet Union. Between 1970 
and 1977, Soviet gains (50) exceeded losses (27) by a margin of almost 
two to one. While the past 18 months are too brief to arrive at any con-
clusive judgment about the longer term, they have, nonetheless, seen 
a significant shift in past trends. Changes in U.S. diplomatic relations 
were positive with 30 countries, negative with 21. Changes in Soviet 
diplomatic relations, on the other hand, were positive with only 11 
countries and negative with 25. Improvements in U.S. diplomatic rela-
tions were particularly notable with Third World countries (especially 
India, and in Africa and Latin America) and in Eastern Europe. The 
deterioration in Soviet diplomatic relations was most marked in Africa,
