842 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI establishing PPCM at final assembly facilities only—­since we already have one at Votkinsk (for the SS–25), the Soviets would only have to agree to establish one new facility, at Pavlograd (for the SS–24). However, for such an approach to pass muster with the Senate, it may be necessary to complement PPCM of final assembly facilities with (1) a regime for tagging missile launch cannisters and (2) a ban on the presence of individual missile stages at any location other than rocket motor plants, motor test facilities, and final assembly facilities. While more work needs to be done on this approach, I believe that it would meet our needs and would also be negotiable. Because it would also treat launch cannisters as the “accountable item” for missiles (that use cannisters) vice first stage motors, this approach would also have the virtue of resolving the stage vs. cannister issue: For missiles with cannisters, the cannisters would count; for missiles that do not use cannisters, the accountable item would be the first stage. — SSI: I understand that I am about to receive Washington’s views on the ad ref deal on suspect-­sight, so I will withhold my comments for now. I only hope that my instructions on right-­of-­refusal are negotiable. If so, we might be able to close out SSI in Geneva. — Throw-Weight: This is also one that, much to my surprise, could be resolved here. After much dickering, the Soviets appear ready to buy the concept of “potential” throw-­weight—­the only key remaining issue on this one is whether we can compromise on the so-­called “range standard.” Pointing out that they have agreed in the treaty to reduce throw-­ weight by “approximately” 50 percent, the Soviets also want some wiggle room in getting down to this level. Again, I think some kind of compromise is possible. — Tagging: There are really two problems here. The first is what we tag. We both agree to tag missiles, but then agreement breaks down: We also want to tag mobile launchers, but the Soviets won’t agree to this unless we are also prepared to tag bombers, including the B-2. For the Soviets (who increasingly suspect that we won’t deploy any mobile launchers), this is an issue of reciprocity. Thus, I don’t think they are prepared to budge. In my view, the solution is to limit tagging to mobile missiles. The second problem is technical: It appears that both Moscow and Washington are having trouble at the expert level in getting their act together on tagging. The Soviets have not yet agreed on a date for experts meetings here in Geneva on tagging. Meanwhile, I understand we are having some problems with our tag reader. The net result is that we may not have a tagging regime ready for treaty signature. While there is little you and Karpov can do to solve these technical problems, you could simplify them by at least agreeing to tag only missiles.
