National Security Policy  1161
Certain major U.S. Naval forces possess a significant nuclear retalia­
tory strike capability. This capability rests primarily in the attack carrier 
striking forces and a growing capability in submarine-launched ballis­
tic missiles.
There are 14 attack carriers and 16 associated carrier air groups 
in the fleet. Normally, 4 to 5 attack carriers, with their embarked air 
groups, are deployed in overseas areas in position to strike assigned 
targets. Technological advances in aircraft, carrier facilities, electronic 
equipments and improved operating techniques have materially 
increased Navy’s nuclear weapon delivery capability. The 4 CVA 59 
(FORRESTAL) class carriers have increased nuclear striking power, 
improved operational flexibility and enhanced safety of operation. 
Action will be taken in FY 1961 to increase the U.S. nuclear retaliatory 
strike capability by deploying one additional FORRESTAL class carrier 
in each of the SIXTH and SEVENTH Fleets, loaded with nuclear-­capable 
attack aircraft. KITTY HAWK, another FORRESTAL class carrier, will 
join the fleet before end FY 1961 and will provide additional nuclear 
striking power to the U.S. retaliatory capacity and will replace one of 
the 7 World War II ESSEX class carriers still in the operating inventory.
Present operational capability for guided missile delivery of 
nuclear warheads from surface ships and submarines is represented by 
REGULUS system for which nuclear warheads are stockpiled. REGULUS 
is installed in 5 submarines (one of which is nuclear powered) and 2 
heavy cruisers, all assigned to Pacific fleet. There are 9 more subma­
rines equipped with REGULUS radar guidance system (TROUNCE) to 
provide terminal control of a REGULUS missile launched from either 
a submarine or cruiser. One launching submarine is continuously 
deployed on station in North Pacific waters with target assigned. The 
other 4 are available in times of tension.
The first 2 Fleet Ballistic Missile (FBM) POLARIS submarines have 
been commissioned and are conducting pre-­deployment tests and will 
be operational with missiles on board prior to end CY 1960. Seven more 
FBM submarines are presently under various stages of construction. A 
total of 6 are scheduled to be operational in CY 1961. Congress autho­
rized 5 additional FBM submarines for a total of 14 and long-­lead items 
funding for 7 more in the FY 1961 Budget. POLARIS missile develop­
ment has progressed rapidly and all major milestone dates have been 
met. The missile was successfully fired from a submerged submarine 
on 20 July 1960.
Included in naval forces are Fleet Marine Forces which contribute 
to the over-­all nuclear retaliatory capability. This capability is con­
tained primarily in 3 Marine Aircraft Wings, one of which is main­
tained in the Pacific. The 3 Marine Divisions, including the division in 
the Pacific as well as the Battalion Landing Team maintained afloat in
