902  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Regarding space activities, the President said he had talked with 
Dr. Glennan. The significance of the space problem is that it affects the 
morale of our people. In the field of space there are a certain number 
of things that affect defense directly. Basically, however, the program 
is scientific. Dr. Glennan had asked for $930 million, and he has asked 
Dr. Glennan to cut this down substantially. While space is important 
to morale, he asks what would happen to the world’s morale if our 
dollar—­the world’s banking currency—were to soften. He asked the 
group to look at every project with a jaundiced eye. He said he did 
not want to gouge Defense because it is the biggest but thought every­
one should be tightening up. He added that if he were convinced of 
the necessity for additional funds for the nation’s security, he would 
instantly go out and get the additional taxes. Mr. Gates said that on 
some of these decisions the best that could be done was to make an 
intelligent guess or gamble. Mr. Douglas added that some people had 
wanted crash programs on the missile output. Referring again to the 
B–70, the President said he had asked what the other elements in the 
military situation would be at the time the B–70 became available. What 
counter-­measures would the Soviets have, for example. On the pro­
posal that the B–70 should be used for reconnaissance he commented 
that we have an excellent reconnaissance vehicle in work right now. He 
recognized the validity of General White’s statement that we must not 
put all our eggs in one basket and rely wholly on missiles. He thought 
we were far from doing so, however.
Mr. Gates mentioned a comparative study that is being made on 
use of missiles and aircraft. Dr. York pointed out that while there is no 
doubt about missiles from a technical standpoint, they will not be exer­
cised like aircraft, and the parent units may lose their verve, somewhat 
as the Coast Artillery did in times past.
The President said that all we really have that is meaningful is 
a deterrent. If the Soviets think the B–70 is more effective than mis­
siles, then it has value. If they do not, it is valueless. Dr. York said 
that the concentration the President had just suggested on deterrent 
value should be stated as basic national policy. The President said 
that beyond the deterrent we would provide for other things such 
as the cold war. He thought we would be cutting back our base sys­
tem greatly in future years. He noted that armament is now in a tran­
sitional period and that if we are thinking of something that is not 
operational for eight years this is not a transitional item but is simply 
a supplement to the missile force.
The President said that, with regard to atomic weapons, if we use 
thousands of small weapons we would be in a general war situation, in 
which the hydrogen weapon would be used, making the smaller ones 
insignificant. He had no objection to a reasonable number for tactical
