Afghanistan
619
February 1980 the following items were delivered: (See Attachment B
for full report).3
a. 60 AK–47 Assault rifles,
b. 60,000 rounds of AK–47 ammunition,
c. 20,000 rounds of .303 ammunition,
d. 200 magnetic anti-tank mines, and
e. 3 RPG–7 launchers and no more than 50 rockets.
During the week of 24 February the delivery to Gailani consisted of:
a. “About” 200 magnetic anti-tank mines,
b. “About” 60 anti-tank rockets, and
c. 30 AK–47 Assault rifles and a quantity of ammunition.
3. AmEmbassy Kabul on 20 February 1980 reported on the insur-
gency in Wardak Province and stated that it might parallel insurgency
in other provinces.4 Paragraphs 5–8 concern the smuggling of arms
from Peshawar to Wardak. Paragraph 9 states: “A caravan reaching
Wardak on about January 25 reportedly brought twelve ‘shoulder-fired
anti-tank guns,’ ninety ‘long-range’ rifles, one ‘dah shoba’ (phonetic—
10 branches?) anti-aircraft weapon, and three ‘multi-purpose’ weapons
usable against aircraft or tanks. The rifles were allegedly ‘American
made.’ The other arms were of Chinese origin, one source’s informants
say. A 120-man caravan is expected to reach Wardak from Peshawar
on about March 5 . . . with more weapons. (Comment: The information
about the arms smuggling was provided in early February, before the
Washington Post and New York Times published stories alleging that the
U.S. was clandestinely supplying arms to Afghan rebels.5 None of our
sources has indicated that any of the smuggled arms came from U.S.
or Pakistani suppliers.)” (Kabul Embtel 0690, Attachment C).
4. In sum, the weapons and supplies supplied by this Agency
appear to be getting through to the insurgents and without the U.S.
hand showing.
Stansfield Turner6
3 Attachment B, not printed, is an intelligence information cable, March 3, that
reported comments made by Hossain Gailani, nephew of Syed Ahmed Gailani, who noted
the insurgents’ greatest need was for anti-aircraft weapons, because Soviet “helicopter
gunships are almost impossible to bring down with conventional arms.”
4 Attachment C, not printed, is telegram 690 from Kabul, which reported claims
made by insurgents in Wardak, a province west of Kabul, that they were preparing a
Spring offensive, and that these plans might be part of a broader plan for increased rebel
attacks in other provinces. The Embassy concluded that the information was accurate.
5 See footnote 3, Document 209.
6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
