1092  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Popular. The more reactionary elements of the elite, lacking strong sup-
port of their own and bitterly opposed to APRA, will probably continue 
to support Acción Popular and will give at least covert encouragement 
to the Communists in an effort to cut down APRA’s strength. However, 
the presidential candidate favored by APRA will almost certainly win.
35. If, on the other hand, Beltrán’s economic program failed, any 
progress toward solution of Peru’s longer range economic problems 
would be seriously impaired. With the growth of inflation and unem-
ployment, the chance of serious strikes and riots would greatly increase, 
probably leading to Beltrán’s resignation. It is highly unlikely that another 
man of his stature and vigor could be found, and Prado would probably 
have to rely more heavily on military support to serve out his term.
36. In the event of a severe and prolonged economic relapse lead-
ing to widespread privation and discontent, the eventual outcome 
would probably be a return to at least provisional military rule. This 
would probably lead to the suppression of APRA and other popular 
political movements, thereby forcing them to turn to more violent and 
extremist tactics.
37. During the next few years the Communists are likely to play an 
influential but not decisive role. As long as constitutional order is main-
tained, APRA will continue to compete effectively with the Communists 
for mass support. On the other hand, it the economic situation deterio-
rates seriously and APRA is suppressed, Communist prospects would 
obviously improve.
38. Even if the Beltrán program succeeds, it will only provide a basis 
for long run development measures. In the long run the dominant posi-
tion of the politico-­military elite will probably come under increasing 
attack from the lower classes. If basic measures for economic develop-
ment and accommodation to popular pressures are delayed indefinitely, 
it is probable that violent social revolution will eventually take place.
V. Foreign Policy
39. Peru has maintained a policy of close and friendly ties with the 
U.S. and has been firmly pro-West in orientation. Of the major Latin 
American countries, Peru has the least contact with the Soviet Bloc. The 
only bloc mission, a Czech legation, was expelled in 1957 for engaging 
in subversive activity. While Peru now has generally friendly relations 
with the other Latin American countries, its boundary dispute with 
Ecuador continues to cause sporadic periods of strained relations with 
that country.
40. Peru is generally dissatisfied with U.S. commercial policy, 
and the U.S. imposition of lead and zinc quotas in 1958 provoked 
widespread criticism of the U.S. In the National Congress there was 
demand for an increase in Peru’s minimal trade with the Soviet Bloc.
