3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 739 3. Whatever we do in the region, it will be costly.15 The more we can do with our allies, the better, but the major initiative will have to come from us. These are painful and difficult issues. We will never know whether any of this could have been averted, but we do know one thing: if we do not respond in a timely fashion, the consequences of an inadequate response will be even more horrendous because our vital interest in the Middle East will soon be directly affected. I will be chairing an SCC meeting on this in the next several days. I will also be discussing these issues with my European colleagues at the Tuesday16 meeting—though, naturally, in a very tentative fashion, without any commitments. Any guidance you could give me for either meeting would be very helpful.17 15 Carter underlined “it will be costly.” 16 January 15. 17 Beneath this paragraph, Carter wrote, “a) We should probe for more normal relations among friends of SU, i.e. Angola, V.Nam, Cuba, Ethiopia, Syria, Iraq, etc. as feasible. b) A quick move to consult with P[rime] M[inister] Gandhi is needed. We must leave the door open for her & encourage Pakistan & PRC to do the same. c) Economic consultations with LDC’s should be expedited, with rich OPEC & our trading partners involved to discuss food, energy, raw materials markets, etc. d) Assess how Mid East peace effort is affected.” 257. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Embassy Moscow Assessment of the Impact of U.S. Economic Denial Measures (U) Embassy Moscow has provided an assessment of the economic impact in response to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.2 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1–2/80. Secret. Sent for information. Printed from a copy that does not bear Brzezinski’s initials. 2 Brzezinski summarized the text of telegram 529 from Moscow, January 10, in this memorandum. The initial “C” is written in the upper right-hand corner of the telegram, indicating that Carter saw it. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 82, USSR: 1/9–15/80)
