1955 7 He added that talks should not be confined to above question because number of other issues exist between China and US. Wang then proposed following agenda: 1. Return of civilians of both sides to their respective countries. 2. Other practical matters at issue between two sides. Regarding second item he proposed each side might put forth matters they desired discuss so that there might be free exchange of views. After few words of introduction, I expressed gratification at release of flyers and agreed it would facilitate our discussions. I said agenda proposed appeared in accordance with agreement between our two governments and I had no objection to it. Not­ ing fact neither Wang nor I had brought stenographer I proposed that in interest maintaining maximum informality this practice be continued at future meetings. I also proposed that we do our best conduct these talks in atmosphere of privacy. And that we agreed neither of us will make any public statements or otherwise make available to press any information whatever concerning these talks except in agreement with each other or after prior notification to each other. Wang declared he welcomed spirit in which I spoke and added that so long as both sides sincerely desire solve problems favorable results could be achieved. He stated it was advisable at first meeting discuss procedural matters and that he was glad note there was no difference of opinion regarding procedure. Since there was no objection regarding agenda he proposed discussion of first item begin August 2 at 10 A.M. Regarding question publicity, Wang said he agreed in principle that information should only be released after mutual agreement. He proposed that as first meeting was closely followed by world press and statements would receive attention throughout world each side be free release statement made at today’s meeting. At second meeting public­ ity question should be further discussed. He expressed pleasure at fact that there was no disagreement on agenda and suggested that it also be released to press. Texts of agreed statement as well as my oral statement to press through Consulate PAO by separate telegram. Gowen
