138 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement facilities; (c) improvement of educational systems and training facilities; (d) improvement of public health; and (e) mobilization of domestic resources. In subscribing to this Act, the Latin American Governments recognized the principle of self-­help and pledged themselves to give greater and more urgent attention to the basic social needs of their own people. Initial financing of the new program will come from the $500 million authorization voted by the U.S. Congress just prior to the Bogotá meeting. The Executive Branch intends to seek actual appropriation of funds during the next session of the Congress in January. The recently created Inter-American Development Bank will be the primary mechanism for administering the funds. Our representatives at Bogotá made it clear that the U.S. Government contemplates continuing support for the new social development program. If the funds are used effectively, and if Latin American countries indicate that they are making a genuine self-­help effort to improve social conditions, further assistance should be forthcoming after the initial funds are committed. We also made clear that we regard the new program as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, programs of assistance to basic economic and industrial development. We indicated, in fact, that we would favor further increases in basic development assistance from the U.S. to Latin America on suitable terms. Similarly, the new program is not expected to interfere with, or substitute for, normal technical assistance programs of the International Cooperation Administration in Latin America. The U.S. Government views the recently signed Act of Bogotá as a major evolutionary step in U.S. policy toward Latin America, adding to existing programs of economic development a broad new dimension of aid for social development. In the words of Under Secretary Dillon, the American Republics have ushered in a “new era” of inter-American social and economic cooperation. It is to our interest, therefore, to give widest publicity to U.S. participation in this venture, through all possible channels, setting the U.S. effort into the context of a cooperative drive by the inter-American community to improve the social condition of the individual. While the new social development program is considered a matter of greatest urgency, some time will unavoidably elapse before Congress appropriates funds to make it fully operational. During this initial phase, and until definitive steps actually are taken, the public should be kept adequately informed, but care should be taken not to overplay the program. Joint efforts of all members of the Country Team will be required to present the facts to all audiences within your country. While basic
