1978 219 strategicвҖ”Вӯwould carry a high riskвҖ”Вӯthough not the certaintyвҖ”Вӯof escalating the conflict to a full-Вӯscale thermonuclear exchange. But if deterrence of nuclear war is our most fundamental defense objectiveвҖ”Вӯand it surely isвҖ”Вӯwhat counts is what Soviet civilian and military leaders believe. On that score, unfortunately, we face another uncertainty. What we see as sufficient for security may appear as quite inadequate to them. What would deter us might not deter them. What some of us consider credible as a deterrent, they may dismiss as a bluff. Great caution and careful hedging are essential in the face of these uncertainties. Basically, they require us to insist on essential equivalence with the Soviet Union in strategic nuclear forces. Because of the stakes, no lesser requirement will do. We do not propose to plan against total irrationality. Rather, the issue is how to make it clear to the Soviets that they cannot gain any military or political advantage from their strategic forces. Insistence on essential equivalence guards against any danger that the Soviets might be seen as superiorвҖ”Вӯeven if the perception is not technically justified. By essential equivalence, we mean the maintenance of conditions such that: вҖ”Soviet strategic nuclear forces do not become usable instruments of political leverage, diplomatic coercion, or military advantage; вҖ”Вӯnuclear stability, especially in a crisis, is maintained; вҖ”Вӯany advantages in force characteristics enjoyed by the Soviets are offset by U.S. advantages in other characteristics; and вҖ”Вӯthe U.S. posture is not in fact, and is not seen as, inferior in performance to the strategic nuclear forces of the Soviet Union. These conditions exist today, and our objective in the current SALT II negotiations is to maintain them in the future. But owing to the current and impending improvements in Soviet strategic offensive and defensive capabilities, we will have to continue our own effortвҖ”Вӯ primarily for increased research and development for the Missile-X (MX) Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM), development and some deployment of cruise missiles, deployment of the Mark 12A warhead, and introduction of the TRIDENT missiles and submarines. III. THE GENERAL PURPOSE FORCES It should be evident that, in an era of mutual strategic deterrence, we must become more concerned than ever about a number of regional balances, and about the adequacy of U.S. and allied conventional capabilities. Strategic parity has not created this problem; the United States and its allies have been at risk to Soviet nuclear attacks for many years. But nuclear parity has forced all of us to recognize that the use of the more traditional types of force by our adversaries may seem to them less risky than formerly.
