1978  219
strategic—­would carry a high risk—­though not the certainty—­of esca-
lating the conflict to a full-­scale thermonuclear exchange.
But if deterrence of nuclear war is our most fundamental defense 
objective—­and it surely is—­what counts is what Soviet civilian and 
military leaders believe. On that score, unfortunately, we face another 
uncertainty. What we see as sufficient for security may appear as quite 
inadequate to them. What would deter us might not deter them. What 
some of us consider credible as a deterrent, they may dismiss as a bluff.
Great caution and careful hedging are essential in the face of these 
uncertainties. Basically, they require us to insist on essential equiva-
lence with the Soviet Union in strategic nuclear forces. Because of the 
stakes, no lesser requirement will do.
We do not propose to plan against total irrationality. Rather, the 
issue is how to make it clear to the Soviets that they cannot gain any 
military or political advantage from their strategic forces. Insistence on 
essential equivalence guards against any danger that the Soviets might 
be seen as superior—­even if the perception is not technically justified.
By essential equivalence, we mean the maintenance of conditions 
such that:
—Soviet strategic nuclear forces do not become usable instruments 
of political leverage, diplomatic coercion, or military advantage;
—­nuclear stability, especially in a crisis, is maintained;
—­any advantages in force characteristics enjoyed by the Soviets 
are offset by U.S. advantages in other characteristics; and
—­the U.S. posture is not in fact, and is not seen as, inferior in per-
formance to the strategic nuclear forces of the Soviet Union.
These conditions exist today, and our objective in the current 
SALT II negotiations is to maintain them in the future. But owing to 
the current and impending improvements in Soviet strategic offensive 
and defensive capabilities, we will have to continue our own effort—­
primarily for increased research and development for the Missile-X 
(MX) Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM), development and some 
deployment of cruise missiles, deployment of the Mark 12A warhead, 
and introduction of the TRIDENT missiles and submarines.
III. THE GENERAL PURPOSE FORCES
It should be evident that, in an era of mutual strategic deterrence, 
we must become more concerned than ever about a number of regional 
balances, and about the adequacy of U.S. and allied conventional capa-
bilities. Strategic parity has not created this problem; the United States 
and its allies have been at risk to Soviet nuclear attacks for many years. 
But nuclear parity has forced all of us to recognize that the use of the 
more traditional types of force by our adversaries may seem to them 
less risky than formerly.
