September 18–December 16, 1978 279 discussion of the Middle East by saying he supposed each of us would retain our own concepts with regard to the Middle East. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Middle East.] 77. Editorial Note In the aftermath of the resumption of artillery clashes between Lebanese Christian militias and Syrian forces in the area around the Lebanese capital, Beirut, on September 27, 1978, a new, more intense round of fighting broke out on September 30. That morning, the U.S. Embassy in Beirut reported the shelling of the villages of Bikfayah and Beit Meri by Syrian artillery, the “first time villages in [the] Christian heartland have been subject to bombardment since [the] Syrians came.” (Telegram 5704 from Beirut, September 30; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780399–0898) For Embassy officials, this new round represented a “qualitative change for the worse” and was “the heaviest fighting since the 1975–76 civil war.” This “significant escalation,” they suspected, had been “intentionally provoked” by the Lebanese Christian militias in order to “dissuade” Lebanese President Elias Sarkis from asking for a renewal of the Arab Deterrent Force (ADF), the multi-national Arab peacekeeping force dispatched to Lebanon in the aftermath of the 1975–1976 conflict, which was due to expire. They also speculated that the Lebanese Christians may also have provoked the fighting “as a way of pressuring USG to follow through on [the] idea of [an] international conference on Lebanon.” Despite this, however, the Embassy believed that the Syrian forces were “very seriously over-reacting.” (Telegram 5710 from Beirut, September 30; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780399–1206) Hostilities escalated further early on October 2 as Syrian forces began shelling East Beirut. The Embassy in Beirut cabled regular situation reports to Washington on the continuing artillery duels between the Syrians and the Lebanese Christian militias between October 2 and October 5. The telegrams are in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File. President Jimmy Carter asked the Department of State to prepare policy recommendations for bringing an end to the crisis in Lebanon. In response, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance prepared for Carter a memorandum outlining twelve possible initiatives the U.S. Government could undertake. At the beginning of the undated memorandum, Vance wrote that any “serious effort, to resolve, rather than simply to
