First Responses
57
4. UN Security Council. The Iranians are calling for a UNSC meeting
to establish a commission to investigate the Shah’s crimes and return
his assets to Iran.10 All agreed that a formal debate in the Security
Council was undesirable, and Ambassador McHenry has been
instructed to attempt to turn off the request.11 If a UNSC meeting
cannot be avoided, we would take the position that there should be
no discussion of the Shah until after the hostages are released, since
that represents a clear violation of the UN Charter and international
law. (C)
5. Diplomatic Relations. The SCC believed that severing diplomatic
relations with Iran at this point would complicate the efforts which
are presently under way, including the PLO and the Iranian Chargé
who is trying to get a meeting with Khomeini. It could also introduce
unpredictable and possibly unproductive consequences from the Irani-
ans; however, the possibility of a break in relations should not be
precluded as part of a larger deal. Secretary Vance felt that other
friendly nations would probably resist any attempt to persuade them
to join us in breaking relations. The British Ambassador only yesterday
recommended to London that they cut back as far as possible but
maintain their staff in Tehran. The Mexican withdrawal is related to
their own expectation that the Shah will return to Mexico at some
point. State will do a more complete assessment of these questions on
an urgent basis. (S)
6. Contact by Kurds. State has informed our Embassy in London
not to meet with the Kurdish delegation seeking to contact us there.12
We could probably not get the Kurds to do more than they are already
doing, and the contact could be used as evidence of hostile intent. (S)
7. Embassy Security. State briefed the press last week on the precau-
tions which had been taken at the embassy, but the story got little play.
State will make the attempt again to get the story out. (C)13
10 As reported in a memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski, November 13. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 17, SCC Meeting #200
held 11/13/79)
11 Not found.
12 The Department instructed the Embassy not to “have any contact with dissident
Kurds at this time. Any public suggestion that we are having such contacts could have
dangerous consequences for the hostages.” (Telegram 294989 to London, November 13;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 30, Subject
File, Iran 11/1/79–11/10/1979). The Embassy had requested instructions in telegram
22387, November 13, 1979. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P840175-1684)
13 Carter wrote in the margin: “Let Jody & Hodding issue a written report—send
me a copy.”
