620
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Mosadeq. It is noteworthy that Mosadeq’s opponents have not based
their attacks against the principle of limiting the Shah’s powers, but on
the quid pro quo of also limiting those of Mosadeq, i.e., cancellation of
the Majlis grant of plenary powers. The Government in turn was
careful not to put before the public any such clear-cut issue as a choice
between Mosadeq or the Shah.
Present Popularity
As to the Prime Minister’s popularity the following comments are
revealing. April 7 the Consul at Tabriz sent a message to the Embassy
which stated that it was apparent the Prime Minister’s hold over Azer-
baijan had “weakened visibly” during the previous two months. The
Consul noted an increasing amount of publicly expressed opposition to
Mosadeq indicating a decline in his personal prestige, and that the at-
tempt of the Prime Minister to undermine the Throne had resulted in
increasing the Shah’s prestige “to the detriment of Mosadeq”.
In a letter dated April 1, 1953, the Consul at Isfahan made the fol-
lowing comment:
“I think I should report that for many weeks now people with
whom I have talked have spoken with growing dissatisfaction about
Dr. Mosadeq and the ‘government’ in general. Articulate persons are
dissatisfied with lack of accomplishment, non-progress toward settle-
ment of the oil controversy, new taxes and regulations governing for-
eign commerce. They talk mysteriously of a coming change in Tehran,
that matters cannot go on as at present. This comment is not meant to
be a public opinion poll, but just a report of comments and the thinking
of some of the ‘better class’ people with whom I have talked.”
The Consul at Meshed reported at this time that the people there
seemed to want both Mosadeq and the Shah.
In late June the Consuls at Isfahan and Meshed largely confirmed
their previous reports. The Consul at Isfahan found the “lower class
still supporting Mosadeq”, although opposition to him was increasing
among the middle and upper classes. He noted, however, that “feeling
generally is apathetic”. At Meshed the Consul remarked a “swinging
back to Mosadeq” on the part of “hedging opportunists”, but that “only
the Shah is popular with all”. The Consul there also stated that Mo-
sadeq’s main strength lies in the belief that all other politicians are
worse.
In April 1953 the TCI Regional Directors were of the opinion that
while the Prime Minister was still able to maintain control of the prov-
inces through his appointees to provincial posts, “his popularity with
the general public seems to be undergoing considerable strain . . .” In
mid-June these same Directors “were agreed that Mosadeq does not
enjoy the same popularity he commanded a year ago . . .”
