708 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 265. Editorial Note President‘s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski wrote in his memoir: “On April 23, the day before the rescue mission, Carter decided that no concurrent attacks on other targets would be undertaken.” He added that President Jimmy Carter also decided that during the following day, D-day, he would conduct business as usual in the Oval Office, I would operate out of my office, and Brown would be in touch with me from DOD, while General Jones would conduct the operation from the National Military Command Center.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, page 496) In his memoir, Carter notes that on April 23 he “received a lastminute intelligence briefing about Iran, encapsulating information received from all available sources. The substance was that there was little prospect of the hostages‘ release within the next five or six months, and that everything was favorable for the rescue mission. Our agents in and around Tehran were very optimistic.” He met with Senator Robert Byrd (D–West Virginia) that evening about notifying Congress. They went over a bipartisan list of senators “who should be notified of any secret operation of this type. I had planned to let him know about the impending rescue mission at the end of this conversation, but now I decided to brief him and the others during the following night, after our team was actually in place and ready to enter Tehran. I therefore told him that such an operation was imminent, but not when it would be launched.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, page 513–514) According to an August 28 memorandum from Colonel Stebbins and an updated paper attached to the memorandum, the following taped conversations occurred April 24–25 between Joint Task Force headquarters at Wadi Kena and the White House. Because of secrecy requirements, normal recording capabilities were not used. Instead, a portable cassette recorder was connected to the secure instrument provided for dedicated point-to-point contact. The recorder required manual start-stop for each transmission and, therefore, had no electronic means of establishing the time for each call. Stebbins also provided codenames used for other people engaged in the calls. (Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–02–0007, J–3 DDSO, Box 7, Iranian Hostage Crisis 1979–1984, L14–19 Telephone Conversations) The following excerpt is pages 11–12 of a 24-page transcript labeled 2808 Tape #1 Side One. All brackets except those denoting text not declassified are in the original: Carter: Hi David. Jones: Yes sir, Mr. President. Much clearer.
