594 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 223. Message From President Carter to Japanese Prime Minister Ohira1 Washington, March 25, 1980, 2346Z WH30387. Please deliver the following message to Prime Minister Ohira at the earliest opportunity: Dear Mr. Prime Minister: During the past 150 days that our diplomats have been held hostage in Iran, I have valued your support and advice. The actions that your country has implemented have helped to isolate Iran politically and to bring home to the Iranian leadership the high costs of their continued violation of international law. Notwithstanding the efforts that all of us have made, Iran continues to affront world opinion and has made no move towards release of our people or of improvement in their condition. Because of Iranian intransigence and the suffering of the captives, I have come to the conclusion that the time has come for stronger measures. Unless Iran moves before Monday2 to show its goodwill and willingness to resolve the crisis by transferring the hostages to government control and improving their condition of detention, I will order the following additional measures: —Implementation of formal economic sanctions against Iran as provided for in the UN Resolution;3 —A compilation by the Treasury Department of all claims against Iran, with the suggestion that we may move unilaterally to settle those claims out of blocked assets; —The expulsion of all Iranian diplomatic and consular officers from the U.S. We continue to need your active support and assistance. As a first step, it would be valuable if you would communicate now with President Bani-Sadr so that he might clearly understand the seriousness of the present moment and the consequences that will flow from continued Iranian intransigence. The U.S. strongly hopes that you and our other close friends will let the Iranian officials know that in the event the above steps do not 1 Source: Carter Library, Office File, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 73, Middle East, 3–5/80. Secret; Flash; Via Batman channels. The same message was sent to Giscard in telegram WH80368, to Thatcher in telegram WH80398, to Schmidt in telegram WH89365, and to Cossiga and Trudeau in telegram 79098 to Rome and Ottawa, all March 25. (All ibid.) 2 March 31. 3 UNSC Resolution 461; see Document 128.
