766 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Bartholomew: Recall when President Bush wrote to President Gorbachev making this proposal, including the element of a ban on MIRVed mobile ICBMs in this START agreement. President Gorbachev responded no, not in this agreement. But he said we should address the question of a mobile MIRV ban in START II. That is what we are trying to work here. Karpov: We propose a more general formula. Let us say “reduce the concentration of warheads on strategic nuclear delivery vehicles, including questions related to MIRVs.” (Break until 3:30) Bartholomew: We should continue with the option of completing our work in time to brief ministers before dinner. Karpov: Let us conclude work on the joint statement on future negotiations first. Bartholomew: On non-­circumvention we have an agreed treaty article, an agreed statement, and a US unilateral statement. If you say this issue is closed on this basis, we can record that in the joint statement on START. The statement you have made to us would in effect stop US/UK cooperation with Trident. Not continuing the long-­established pattern of cooperation is not acceptable to us. We cannot and will not accept bounds or limits on cooperation with the UK which has gone on for decades. We will not enter into a treaty that destabilizes our alliance structure. This is not just a matter of decades-­long cooperation with the UK, but the stability of the entire structure of alliances. We cannot subordinate this to START. The US has gone a long way to meet your concerns, further than we have ever gone before. Cooperation with the US is not going to make the UK a nuclear superpower. If you tell us Trident II is the end of the line, that is a treaty blocker. I do not say this in a negotiating sense, there is nothing here to negotiate. This is the position of my leaders, this is what they will be saying. Karpov: We do have a good basis for reaching agreement. We have agreed on a text of article XIII, agreed on a text of a joint statement, and we take note of the US text. The US statement leaves open the possibility of a situation concerning future cooperation with the UK concerning strategic offensive arms. What you want is totally unconstrained cooperation with the UK, even allowing expanded cooperation as compared with what we have now. We have talked about an exemption for current cooperation, we are not talking about future cooperation unconstrained. That is too much. What we advocate is to reach agreement with current practice, exempt the current practice as it exists, the Trident II program.
