Yugoslavia 921 some of his opponents, as well as some journalists, for passing up an important chance to concretely underscore U.S. support for Yugoslavia at a critical moment. (C) 3. Consultation with the Allies. The trip provides a valuable opportunity for the President to consult with the allies (especially Schmidt, Thatcher and Giscard) and to coordinate policy on a broad range of issues at a moment when allied solidarity is—or at least is perceived to be—beginning to unravel. A meeting with the major allies could serve to shore up this solidarity and give it a shot in the arm. But this will require leadership that only the President can provide. In lieu of that, as Bob Blackwill has pointed out, East-West detente will be left in the hands of Schmidt and Giscard, who may succumb to attempts by the Soviets to exploit fissures in the Alliance. (C) 4. Domestic Political Considerations. The trip could help the President domestically. He would capture the headlines, be seen meeting with world leaders and providing international leadership while the Vice President campaigns in New Hampshire—and he could be back in the White House in 48 hours. (C) 5. The Soviet Angle. Because of Brezhnev’s health, and with Kosygin incapacitated, it is far from certain that he will attend the funeral. (The Soviets only sent their Ambassador to Kardelj’s funeral—a point not lost on the Yugoslavs.) If Brezhnev does not go—and my guess is that he won’t—then there is no problem. Vance could meet quietly with Gromyko or you could meet with Alexandrov.3 If Brezhnev does go, then the President can hardly avoid meeting with him. While any such meeting is unlikely to result in any dramatic change in Soviet policy or a major improvement in bilateral relations, it need not turn into a shouting match. At the very least it would provide an opportunity for the President to: —make clear to the Soviets at the highest level in a firm nonpolemical manner the nature of our concerns over Afghanistan and the reasons for our actions; —reaffirm his belief in the need to dampen military competition and move forward in areas such as MBFR, SALT and CSCE; —project an image of firmness and determination to defend vital U.S. interest; —keep open the lines of communication and leave the door ajar for any Soviet initiatives at a later date. (C) 3 Andrei M. Aleksandrov-Agentov, a member of the Secretariat of the General Secretary, Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and Brezhnev’s foreign policy adviser.
