762
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
III. FUNCTIONAL GUIDANCE
A. Military/Technical Criteria
The Soviets have stated that they will table their own military/
technical criteria at Round IV. We should be prepared to discuss these
criteria in conjunction with the eight military/technical criteria which
the US side tabled in Round III, with the aim of reaching agreement.
We should also be prepared to discuss such supporting measures as
controls on retransfers, arms sales promotional activities and physical
security, as appropriate. Controls on the transfer of weapons manufac-
turing technology7 should be sought as necessary to prevent circum-
vention of other agreed restraints on transfers of weapons themselves.
Thus, co-production controls should be sought only for weapons
whose transfer is restrained pursuant to military/technical criteria.
B. Political/Legal Criteria
With respect to political/legal criteria, the Delegation should con-
tinue the discussions which began at the third round on the parallel US
and Soviet drafts. To the extent consistent with the position paper on
political/legal criteria prepared for the third round,8 the Delegation
should work with the Soviet side to develop mutually acceptable cri-
teria. However, these efforts should be coordinated with the pace and
tenor of the discussions on the other CAT issues, particularly the mili-
tary/technical criteria, so that agreement on political/legal criteria
does not take place prematurely.
C. Consultative Mechanism
The Delegation is authorized to build upon the presentation in
Round III to seek agreement on the establishment of, and the functions
of, a consultative mechanism to refine and implement the under-
standings arrived at by the two sides in the CAT rounds. The Delega-
tion is also authorized to present, for purposes of discussion, illustra-
tive examples of how such a mechanism might be structured and to
seek Soviet responses in order to refine our own approach to the ques-
tion. In particular, the Delegation should seek Soviet thoughts as to the
best way to structure multilateral consultations. Any consultative mech-
anism should be designed to implement agreed restraint measures.
7 Defined as co-production, licensed production, or co-assembly. [Footnote is in the
original.]
8 Not found.
