900 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement In concluding the meeting, the President invited the Chiefs to come in to see him whenever they wished to. A.J. Goodpaster Brigadier General, USA 217. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Augusta, Georgia, November 21, 1959 OTHERS PRESENT Secretaries Gates, Brucker, Francke, Douglas, Dr. York, General Brown, Mr. Logan, General Goodpaster The President said he had met with the Chiefs of Staff to discuss the military program for fiscal 1961. One question in his mind related to the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean. He felt that its presence there was largely just a matter of habit. It is no longer the asset it once was to the right flank of the European defense position, because of the advent of long-­range thermonuclear missiles. He said he had asked Admiral Burke to take an objective look at this question. The next item that he had strongly questioned was the B–70. We have the B–58 coming into inventory and various missiles behind it. To put as much into the B–70 project as is proposed and have from it a vehicle nearly ten years from now seemed to him to be a very doubt­ ful proposition. He wondered what the counter measures would be by that time. General White had previously expressed great concern over this, stating that if we drop this weapon we would be stand­ ing on our inventory and not going into a new field. The President thought that NACA is conducting forward research in this field, and indicated he did not share General White’s concern. Dr. York said he thought the general design of the B–70 aircraft is sound. Technically, it represents a big step forward. For example, there is a change in construction material from aluminum to stainless steel. If we are to go above mach 3, it will be necessary to use steel. For reasons of pro­ moting technical progress, Dr. York said he was inclined to want to go forward with this. Even if there is no good military reason to carry 1 Source: U.S. military program: B–70; national defense system; budget, space activ­ ities; missile programs; Panama. No classification marking. 6 pp. Eisenhower Library, Papers, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
