World Hunger and Food Policy
685
President will need if he is to fulfill the promise he has made to double
foreign aid by 1982.3
One additional suggestion: The Soviets have traditionally been
very difficult on this issue—refusing to participate in international con-
ferences, etc. As you know, they have proposed three CSCE initiatives
for international conferences on energy, environment and transporta-
tion. Perhaps we could respond with an American proposal at the fall
CSCE meeting for a food and nutrition conference—pegged on the connec-
tion between human needs and human rights.4 This would: (1) consti-
tute an American initiative at CSCE which the President wants, and
(2) be visible evidence of the fact that the US is not backing off on
human rights, without being provocative to the Soviets (at least in a
way they can acknowledge). Hormats is very dubious about this idea.
He feels that the LDCs would resent it as an attempt to insert a
North-South issue into the East-West conflict. Perhaps some more
work would define some useful variant of it.
Recommendations:
1. That you make clear at the meeting that you view this as a major
foreign policy issue, on which the NSC is preparing to begin an intera-
gency study—in which all concerned Executive Office departments
will be appropriately involved.
2. That you do not think that we should start any public relations
programs, such as Bourne proposes, until we have our policy pretty
well worked out. Public conferences before that time would only serve
to advertise and increase our present lack of direction.
3. That you suggest that Chip’s role be focused on the relationship
of human needs to the global human rights agenda, and that a substan-
tive role for him be developed on that basis. It should be emphasized
that creating domestic support for this idea would be of very real value
to the President.
4. That you approve further work on the proposal to suggest some
kind of food and nutrition conference as an American initiative of the
CSCE Review Conference.5
3 Carter made the pledge to double foreign aid by 1982 at the London Economic
Summit in early May, and Vance discussed it with Congressmen on May 25. Information
is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume III, Foreign Economic
Policy.
4 The CSCE Review Conference opened on October 6 in Belgrade, Yugoslavia.
5 There is no indication whether Brzezinski approved or disapproved any of the
recommendations. According to an NSC Correspondence Profile attached to another
copy of the memorandum, the memorandum was returned to Tuchman on June 29 with
instructions that it was to be held. Another copy was sent to Brzezinski on July 14 for de-
cision. The last entry in the Correspondence Profile, October 11, indicates the memo-
randum was OBE. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Box HE–6, Subject Files—
Executive, 1/20/77–9/29/77)
