1955 65 59. Letter 2 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 2 Washington, August 10, 1955 Dear Alex: I hope to get off a short note to you by each pouch (Monday, Wednesday and Friday) whether or not there is much that is new to pass on to you. The report of the 4th meeting on August 8 was illuminating. It was good to see how well you met the cleverness of Wang Ping-­nan and kept him on the defensive despite the resourcefulness of his approach and the subtlety of his misrepresentations. We are struck by the fact that the full report of the meetings gives an appreciation of the atmosphere of the talks no condensed summary can convey. Walter Robertson and I hope to meet with the Secretary today on your 364 which anticipates questions which will probably arise in the near future. We concur that the question of what degree of perform­ ance on Americans will be considered sufficient for our agreement on representation ought to be deferred. There is considerable skepticism as to whether we should be prepared to give on the representation proposal to the extent that you suggest. The symbolic significance of the representation issue has become magnified here and every angle of any agreement we make will be exposed to the closest scrutiny in many quarters. The GRC of course is watching us like a hawk on this. Wellington Koo was in yesterday chiefly to stress the dangers implicit in any concession on the representation issue going beyond students who take the initiative to return to the mainland. I am sending you a copy of this memorandum of conversation. It is true that friends and relatives of Chinese in this country can now write them from China, but this is not the same as writing to an officially designated representing Embassy. I have no doubt that the Chinese Communists have the resources to get the names and addresses of great numbers of Chinese students in this country and to arrange for real or pretended relatives in China to address the Indian Embassy in regard to them. Thus the Indian Embassy might get involved in a mass of cases. This would give the Chinese Communists the widespread access they want to Chinese students in this country in practice, whether they have it in theory or not. We hope to get an instruction to you on this by the end of the week. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.
