Negotiating Channels
363
4.) Once the hostages are safely released, the US is prepared to lift
the freeze of Iranian assets and to facilitate normal commercial relations
between the two countries, on the understanding that Iran will meet
its financial obligations to US nationals and that the arrangements to
be worked out will protect the legitimate interests of US banks and
other claimants. The US is prepared to appoint members of a working
group to reach agreement on those arrangements.
5.) The United States is prepared to appoint a representative to
discuss with Iranian representatives the current threat posed by the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and to recommend to their government
steps that the US and Iran might take in order to enhance the security
of Iran, including the resumption of the supply of military spare parts
by the United States to Iran.
6.) The US Administration is prepared to make a statement at an
appropriate moment that it understands the grievances felt by the
people of Iran, and that it respects the integrity of Iran, and the right
of the people of Iran to choose their own form of government. The
United States Government recognizes the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran as the legal government of Iran. The US reaffirms that
the people of Iran have the right to determine their own form of
government.
138.
Memorandum for the Record by Director of Central
Intelligence Turner1
Washington, January 11, 1980
SUBJECT
Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 9 January 1980 [portion marking not declassified]
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
4. I then delivered my paper on possible resolution of the hostage
issue.2 I emphasized that the main line of action in it that was somewhat
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 95M01183R: Policy Files (1977–1981), Box 1, Folder 3: DCI Turner—Eyes Only Files—
Memos and Meetings with Various Officials and Subjects. Top Secret; [handling restrictions
not declassified].
2 Paper prepared by the Director of Central Intelligence, “The Hostage Situation,”
January 9. Turner wrote that early release was unlikely, that Khomeini held the key to
their release, and that economic pressure would have a negative effect on the situation.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran
1/1/80–1/10/80)
