526 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 entirely. We should hold out some slim chance, however slight. Vance will announce tomorrow that he is meeting with the co-chairmen of the Commission. Jody Powell said we should brief the editorialists and columnists on a background basis.16 He felt it would be useful to provide them some detail on the scenario for their own information but not for publication. Others felt that we should limit ourselves to confirming that the Commission was to see the hostages but not go into detail about what was to have happened after that. We should maintain that line at least until the end of the week after we have had the opportunity to follow up on our contacts. Admiral Turner will get out through his channels the line that the present Government of Iran is not following Islamic principles.17 (C) 16 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “I want key top editors briefed.” 17 Below this sentence, Carter wrote: “and that real gov’t authority is non-existent.” 205. Paper Prepared in the National Foreign Assessment Center, Central Intelligence Agency1 PA 80–10121 Washington, March 1980 Iran: Exporting the Revolution [portion marking not declassified] An Intelligence Assessment Key Judgments Iranian leaders, including Ayatollah Khomeini and President Bani- Sadr, are ideologically committed to aiding other Islamic revolutionaries. The Iranians see their revolution as an example for other “oppressed” peoples and believe that the organizational and ideological techniques they developed to topple the Shah can be used by others. Internal problems have thus far forced Tehran to limit its official support for other revolutionaries largely to propaganda. Even this rhetoric, however, has greatly alarmed some of Iran’s neighbors, espe- 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job 81T00208R: Production Case Files (1979–1980), Box 2, Folder 16. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Prepared by the Iran Task Force and coordinated with the Office of Strategic Research and the National Intelligence Officer for Near East and South Asia.
