of promoting mutual, intellectual and social understanding. (See Appendix 23)28 Topic 6. Exchange of Professors and Students. The same considerations apply with regard to this subject as to the preceding one regarding the establishment of scholarships and fellowships. In addition, the matter of recognition of professional degrees is a matter controlled by the State governments and not one in which the Federal Government may interfere. Topic 7. To recommend the establishment of special chairs, supported or subsidized by the government, for the study of the Spanish, English and Portuguese languages and of their respective literatures. In the United States the establishment of special chairs for instruction in specific subjects is left to the private initiative of the various universities and colleges, which are not subsidized or supported by the federal government, although many of them receive pecuniary aid from state governments. In general it may be said that the Spanish language and literature is widely taught in the United States, and in most of the larger colleges courses in Portuguese are also available. In general it may be asserted that the United States has gone far along this line. Naturally an increase in the study of the English language and its literature in the Latin American countries will be a distinct advantage in bringing about a more intimate knowledge of this country in Latin America and you should accordingly look with favor upon the adoption of such a resolution as is forecast in this item. As this contemplates a procedure requiring in the United States legislative action and an appropriation by Congress you will of course say nothing which might encourage the hope that it will be adopted in this country. In many of the Latin American countries which maintain a government department of public instruction it is possible that special chairs might be established and supported by the Government through an executive decree. This would not, of course be the case in this country.
