Costa Rica 435 participated in drafting. The recommendations were then reviewed by the contributing members of the Embassy staff, who were invited to suggest revisions or additions. This resulted in several additions, but otherwise no alterations were made in my original draft. The Embassy staff concurs in the opinion that the following recommendations should be placed before the Operations Coordinating Board. Recommendation No. 1 Overall Recommendation as to the Operation of the OCB In a personal and confidential letter to the Secretary on November 13, 1959 (Tab A)4 I stated in substance that I felt the United States was lax in its system of implementing policy and made a recommendation for new functions of the OCB (see in particular page 2, paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of Tab A). I have been making similar recommendations for more than four years, which I gathered together in another memorandum which was presented to the Chiefs of Mission Conference in El Salvador during April of this year. It is entitled “Policy and Performance” and is attached as Tab B. Recommendation No. 2 Political – Reference (15 c (1)—Enforcement and Adoption of Laws to Control Communist Activities The entire problem of communist penetration of Latin America stems from a lack of Latin American appreciation that communism is imperialist intervention by Russia. In Latin America it is generally believed that the communists are just another political party. Also, in a sense, the communist are, at times, at the very least put up with because of the superficial but widely accepted idea that the way to get help from us is to appear to embrace communism. Step No. 1, which I feel might in a year’s time cause a realization of the degree of this communist intervention in Latin America, would be the general adoption of a law modeled on our old Foreign Agents Registration Act.5 This I recommended on June 3, 1958. (See Tab C.)6 Other steps might be undertaken to encourage further participation in intelligence and counter-­intelligence training programs for armed forces, and police. Such training is available from Army sources, and can be used to emphasize the nature of the Soviet threat to hemispheric security. 4 Not printed 5 For text of this Act, Public Law 583, 75th Cong., approved June 8, 1938, see 52 Stat. 631. 6 The recommendation was contained in a letter to Rubottom, not printed.
