238 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I continues to remain involved—inextricably—despite Vietnam and the other difficult, if less searing, experiences of the last decade. We cannot afford to see the rest of the world dominated by another power. Our safety depends in large part on an orderly diffusion of power rather than an attempt to concentrate it in our own hands, let alone having it fall into a single power center elsewhere. We need independence, territorial integrity, and freedom from external attack not only for ourselves but for others as well. We recognize that need through our treaty and nontreaty commitments. We would, in my view, find it virtually impossible to preserve our internal liberties if we were an island of democracy in a sea of totalitarianism. We could hardly hope to maintain a stable and expanding economy if we were deprived of external markets. Defense in this modern age would become an almost intolerable burden if we did not have allies to contribute both resources and strategic locations to the collective security. In a time of instant communications, we could hardly insist on human rights at home and silently watch their violation abroad. Maybe it has become a cliche, but we do in fact inhabit an interdependent world. Our own actions have widespread international effects. Decisions by other nations can have a major impact on us as well. The oil embargo of 1973 and the subsequent increase in our petroleum imports—which now make up half our oil consumption—constitute only the more obvious index of interdependence. We are bound to care— and care deeply—about what happens in many parts of the world. Because of our power and influence, other nations are bound to care about us; some of them will always seek our involvement in their problems. Isolation today is about as relevant for the United States as the one-horse shay. Perhaps we have been too much of an international busybody in the recent past. But no one can doubt that there remains much to busy us in this dynamic world. The Soviet Challenge Our principal long-term problem continues to be the Soviet Union. Whether we like it or not, the Soviet leadership seems intent on challenging us to a major military competition. To quote a friend and colleague—someone whose professional efforts over the past 15 years have been focused on arms control and who during most of that time has considered that U.S. actions were driving the competition: The principal factor driving the arms race now is the Soviet military buildup, strategic and tactical. The most evident—and dangerous—features of this challenge arise from the steady annual increases, in real terms, in the Soviet de-
