Chapter 5, May–June 1990 693 — Addressing the preamble of the Soviet draft, Nazarkin explained that the second sentence had been changed to conform to U.S. references to reducing the risk of war, not just nuclear war; the Soviets had added “transparency and predictability” to the third sentence in order to accommodate U.S. interests; and “equal security” had been replaced by “security.” In the first paragraph of the body of the statement, the Soviets had added “the sides will hold consultations regarding future talks,” and the sentence acknowledging the right of either side “to raise . . . issues related to any kind, type or component of strategic offensive arms with a view to their limitation. Nazarkin said the second sentence of the second paragraph had been formulated to explain the concept of strategic stability on the basis of what the U.S. side had said in Geneva. In the third paragraph, Soviet aims were more precisely expressed, without preempting results and U.S. views were accommodated by striking out “experts group.” In the fifth paragraph, “in particular” had been deleted. — Burt commented that, while the U.S. side could not agree to the revised Soviet draft, it regarded the draft as much improved over earlier versions. He contended that the Soviet side was engaged in old thinking in talking about new negotiations and a sequential approach to the process. Regardless of draft language issues, he urged adoption of the concept of building on the results of the current negotiations rather than reinventing the wheel, expressing the hope that there would never again be such a long and complex treaty. — Burt also observed that, while the U.S. side believed additional measures taken to strengthen stability would also result in additional reductions, the explicit focus on strengthening stability underscored new thinking on the part of the United States. The U.S. draft was a good deal more specific about how stability and reductions should be achieved. Drawing on the Bush proposals to Gorbachev it included the phrase, “. . . beginning with the ban on mobile MIRVed ICBMs, leading to a ban on all MIRVed ICBMs.” — Burt said the U.S. draft reflected a different attitude toward the relationship between offense and defense than the Soviet draft, and asked Ambassador Smith to comment on that aspect. Smith said that in spite of differences with the Soviet draft, he also saw similarities and some positive ideas. Although the Soviets addressed the relationship between offenses and defenses differently, at least the concept was there, as was the question of new technology. — Regarding the subject of the third paragraph, Smith outlined the principles guiding the U.S. approach. DST should continue after START concludes, if, as was likely, there was no agreement at that time. While this may not be a difference between the two sides, it was not mentioned in the Soviet draft. The United States believed that the sides
