Eastern Europe Region
147
in Poland would have most negative consequences for East-West
relations in general and U.S.-Soviet relations in particular.” (Public
Papers: Carter, 1980–1981, Book III, pages 2771–2772)
On December 4, the CIA received an urgent message from a highly
valuable and well placed source in the Polish General Staff, Colonel
Ryszard Kuklinski. Kuklinski informed the CIA that the Soviets had
decided to invade Poland with 15 divisions, 2 Czechoslovak divisions,
and 1 East German division on December 8. (Benjamin Weiser, A Secret
Life, pages 219–221) Despite Kuklinski’s information, the final decision
on Soviet intervention had been delayed until after a special meeting
of the Political Consultative Committee (PCC) of the Warsaw Pact
scheduled to take place in Moscow on December 5. At the meeting,
Polish First Secretary Stanislaw Kania, informed the other Eastern Euro-
pean leaders that the Polish leadership had instituted a group working
on imposing martial law in Poland, arresting the leadership of Solidar-
ity, and creating an armed militia of party functionaries. While the
Warsaw Pact leaders cautioned Kania of the danger of having the
situation further deteriorate, it was agreed that the Polish leadership
should still attempt to resolve the situation on its own. (From Solidarity
to Martial Law, pages 141–161)
On December 7, the National Security Council met to discuss the
situation in Poland and U.S. reactions. President Carter approved the
text of cables to be sent to the United Kingdom, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, and other U.S. allies, as well as the United
Nations Secretary General and NATO Secretary General. Following
the meeting, the White House issued a statement: “Preparations for
possible Soviet intervention in Poland appear to have been completed.
It is our hope that no such intervention will take place. The United
States Government reiterates its statement of December 3, regarding the
very adverse consequences for U.S.-Soviet relations of Soviet military
intervention in Poland.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–1981, Book III,
page 2785)
On December 8, Bureau of Intelligence and Research Director Ron-
ald I. Spiers briefed Western Ambassadors in Washington on the U.S.
assessment of the Polish situation. In telegram 326216 to multiple posts
December 9, the Department of State informed all NATO capitals that
Spiers told the Ambassadors that the Soviets had completed prep-
arations and military intervention could happen without further
notice. Spiers reported: “Military signs are sufficiently ominous that
whatever steps can be taken to affect Soviet decision making should be
taken now.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800587–1069)
By December 11, the Soviet leadership had decided to wait for a
Polish solution to the crisis. In a meeting of the Soviet Politburo, chief
