562 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 120. Memorandum From Charles Stebbins of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, April 10, 1979 SUBJECT The President as Commander-­in-Chief (U) I have listed some substantive and cosmetic actions at the Tab that the President could take to enhance the public’s perception of him as Commander-­in-Chief of the Armed Forces, and to reverse what I sense to be a growing alienation of the military community from him. (C/S) Certainly, the President’s decisions on Vietnam amnesty, B–1, Defense veto, military pay cap, etc., have been controversial, and he faces some similarly difficult decisions in the near future (SALT, CTB, M–X, the military retirement system, etc.); but I do not believe that the inevitable consequences of such decisions need be a lessened leadership image and an alienated military community. (C/S) Rather, I believe that the perception of the President as Commander-­ in-Chief can be improved perhaps substantially by our making his already considerable contacts and involvements with the military more visible to the public, and by increasing their number and scope. (C/S) I also believe that the President can reverse the alienation process by being sensitive to the special psychological needs of the military community in making its members feel that as their Commander, the President regards them with “special” affection and not just as another category of “federal government employees.” Very simply, these people—­who endure the hardships of life in missile silos, submarines and remote locations away from families—­believe they are indeed “special” and that their peacetime sacrifices deserve public recognition and appreciation no less than their wartime sacrifices. I feel that some additional and carefully considered bows in this direction by the President could produce dramatic results. (C/S) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 59, Administration’s Policy: General: 1–7/79. Confidential; Sensitive. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote “good, ZB” in the upper right corner of the memorandum.
