Third, as ships pass from the first to the second group they may
be replaced in the former by completed new construction; but in
the event that the tonnage of the second group had already been
entirely taken up by over-age vessels an equivalent tonnage from
the second group would have to be scrapped;
Fourth, the total tonnage of the first group could be filled up to its
limit by new construction and thereafter new construction could
only proceed as vessels of the first group passed the age limit.
Insofar as our present situation is concerned such a proposal would not
require immediate scrapping. In the allowed 500,000 tons of surface craft
we could retain 10 Omahas, 60,000 tons, also approximately 50,000 tons of
old cruisers and all our 307,000 tons of destroyers. In the over-age tonnage
of 125,000 we could place our remaining 115,000 tons of very old cruisers
or we could maintain such other subdivision of cruisers and destroyers as
appeared desirable. As new cruisers are completed we could fill up the first
group to the allowed 500,000 tons and thereafter transfer over-age vessels
to the second group as required and scrap the oldest vessels when the
125,000-ton limitation is reached. (All figures in Washington standard
tons.)
This proposal as advanced is of advantage to Great Britain in that the total
tonnage figure is camouflaged and permits her to build up to a total of
500,000 tons of cruisers and destroyers below their proposed age limits of
16 years for cruisers and 12 years for destroyers. Great Britain is in a
position to fill the supplementary group of 125,000 tons during the life of
the treaty with efficient vessels which are now less than 16 years old (which
we could not do) and gives them a clear advantage over the United States of
all vessels placed in the second group. Before we could discuss such a plan
we should have to devise modifications which would give us adequate
compensation in second group.
The Japanese do not desire a total tonnage limitation which will lead to new
construction on their part, as they have stated that their people would force
them into building if the treaty permitted it. On the basis of approximately
300,000 tons of surface craft in first place they would not have any free
tonnage available for construction other than that tonnage required for the
