Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I the matter is primarily carried out in a domestic context. There is a vacuum here that the State Department ought to fill. We suggest that you meet soon with Dick Cooper, EB and others to discuss how we can become more involved and what we should be pressing for in this area.46 Attached is a list of proposals which might be explored for possible new initiatives.47 C. North/South Issues: You have expressed an interest in spending more time on these issues. Your support, and speeches, have been very valuable for what progress we have made in the last two years; but you will have to spend more time in the bureaucratic arena, and in getting fully acquainted with the substance of these complex matters, to have the desired impact. We have been more effective at setting broad directions than in obtaining practical movement. The recent fiasco on the liberalization of the Compensatory Finance Facility makes the point. Budgets and politics make dramatic new North/South initiatives unthinkable. But as listed in previous memos, there are a number of specific issues on which progress may be possible (e.g., a bond guarantee scheme to increase LDC access to private credit and debt questions).48 We are working on a contingency fund proposal as part of the FY’81 ESF budget. And we may want to suggest to you that Tom Ehrlich set up a working group, perhaps including SFRC and HFAC staffers, to work on a streamlined foreign aid bill, looking toward our FY’82 submission.49 Church and Zablocki should be consulted first. This would lay the groundwork for Congressional action in 1981. D. Institutional Issues: We would encourage you to make a conscious effort to upgrade the role and performance of the Department in the next eighteen months.50 Thanks to your stature and standing with the President, the Department usually is involved in key policy decisions. However, participation by your top officials is often not institutionalized—it is only a result of your involvement on an ad hoc and case-by-case basis.51 When you leave, your successor may find that the Department’s presence in the key decision-making processes is again 46 Vance underlined this sentence, placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to it, and wrote: “ok after Labor Day.” 47 Not printed is an undated, 1-page set of proposals entitled “Energy Initiatives.” 48 Vance underlined this sentence. 49 Vance underlined this sentence. In the left-hand margin next to it, he wrote “interesting.” 50 Vance underlined this sentence. In the left-hand margin next to it, he wrote “yes.” 51 Vance underlined the portion of this sentence from the beginning and concluding with “institutionalized.”
