72  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Gorbachev said this was more or less what the Soviets were 
ready for. They had also been prepared to open the talks in May. He 
asked whether the Secretary had any comments on the negotiations 
themselves.
The Secretary said the U.S. had finished its foreign policy reviews 
but had not quite completed its reviews of each and every element of 
the various arms control negotiations. We expected to be ready to go 
on the agreed date and to maintain a considerable degree of continuity 
in our positions. In START we were prepared to use the joint draft text 
as a basis for discussion, but we reserved the right to make new pro-
posals or to change the proposals of the previous Administration, and 
we assumed the Soviets also reserved such a right. But we expected a 
considerable degree of continuity.
Shevardnadze said that he and the Secretary had also agreed to 
resume the Nuclear Testing Talks and chemical weapons consulta-
tions about the same time as the Nuclear and Space Talks. There were 
also consultations planned on conventional forces. But the Soviets had 
received no support from the Secretary on their proposal to negotiate 
on tactical nuclear weapons.
Gorbachev said he would like to press that further.
The Secretary said Gorbachev should go ahead and press away.
Gorbachev said he would do so since the Secretary agreed. From 
what the Secretary had said, he wanted to emphasize that disarmament 
for development was a problem not only for the Third World, but also 
for the Soviet Union and the United States. It had taken the Soviets a 
while to find this out, but it was true. Future generations of Soviet and 
American analysts would want to see how our two countries, in pursu-
ing the arms race, had marched almost to the abyss.
Returning to NST, Gorbachev said he welcomed what the 
Secretary had said about the U.S. approach to the negotiations on a 
50-­percent strategic arms reduction. We were not, however, beginning 
from scratch. The Soviets agreed that we had to build on what we had 
achieved in the past. Since the U.S. was in the last stages of developing 
its detailed position he wanted to emphasize three problems.
Generally speaking, Gorbachev explained, a 50-­percent reduction 
was a tremendous undertaking. The INF experience was good and 
important, but it was not enough for this new treaty. We would need 
to work to build trust further. Any suspicion that either side was seek-
ing advantage would harm the prospects for reaching agreement on 
the key issues. One example of this was the problem with air-­launched 
cruise missiles. The U.S. proposal would give the U.S. the chance to 
have about 8,500 nuclear warheads, not 6,000. The Soviets had to ask 
themselves whether the U.S. was trying to outsmart the Soviet side.
