1979 715 is required in order to gather worldwide intelligence, conduct vital diplomatic functions, execute command and control of the military forces, provide for continuity of essential governmental functions, and reconstitute the political, economic and social structure of the Nation. It is National policy that the telecommunications resources of the country shall have inbeing attributes to ensure the flexibility, adequate residual capacity and restorability to fulfill these needs. In support of national security policy and strategy, the Nation’s telecommunications must provide: —Connectivity between the National Command Authority and the Strategic forces to support a flexible execution of retaliatory strikes during and after an enemy nuclear attack. —Support for the vital functions of worldwide intelligence gathering and diplomatic affairs. —Responsive support for operational control of the armed forces, even during an extended nuclear war. —Support of mobilization in all circumstances including nuclear war. —Continuity of government and all essential government functions and services before, during, and after a nuclear war or natural disaster, to include those functions essential to life support, weapons construction, and the survival or reconstruction of the industrial complex. —Recover of the political, economic, and social structure of the Nation during and after a nuclear war or natural disaster. The following objectives are established: —Telecommunications requirements for national security, continuity of government, and government functions vital to the national survival should have priority in the restoration of services and facilities in national emergencies. —Interstate common carrier networks (including specialized common carriers and domestic satellite carriers) shall be interconnected and capable of interoperation in emergencies at selected, proximate, breakout points outside of likely target areas. —Outside of likely target areas, the backbone facilities of interstate common carriers should be situated to avoid collateral damage from nuclear attack. The Government will make available the necessary information to allow such siting. —The Government shall plan for emergency use of industry private line communications that have significant capabilities. —All functionally similar government telecommunications networks shall be capable of interchange of traffic in emergencies.
