1979  715
is required in order to gather worldwide intelligence, conduct vital dip-
lomatic functions, execute command and control of the military forces, 
provide for continuity of essential governmental functions, and recon-
stitute the political, economic and social structure of the Nation. It is 
National policy that the telecommunications resources of the country 
shall have inbeing attributes to ensure the flexibility, adequate residual 
capacity and restorability to fulfill these needs.
In support of national security policy and strategy, the Nation’s 
telecommunications must provide:
—Connectivity between the National Command Authority and 
the Strategic forces to support a flexible execution of retaliatory strikes 
during and after an enemy nuclear attack.
—Support for the vital functions of worldwide intelligence gather-
ing and diplomatic affairs.
—Responsive support for operational control of the armed forces, 
even during an extended nuclear war.
—Support of mobilization in all circumstances including nuclear 
war.
—Continuity of government and all essential government func-
tions and services before, during, and after a nuclear war or natural 
disaster, to include those functions essential to life support, weap-
ons construction, and the survival or reconstruction of the industrial 
complex.
—Recover of the political, economic, and social structure of the 
Nation during and after a nuclear war or natural disaster.
The following objectives are established:
—Telecommunications requirements for national security, conti-
nuity of government, and government functions vital to the national 
survival should have priority in the restoration of services and facilities 
in national emergencies.
—Interstate common carrier networks (including specialized com-
mon carriers and domestic satellite carriers) shall be interconnected 
and capable of interoperation in emergencies at selected, proximate, 
breakout points outside of likely target areas.
—Outside of likely target areas, the backbone facilities of inter-
state common carriers should be situated to avoid collateral damage 
from nuclear attack. The Government will make available the necessary 
information to allow such siting.
—The Government shall plan for emergency use of industry pri-
vate line communications that have significant capabilities.
—All functionally similar government telecommunications net-
works shall be capable of interchange of traffic in emergencies.
