3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
718
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
concentration of naval forces near Iran and in the region of the Persian
Gulf, as well as in many other cases, about which it would have been
necessary as a minimum to notify us?
“In connection with the content and spirit of your message I con-
sider it essential to again clarify the point that the request of the Af-
ghanistani Government and the satisfaction of this request by the So-
viet Union are exclusively a matter for the USSR and Afghanistan,
which regulate their mutual relations themselves, by mutual agree-
ment, and naturally cannot permit any sort of interference from
without in their mutual relations. They, as any member states of the
UN, enjoy the right not only to individual self-defense, but to collective
defense as well, which is envisioned by Article 51 of the UN Charter,
which the USSR and USA formulated themselves. And this was ap-
proved by all member states of the UN.
“There is, of course, no basis for your assertion that our actions in
Afghanistan allegedly threaten the peace.
“In light of all of this, the immoderate tone of certain formulations
in your message hit us squarely between the eyes. What is the purpose
of it? Would it not be better to evaluate the situation more calmly,
keeping in mind the supreme interests of the world rather than, ulti-
mately, the mutual relations of our two powers.
“Concerning your ‘advice,’ we already informed you, and here I
repeat again, that as soon as the reasons which prompted the Afghanis-
tani request to the Soviet Union disappear, we fully intend to withdraw
the Soviet military contingents from Afghanistani territory.
“And here is our advice to you: The American side could make its
contribution toward ending the armed incursion from without into Af-
ghanistani territory.
“I do not believe that the work to create more stable and produc-
tive relations between the USSR and USA can be in vain. Unless, of
course, the American side wants this to be. We do not. I think it would
not be to the benefit of the United States of America itself, either. It is
our conviction that the way relations develop between the USSR and
the USA is a joint matter. We believe that they must not be subject to
vacillation under the influence of some kind of attendant factors or
events.
“Despite disagreements on a number of issues in world and Euro-
pean politics, which we understand quite clearly, the Soviet Union is an
advocate of conducting affairs in the spirit of those understandings and
documents which were adopted by our countries in the interests of
peace, equal cooperation, and international security.
