1230  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
1. That all the territory of the continental United States, all Alaska 
including the Aleutian Islands, all the territory of Canada and all the 
territory of the Soviet Union will be open to inspection.
2. If the Government of the Soviet Union rejects this broad proposal, 
to which is related the proposal for inspection in Europe, referred to in 
paragraph D below, the Governments of Canada, France, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States (with the consent of the Governments 
of Denmark and Norway) propose that:
All the territory north of the Arctic Circle of the Soviet Union, Can­
ada, the United States (Alaska), Denmark (Greenland), and Norway; 
all the territory of Canada, the United States and the Soviet Union west 
of 140 degrees West longitude, east of 160 degrees East longitude and 
north of 50 degrees North latitude; all the remainder of Alaska; all the 
remainder of the Kamchatka peninsula; and all of the Aleutian and 
Kurile Islands will be open to inspection.
D. With regard to inspection in Europe, provided there is com­
mitment on the part of the Soviet Union to one of the two foregoing 
proposals, the Governments of Canada, France, the United Kingdom 
and the United States, with the concurrence in principle of their Euro­
pean allies and in continuing consultation with them, subject to the 
indispensable consent of the countries concerned and to any mutu­
ally agreed exceptions, propose that an area including all of Europe, 
bounded in the south by latitude 40 degrees North and in the west by 
10 degrees West longitude and in the east by 60 degrees East longitude 
will be open to inspection.
E. If the Government of the Soviet Union rejects this broad pro­
posal, then, under the same proviso expressed above, a more limited 
zone of inspection in Europe could be discussed but only on the under­
standing that this would include a significant part of the territory of the 
Soviet Union, as well as the other countries of Eastern Europe.
F. The system of inspection to guard against surprise attack will 
include in all cases aerial inspection, with ground observation posts at 
principal ports, railway junctions, main highways, and important air­
fields, etc., as agreed. There would also, as agreed, be mobile ground 
teams with specifically defined authority.
G. Ground posts may be established by agreement at points in the 
territories of the States concerned without being restricted to the limits 
of the zones described in paragraphs C–l and–2, but the areas open to 
ground inspection will not be less than the areas of aerial inspection. 
The mobility of ground inspection would be specifically defined in the 
agreement with in all cases the concurrence of the countries directly 
concerned. There would also be all necessary means of communication.
H. Within three months of the entry into force of the convention, 
the parties will provide to the Board of Control inventories of their
