March 27–December 31, 1979
939
the end of the month with the existing working groups. Only on Leb-
anon have we not made much progress, but even there I sensed greater
Israeli concern about the course they are on than their formal position
reveals. Coupled with my talks in Egypt, this visit brings us into transi-
tion to a new and more active phase in the negotiations and on the
broader Middle East stage. End summary.
3. My meetings2 with Begin were, of course, the centerpiece of the
talks here, and Sam Lewis is sending a more detailed report on those
two meetings. I deliberately spent a good deal of time conveying to
Begin Sadat’s strong, positive feelings about his meetings with Begin in
Haifa3 and Khalil’s apparent newly heightened commitment to the
success of the autonomy talks. Naturally, Begin and his colleagues are
very pleased by Sadat’s understanding of the Israeli Government’s po-
litical problems. They were also relieved in my several meetings here to
be assured that we are not going to press them to face the more difficult
issues in the negotiations in the next couple of month. They agree to use
the next three months for broadening and intensifying preparatory
work on the most complicated issues in order to “tee them up” for the
Ministerial group to address toward the turn of the year. I also assured
Begin of your continuing deep personal commitment to the Camp
David process and Agreements, and to Resolutions 242 and 338. Begin
acknowledged the existence of an enhanced personal relationship with
Sadat and expressed his pleasure that everyone strongly adheres to the
target date of next May for the autonomy negotiations, and he was ob-
viously pleased that press accounts of an American effort to force the
pace on negotiations seemed unfounded.
4. On the other hand, my strong presentation4 on the importance of
Israel’s taking the initiative to help achieve a lasting truce in South Leb-
anon met with no positive response. Later, however, with Dayan and
with Justice Minister Tamir during my ride with him to the airport, I
found more concern about Israel’s course than came out in my talk with
Begin. Their problem is that they feel trapped and do not know how to
change course.
5. I hit hard on the negative impact Israeli actions in Lebanon are
having on U.S. public attitudes. He listened, but then insisted that he
cannot change course unless all terrorist attacks cease, including
2 Strauss met with Begin for an hour and three quarters on September 11 and for a
brief follow-up meeting on September 12. Lewis sent a full report of these meetings in
telegram 19734 from Tel Aviv, September 13; ibid.
3 See Document 288 and footnote 2 thereto.
4 Lewis sent a full report of Strauss’s conversations on Lebanon with Begin on Sep-
tember 11 and with Dayan on September 12 in telegram 19737 from Tel Aviv, September
13; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 43,
Robert Strauss, Middle East, 9/9–15/79.
