Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America 1137 or to waive Tlatelolco into force. It also continues to foreswear any action contravening Tlatelolco’s objectives and any intentions of developing a nuclear explosive device. The major new developments of nonproliferation concern in 1979 were: (a) a more active nuclear diplomacy, with GOB negotiating nuclear arrangements for cooperation in peaceful applications of nuclear energy with Argentina, Venezuela, and, of most concern, Iraq; and (b) a marked slow-down in the nuclear program undertaken with the West Germans. Of the factors causing the GOB to defer decisions to undertake costly new projects envisaged under FRG–GOB nuclear accord, the troubled economy stands out as the most important and the least susceptible to change. If the nuclear power development continues to drag, there will be correspondingly less incentive to expand future enrichment and reprocessing capabilities beyond the experimental stage. The U.S. continues to have little influence on GOB nuclear policies. Our early full adherence to the Tlatelolco protocols would be well received here. A clear message to the GOB restating U.S. requirements for continued cooperation—perhaps tied to Tlatelolco protocal adherence—might prepare the way for a resumption of a more active nuclear relationship. End summary. [Omitted here is the body of the telegram.] 462. Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany to the Department of State1 Bonn, December 19, 1979, 1819Z 22524. For Deputy Secretary Christopher. Subject: FRG Sale of Nuclear Reactor to Argentina—Safeguards Issue. Ref: New Delhi 22430.2 1. (Secret—Entire text). 2. Action requested: See paragraph 13. 3. Summary: We are concerned that the safeguards negotiations for the sale of a nuclear reactor by the FRG to Argentina may result in something less than full-scope safeguards or their equivalent on Argen- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P840133–2108. Secret; Nodis. 2 Telegram 22430 from New Delhi, December 7, reported that the Federal Republic of Germany was “very disturbed” that the “US was not [nit] picking and trying to dictate tactics and FRG resented this. If we kept it up it would not help cooperation.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, D790569–0354)
