Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1137
or to waive Tlatelolco into force. It also continues to foreswear any ac-
tion contravening Tlatelolco’s objectives and any intentions of devel-
oping a nuclear explosive device. The major new developments of non-
proliferation concern in 1979 were: (a) a more active nuclear diplomacy,
with GOB negotiating nuclear arrangements for cooperation in peace-
ful applications of nuclear energy with Argentina, Venezuela, and, of
most concern, Iraq; and (b) a marked slow-down in the nuclear pro-
gram undertaken with the West Germans. Of the factors causing the
GOB to defer decisions to undertake costly new projects envisaged
under FRG–GOB nuclear accord, the troubled economy stands out as
the most important and the least susceptible to change. If the nuclear
power development continues to drag, there will be correspondingly
less incentive to expand future enrichment and reprocessing capabil-
ities beyond the experimental stage. The U.S. continues to have little in-
fluence on GOB nuclear policies. Our early full adherence to the Tlate-
lolco protocols would be well received here. A clear message to the
GOB restating U.S. requirements for continued cooperation—perhaps
tied to Tlatelolco protocal adherence—might prepare the way for a re-
sumption of a more active nuclear relationship. End summary.
[Omitted here is the body of the telegram.]
462.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Department of State1
Bonn, December 19, 1979, 1819Z
22524. For Deputy Secretary Christopher. Subject: FRG Sale of Nu-
clear Reactor to Argentina—Safeguards Issue. Ref: New Delhi 22430.2
1. (Secret—Entire text).
2. Action requested: See paragraph 13.
3. Summary: We are concerned that the safeguards negotiations
for the sale of a nuclear reactor by the FRG to Argentina may result in
something less than full-scope safeguards or their equivalent on Argen-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, P840133–2108. Se-
cret; Nodis.
2 Telegram 22430 from New Delhi, December 7, reported that the Federal Republic
of Germany was “very disturbed” that the “US was not [nit] picking and trying to dictate
tactics and FRG resented this. If we kept it up it would not help cooperation.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, D790569–0354)
