264 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I The view that I have sketched for you today is that of only one leader in only one nation. However wealthy and powerful the United States may be, however capable of leadership, this power is increasingly only relative. The leadership increasingly is in need of being shared. No nation has a monopoly of vision, of creativity, or of ideas. Bringing these together from many nations is our common responsibility and our common challenge. For only in these ways can the idea of a peaceful global community grow and prosper. Thank you very much. 57. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, October 21, 1977 SUBJECT NSC Weekly Report #33 1. Opinion We need to look ahead and develop a coherent strategy—including priorities, timing, and yes, linkages—for managing our dealings with the Soviet Union, including the barrage of arms control negotiations, and such major political issues as CSCE, human rights, and the Middle East. We need this strategy to guide our own planning and action, and to make sure we do not run into difficulty with Congress and the public on the Soviet front. For the American public, how the Soviet connection is managed is a central standard for evaluating the foreign policy performance and competence of any administration. The public becomes anxious when they think things are going badly with the Soviets; but they equally— and sometimes more so—become nervous when they think things are going too well because they suspect good relations are being bought with concessions. Above all, the American public wants a sense that the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 10–12/77. Top Secret; Sensitive; Codeword. Both the President and Mondale initialed the memorandum. In an attached note to Brzezinski, Inderfurth wrote: “For your file. DA [David Aaron] has pursued the action item. Rick.”
