Colombia 357 1959,3 Mr. Horace Henderson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, reaffirmed our recommendation “that same land reform or agrarian reform is in some countries essential to economic and social development. We reaffirm our support for the concepts of land reform as embodied in resolutions of the General Assembly of the UN, the Economic and Social Council and the FAO Conference.” With regard to Congressional opinion, two Senators who recently visited Latin America have reported as follows: “. . . we should be entirely sympathetic when a South American Government which has formulated a just and equitable land reform program needs capital to provide compensation for the land” (Senator Morse); “. . . the United States should adopt a more realistic lending policy . . . in regard to loans for social reform or welfare projects, as . . . land redistribution” (Senator Aiken). e. Colombia already is attempting a sound approach to agrarian reform. President Lleras Camargo, internationally respected leader of Colombia’s governing alliance between liberals and conservatives, both of which are economically conservative and regarded in Colombia as “the oligarchy,” is pushing land reform efforts on several fronts. By tax inducement he is attempting to stimulate the greater utilization of private lands. By legal provisions making available some deposits of commercial banks and savings funds for agricultural credit, he is attempting to increase production under existing ownership. Through the Caja de Credito Agrario (Agrarian Credit Institute), he is attempting a program of resettling landless peasants on governmental lands. Through the application of a seldom-­used law of 1936 providing for the expropriation of private lands that are not being and have not been used for over ten years, the Caja has expropriated (with compensation) some few private holdings. ICA has been assisting the Caja with technical assistance and PL 480 funds. However, the efforts so far have only begun to scratch the surface of the problem and there is considerable need for additional assistance. 4. Proposal for U.S. Aid Meaningful agrarian reform involves much more than providing the landless with land. Almost invariably it involves agricultural credit, and it may involve the development of adequate land classification, land title procedures, rural facilities such as roads and schools, and even markets. Last but not least, it requires an unusual degree of governmental administrative capacity. Thus, it is first necessary to work 3 The referenced session of the Food and Agriculture Organization of The United
