January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1167 Elyakim Rubinstein, Assistant Director General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Professor Ruth Lapidot, Legal Adviser to Foreign Ministry Gilad Stern, Assistant to the Minister of Interior (Prime Minister Begin began by presenting the President with a book). Prime Minister Begin said that this book shows how great is peace. It quotes ancient sources. It is dedicated to “President Jimmy Carter, the architect of the peace treaty, in gratitude and admiration.” The President said that Prime Minister Begin was too generous. Prime Minister Begin said that the book contains their greatest sayings. The President said that he is grateful, and will keep the book the rest of his life. (The President presented a book on a section of Georgia called Jerico). He said that, since he had read about Jerico in the papers, he wanted to give Prime Minister Begin this book! (laughter) It is about the Southland, where the President lives. Prime Minister Begin said that he understands the President has the right to live there! (laughter) The President said that Jerico has a special meaning in the South. The book was written by James Dickey, who is a Georgian. It is beautiful. He wants to say that we are grateful and honored to have Prime Minister Begin here and his group. He (the President) is grateful that Prime Minister Begin has brought his new foreign minister to meet with us. He is also thankful that Minister Burg is here. The President has had reports that Minister Burg has been doing constructive work. He will say in public the comments he made to Prime Minister Begin in private. They covered the crucial elements of our relations. Our security is intimately tied together, in the Middle East and also in other parts of the world. Our purposes are the same; and enhancing the security of Israel also enhances the security of the United States. He would repeat: the U.S. is committed to the security of Israel. We have promised that we will not negotiate with, or recognize, the PLO until and unless it recognizes Israel’s right to exist and endorses Resolution 242, which is the basis for peace. We are adamently opposed to the establishment of a Palestinian state on the West Bank. This is felt strongly by Sadat, as well, and Sadat said it here last week. He (the President) had outlined to Prime Minister Begin Sadat’s views. Sadat is eager to finish all of Camp David soon. Sadat wants continuous negotiations, for 40 days until the 26 May target date. Sadat is aware of Israel’s special concerns with security. And Sadat deplores, with him (the President) the constant threat to Israel of terrorist acts. We have common purposes, both in the immediate security of Israel, and also of the Middle East and Persian Gulf region. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has changed adversely the alignment of forces there—which contains 90% of the
