North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
827
be no focus on the “absolute poverty” problem (and therefore a BHN
strategy to get at the one billion living in absolute poverty conditions);
rather the focus should be on “the poor majority”. I have not been able
to convince Ted that the entire US aid effort (save military assistance) is
already supposed to be concentrated on the “poor majority” (a term with so
many conceptual and operational problems that it is useless as a policy
guideline). I cannot get him to see that a BHN strategy has a specific
target group, and requires a specific set of policies to raise the standard of
living of this group; and would be a novel and important political/devel-
opmental ingredient of a Carter foreign policy.
Van Dyk will surely bring this issue up; I have addressed it directly
in the PRM response (p. 26, top paragraph).
In meeting these arguments I have tried to build into the PRM 8
paper (pp. 20–30) two countervailing ideas:
(1) Despite LDC elite demands for a lot of free resource transfers
via NIEO, BHN is an appropriate US counter-proposal in perfect conti-
nuity with the President’s ideas and one which will give the Human
Rights emphasis the broadening it needs.
(2) The BHN approach is not meant to substitute for other responses to
LDC needs; it is a particular policy aimed at a particular problem which the
US feels is deserving of priority attention. We are willing to take all the
nasty and predictable Argentinian speeches that may come our way for
this new emphasis.
In all, the group ranged from lukewarm (especially Treasury) to
very supportive (S/P, parts of AID—not Van Dyk, but hopefully Gil-
ligan). Cooper told me he was all for it, “but you will have trouble with
the E Bureau”. Vance, of course, is strongly on record already.
Here again my hope would be that you and the President would
strongly endorse Issue #3 (“increase significantly US support”) for a
BHN effort.
If this approval is given, the Group (proposed in Issue #1) would
owe the President a full-scale set of options on a major BHN approach by
November 15 (as called for in follow-up pp. 47–48). Additionally, I
would hope the President would approve follow-up issue b, which
would settle an awful lot of inter-agency squabbling quickly by ap-
proving the view that basic human needs as defined in this PRM Re-
sponse is “an integral element of human rights”. (S/P made this spe-
cific proposal for Presidential decision.) Finally, approval of follow-up
issue c will serve to beef up the Vance effort to get OECD endorsement
for a BHN emphasis in all DAC member programs.
Again, the opponents will argue that “this isn’t what the LDC’s are
asking for”. These people suffer from bad logic. They are the first to
scream about the need for “reciprocity” in the narrow sense, but cannot
view our placing BHN on the North-South agenda as the reciprocal of
