Human Rights
539
within six months after the commodities are delivered to the recipient
country.2
In response to this requirement, the Department, in consultation
with AID, made a determination that for Fiscal Year 1978, language in
accordance with the above requirement would be placed in agreements
with countries where serious human rights problems exist or are
widely perceived to exist by the public or Members of Congress. This
liberal application of the statute would ensure compliance while
avoiding the creation of a public “hit-list” which could follow from a
narrower interpretation. It would also, on the other hand, minimize the
accounting workload placed on our AID Missions and Title I recipient
governments. Accordingly, language was placed in one third of the
Fiscal Year 1979 Title I Agreements and specifically in agreements with
the following countries: Bangladesh, Guinea, Haiti, Indonesia, Philip-
pines, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Zaire, and Korea.
The PL 480 I list for Fiscal Year 1979 has recently been submitted to
the Congress. It contains twenty-nine countries. Consensus has been
reached within the Department to maintain language in the agreements
with the following countries on that list: Guinea, Haiti, Sierra Leone,
Philippines and Zaire. There is also a consensus to maintain the lan-
guage through the side-letter arrangement with Indonesia and Korea
as long as it is not necessary to negotiate new agreements. There is also
a consensus, in view of changing circumstances, to drop the language
from the agreement with Somalia. HA proposes maintaining language
in the Title I Agreement with Bangladesh and adding language to the
Title I agreements with Pakistan, Syria and Tunisia. All four were Title I
recipients last year. The NEA Bureau is opposed to re-inserting lan-
guage in the Bangladesh agreement and to adding language in the
other three.
New agreements under PL 480 Title III will be negotiated with In-
donesia and Bangladesh later in the year. With HA consensus, lan-
guage was not included in the 1978 Title III agreement with Bangla-
desh. Title III by its nature ensures that the assistance provided is used
to directly benefit the needy and, accordingly, it is questionable
whether separate human rights related language is required. AID’s
General Counsel has been asked to provide guidance on this point. If
needed, a separate memo on this issue will be provided subsequent to
the receipt of this legal guidance.
[Omitted here is information concerning specific Bureau positions
with regard to the Title I agreements anticipated for Bangladesh, Pak-
istan, Syria, and Tunisia.]
2 See footnote 6, Document 58.
