1977 145 risk by having a back-­up program, is a worthwhile trade for the additional RDT&E expenditure required to carry both programs at least to the point of final production selection. 3. SALT Aspects: Dropping ALCM could result in foreclosure of air launched cruise missile options during SALT as a result of constraints on TOMAHAWK. TOMAHAWK, having an identical external configuration for SLCM, GLCM, and bomber-­launch (including B–52 and cruise missile carrier) application, may create weapon counting complications. Should there be a SALT constraint on GLCM/ SLCM, the bomber-­carried TOMAHAWK may be also constrained. ALCM, having an entirely different configuration from that of ­TOMAHAWK, and not being launchable from submarines, will avoid any potential SALT entanglement between sea-­launched cruise missile and ground-­launched cruise missile from a strategic air launch cruise missile system. Such an option should be preserved until the SALT ­situation is clarified. 4. Legal Aspects: If signed into law, the Defense Appropriation Authorization Act, 1978 directs that: “Competitive cruise missile development programs shall continue until the Secretary of Defense certifies to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives that (1) a single airframe for the cruise missile can be selected which meets all operational requirements, and (2) cost data clearly establish that termination of the competitive cruise missile development programs will result in lower development and procurement costs for the cruise missile.” 5. Asymmetric Strengths: The two systems have different strong points and, thus, are not 100% comparable: a. TOMAHAWK: —Longer range [less than 1 line not declassified] —Probably cheaper in missile unit cost. —More matured in missile tests. —Essentially common missile for SLCM and GLCM missions. b. ALCM: —More matured in system test for B–52 Launch. —Avoiding entanglement with SALT constraint which might be placed on GLCM/SLCM. —Single-Service management and thus, better system integration. —Compatibility with existing SRAM support equipment. As time goes by, many of these will be resolved one way or the other, and a decision between them should then be possible for this application.
