LXVI  Summaries of Compilations
El Salvador
U.S. Relations With El Salvador
Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents 
in the text.
U.S. Relations With the Lemus Government
U.S. relations with El Salvador were without serious difficul-
ties during most of the 1958–1960 period. Johns Hopkins University 
President Milton Eisenhower visited El Salvador in July 1958 during 
his 3-­week trip to several countries in Central America as President 
Eisenhower’s personal representative. He met with President Jose 
Maria Lemus and other government officials, businessmen, and labor 
leaders. Lemus called attention to El Salvador’s economic problems and 
expressed interest in increased U.S. assistance but offered no specific 
proposals (ES–2) Lemus made a State visit to the United States March 
9–21, 1959. In a meeting with Eisenhower on March 11, he stressed his 
interest in Central American economic integration and Eisenhower 
expressed sympathy with this objective. (ES–5, 6)
During the following year, Lemus political support deteriorated 
as Salvadoran politics became increasingly polarised. In April 1960, 
the Embassy reported strains and cleavages within the “oligarchic tri-
archy (Army, landed gentry and church) which has ruled this country 
for decades” and growing strength among opposition elements “led 
by Communists and supported morally and financially from Cuban 
sources” Lemus was increasingly isolated, the Embassy reported; 
opposition to him was growing not only on the left but also among 
the wealthy, who blamed him for failing to take strong action against 
extremist elements. (ES–13)
Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian 
Affairs C. Allan Stewart told Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs Roy Rubottom in an April 12 memorandum that 
“Fidelismo is spreading like wildfire” among the poor but that the 
Lemus government had done nothing to remedy social conditions. 
(ES–14) When Stewart visited El Salvador in June, Lemus requested 
U.S. assistance for the Salvadoran security forces, but when he asked 
Ambassador Thorsten V. Kalijarvi about the request 2 months later, 
Kalijarvi told him it was still under consideration in Washington. 
(ES–16, 17, 18)
Events reached crisis level in August and September with grow-
ing demonstrations and disorders. Kalijarvi commented that, after an 
initially hesitant response, Lemus had antagonised the public by using 
heavy-­handed and indiscriminate force; mean-­while he had alienated
