Chapter 2, January–June 1989  215
An alternative approach to verification would explicitly consider 
the military risks posed by potential cheating were it to occur. Such an 
approach requires a “military risk” assessment for each case. JCS is in 
the best position to perform such analyses and to testify about them 
during ratification hearings.
SLCM. The Soviets have told us repeatedly that our position of 
no limits on SLCMs is a show-­stopper—­they repeated that message in 
Moscow last month. The time will come when we have to move to our 
bottom line.2 We need to do our homework on SLCMs. On an issue this 
complicated we need to begin to sort out our priorities and interests.
Mobile ICBMs. The U.S. has proposed a ban on mobile ICBMs 
largely out of concern that our inability to count accurately Soviet 
mobiles could lead to a militarily significant problem if the Soviets hid 
missiles and launchers for deployment in a crisis. Recently, you sig-
naled a major strategic commitment to mobile ICBMs in your decision 
to fund the rail-­garrison MX and road-­mobile Small ICBM. You need to 
decide if we should drop our ban and, if so, how.3 Major considerations 
are: how to help build a Hill consensus on MX and Midgetman; how to 
protect ratification prospects given uncertain future of ICBM programs; 
do we need to strengthen the current verification scheme on the table in 
Geneva; and are there interim measures we should propose to mitigate 
our concerns, especially if there is a considerable delay in completing 
a Treaty?
Nondeployed Missiles. An issue that has become closely related to 
mobile ICBM limits is how to constrain missiles which could be used 
for refires or to break out of treaty limits in a crisis—­so-­called non-
deployed missiles.4 Verification is important; [2½ lines not declassified] 
There are two issues here. First, what types of nondeployed missiles 
are we most concerned about: just mobile missiles or all missiles that 
give the Soviets some potential to cheat? The second issue is, how do 
we trade off our need for nondeployed missiles as test missiles and 
spares against our desire to constrain the Soviets? Low limits could 
help constrain Soviet cheating but significantly add to the costs we 
have to pay to support a reliable missile force.
ALCMs. There are a number of related issues here, but the most 
important is how to count ALCMs deployed on bombers. The U.S. 
has proposed that each side specify which heavy bombers can carry 
ALCMs. Each of those bombers would then count as ten warheads 
under the 6000 limit, regardless of its true capacity to carry ALCMs or 
2 Bush drew a checkmark on this and the previous sentence.
3 Bush drew two short vertical lines in the left-­hand margin of this and the previous 
sentence.
4 Bush underlined “refires” and “limits in a crisis.”
