Panama 987 and help from us this regard would be valuable. Initial reaction of diplomatic corp highly favorable. Discussions with Carter have been cooperative. Flags will be flown on or before September 20. Carter desirous formal but simple flag raising ceremony with President De la Guardia in attendance. Instructions in this regard desired at once.3 3 In telegram 142 to Panama City, September 17, the Department of State notified Ambassador Farland that it approved of a formal but simple flag raising ceremony with President de la Guarlia in attendance, provided that Farland and Gov. Carter agreed on the details and plans and provided that United States personnel carried out the flag raising and other physical duties connected with the ceremony. (719.04/9–1760) In telegram 162 from Panama City, September 21, Ambassador Farland reported that the Panamanian and American flags had been raised at 10 a.m. that morning in Shaler Triangle in a simple but appropriate ceremony attended by Panamanian Foreign Minister Moreno and other officials of the Foreign Office, members of the Cabinet, and the Commander of the National Guard. (719.04/9–2160) PM–60. Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Mallory) to the Acting Secretary of State1  Washington, September 23, 1960. SUBJECT Ceremony on Occasion of Initial Flying of Panamanian Flag in Canal Zone. This paper is in response to your oral request of this morning for the background on the decision to hold a ceremony on the occasion of the initial flying of the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone. The actual genesis of the concept of a ceremony is not clear but Ambassador Farland reported on September 17 that Governor Carter was desirous of a “formal but simple flag raising ceremony with President de la Guardia in attendance” and he requested instructions in this regard. (Tab A).2 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/PAN Files, Lot 65 D 176, “Relations-Panama July 1960.” Secret. Drafted by Sharp. The source text is an uninitialled carbon copy. 2 Not attached to the source text. The document at Tab A, telegram 156 from Panama City, September 17, is printed as Document PM–59.
