Arms Control and Disarmament  1321
meeting on April 7, the Special Cabinet Committee established a work­
ing group on U.S. disarmament policy with members from the Depart­
ments of State, Defense, AEC, CIA and Dr. Killian’s office. The working 
group was asked to report by Tuesday, April 15, to the Special Cabi­
net Committee presenting its initial assessment of (1) the adequacy of 
present U.S. disarmament policy and (2) the opportunities for new U.S. 
initiatives in this field.
Mr. Farley reviewed the status of summit preparations within the 
Department of State, noting that the US, UK and France on March 31 
had proposed to the Soviet Union that preparatory talks to pave the 
way for a possible summit meeting begin in the latter half of April. 
Therefore, it is a matter of urgency that this government have com­
pleted as soon as possible whatever review of its disarmament policy 
may be necessary.
Mr. Farley noted that while the predominant feeling in the Depart­
ment of State is that there would be no summit meeting until fall, it is 
essential that we be ready to begin preparatory talks within the month. 
He said we recognize that this is a broad field and that probably a great 
deal of detailed work will be necessary. However, it is desirable at this 
point for the working group to ask itself (1) if the present U.S. position 
on disarmament (August 29) is one on which we can stand in detail, (2) 
if there are possible ideas for change which should be explored, (3) if 
there are modifications of the present policy which are desirable at this 
point. He said that probably the prospects of an agreed interagency 
position by April 15 were slight, but that the working group must by 
then identify for the principals on the Special Cabinet Committee any 
lines needing further detailed study. He explained that he considered 
it the task of the working group to pose the issues, suggest initiatives 
and assemble the facts so that the principals may be able to make any 
decisions necessary.
Mr. Farley then explained that the paper distributed to the working 
group had been prepared by the Department of State in order to put 
forth the results of our own preliminary re-­examination of the broad 
field of disarmament policy. He noted that it has been approved by 
the Secretary of State, after discussion with the panel of disarmament 
advisers, for interagency consideration. He explained that we had con­
sidered the present form of the paper as that most useful for compari­
son with existing policy, that is, an interlinear modification of the June 
11, 1957 NSC policy statement on disarmament.
Ambassador Wadsworth said that based on this, he felt the working 
group should reconvene Monday to receive initial suggestions from its 
members as to: 1) whether the U.S. should stand firm on its present pol­
icy, 2) any new ideas from the various agencies, or 3) any areas which
