874  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The first ATLAS intercontinental ballistic missile complex, at 
Vandenburg AFB, initially programmed to be operational in June 1959, 
is now scheduled to be operational before the end of October 1959. A 
second complex for the first squadron is programmed to become oper­
ational before the end of CY 1959. The second ATLAS squadron, pro­
grammed for Warren AFB, is scheduled to become operational prior 
to the end of FY 1960. The research and development programs for 
the TITAN and MINUTEMAN are progressing satisfactorily. The first 
TITAN squadron is programmed by the Air Force to be operational by 
end FY 1961 and the first MINUTEMAN squadron during FY 1963.
Supplementing the SAC retaliatory capabilities are the USAF tac­
tical nuclear strike forces. In the Pacific, these forces consist of 3 wings 
of tactical fighters, one wing of tactical bombers and 2 squadrons of 
MATADOR tactical missiles, all to continue in the program during 
FY 1960. In the United Kingdom, Europe and the Middle East, tacti­
cal nuclear strike forces consist of 6 tactical fighter wings permanently 
deployed plus 4 squadrons on continuous rotation from the United 
States; one wing of tactical bombers, and 3 squadrons of tactical mis­
siles (2 MATADOR and one MACE). The tactical nuclear strike units 
in these areas are programmed to remain unchanged during FY 1960 
except for converting one of the 2 MATADOR squadrons to MACE mis­
siles. Nuclear-­capable tactical air forces in the United States, capable 
of augmenting forces overseas, consist of 6 tactical fighter wing equiv­
alents which continue in the program through FY 1960. One bomber 
wing and 6 tactical fighter wings were inactivated during FY 1959.
Continuing progress is being made in providing the above deliv­
ery systems with weapons and warheads having improved weight to 
yield ratios. Continuing dispersal of nuclear weapons to combat units 
in the field has improved greatly the operational readiness of our offen­
sive forces. This action, coupled with streamlining of our release pro­
cedures, has reduced substantially the reaction time of these forces to 
counter enemy aggression. However, due to political denial of storage 
rights in certain countries, weapons allocated to some combat units 
are not immediately available to those units. Action is continuing to 
obtain the authority for dispersal of nuclear weapons to those addi­
tional countries.
Certain major U.S. Navy forces, with the primary mission of main­
taining control of essential sea areas and air communications, possess 
a significant nuclear retaliatory strike capability. This capability is pri­
marily in the attack carrier striking forces with a secondary capability 
in missile delivery from surface ships and submarines. There are 14 
attack carriers (including 2 new carriers in “shakedown” status) and 16 
associated carrier air groups of which 4 to 5 attack carriers with their 
attached air groups are normally in position to strike assigned targets. 
Deliveries of new jet aircraft and modernization and new construction
