628
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
been met by keying the ATP priorities to CTB readiness and by explic-
itly requiring the laboratories to be prepared to halt testing in the event
of a CTB. (S)
We have, in addition, been sensitive to your earlier concern with
the level of laboratory manpower in addressing the buildup of the
testing level. (S)
A buildup to about 20 tests in FY 1982 is appropriate since there
are a number of important stockpile confidence tests which can be car-
ried out without elaborate preparations. However, we do not need to
decide on whether to increase the level further to 25 until the specific
tests involved in shifting the program emphasis towards basic research
are identified and reviewed. Consequently, we recommend that the
testing rate be limited for now to about 20 per year. (S)
To accomplish this reduced goal, some increase in manpower is
necessary (but less than the buildup from the current 7400 to 8100 by
the end of FY 84, envisioned by the proposed ATP). Accordingly, with
OMB, we will stress efficiencies to minimize the infrastructure buildup
associated with the added testing. OMB concurs in this approach and
believes that an FY 81 supplemental of less than 50 million dollars is
enough to begin the effort (this could raise the FY 81 test level to as
many as 14 and allow for preparations for about 20 tests in FY 82); and
an FY 82 increment of about 100 million dollars would be sufficient to
accomplish this goal. We will ask DOE/DOD to address subsequent
long-term testing needs following your review of the detailed FY 1981
test program, GUARDIAN, which will be forwarded to you shortly. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:
We believe that the revised ATP would restore some needed re-
search to the test program, would enhance our readiness for CTB, and
would be responsive to Congressional concerns about the current
asymmetry in US and Soviet test rates. Consequently, we recommend
that you authorize Zbig to sign the directive at Tab A which would
(1) approve the ATP in principle; (2) set the test rate at about 20 per
year; (3) stress the priority of initiatives related to enhancing CTB read-
iness, with adjustments to systems priorities to reflect recent DOD deci-
sions; and (4) direct that the FY 81 Supplemental and FY 82 incremental
funding needs for the ATP be determined in the context of the FY 82
DOE budget review. (S)
Approve
8
Disapprove
Other
Jim McIntyre concurs.
8 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” at the bottom of the page.
Brzezinski signed the directive at Tab A, a November 12 memorandum to Brown and
Duncan.
