Romania 689 216. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, July 3, 1979, 3:30 p.m. SUBJECT Summary of David Aaron’s Meeting with Ambassador Corneliu Bogdan, Director of the North American Division in the Romanian Foreign Ministry (U) PARTICIPANTS Mr. David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Stephen Larrabee, NSC Staff (Notetaker) Ambassador Corneliu Bogdan Ion Besteliu, Political Counselor, Romanian Embassy Mr. Aaron opened the meeting by welcoming Amb. Bogdan2 and saying it was nice to see him again. (U) Amb. Bogdan stated that Mr. Aaron presumably knew why he was here. He did not want to unduly bother Mr. Aaron, but hoped that he could receive the Administration’s support regarding MFN. (C) Mr. Aaron underscored that the Administration supported MFN for Romania and had worked hard to obtain it. He emphasized, however, that there was a concrete problem which had to be resolved. He pointed out that to be successful with the Congress the Administration needed the support of the interested American groups. (C) Amb. Bogdan stated he did not want to cover the same old ground. He was not certain why the groups had raised the issue. The fate of the Jews in Romania would not be affected by MFN one way or the other. (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 33, Memcons: Aaron, David: 1–12/79. Confidential. The meeting took place in Aaron’s office at the White House. Earlier that day, Larrabee sent a briefing paper outlining Romanian concerns and providing Aaron with talking points for his meeting with Bogdan. Larrabee recommended that Aaron stress the administration’s strong commitment to MFN for Romania, and that, irrespective of right or wrong, support of Jewish- American groups was vital for congressional approval. Aaron initialed the memorandum indicating he had seen it. (Ibid.) The memorandum of conversation was approved by Aaron on July 7. He instructed his staff to “Keep it here. Don’t send it out.” (Ibid.) 2 The meeting with Bogdan took the place of the previously scheduled meeting between Aaron and Ionescu. Bogdan, who had been Ambassador to Washington from 1967 until 1978, was sent by Bucharest to troubleshoot the MFN situation. On June 28 Larrabee informed Aaron’s office that Bogdan was coming and was seeking an appointment with Aaron to discuss the situation. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 66, Romania: 4/79–3/80)
