Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 773 155. Statement by Secretary of State Muskie1 New York, August 25, 1980 Securing the World’s Common Future I welcome this opportunity to address the U.N. special session on economic development. I intend to speak frankly. And I will suggest some specific obligations of the world’s nations—including my own— to secure our common future on a fragile planet. We meet because we are in the midst of a world economic crisis. We cannot escape it. We must respond to it. Millions of our fellow humans are starving, and millions more are malnourished, on what can be a bountiful planet. Soaring oil prices have crippled the developing world; even the strongest industrial economies are struggling. Infectious recession and inflation touch us all. Nations in desperate need of growth and development instead face worsening trade deficits, deeper debt, and diminishing prospects for meeting the needs of their people. The work ahead is substantial. The time is short. But if we take an ambitious view, seasoned with realism, we can accomplish our main purposes at this special session. We can adopt a realistic international development strategy that will help improve development prospects. And we can agree on procedures and an agenda for a new round of global economic negotiations—serious work aimed at concrete progress where the need is urgent and consensus appears within reach. My country will participate constructively in these proceedings. Progress is essential for the world’s interest and also our own. We are encouraged that progress is possible because progress has been made. The fact is that over the past decade many people in developing nations have attained better lives. Per capita income in the Third World has risen by some 3% per year. Exports have increased by 8.7% annually. Manufacturing output is higher. Life expectancies and literacy rates have improved. Infant mortality rates have declined. Striking progress has been made, much of it recently, in adjusting the system to improve Third World prospects. • The flow of aid to poorer nations has steadily increased. More than $100 billion in replenishments for the multilateral development banks and their affiliates have been agreed. 1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, October 1980, pp. 76–78. All brackets are in the original. Muskie made the statement before the 11th Special Session of the UN General Assembly. The General Assembly met in special session from August 25 until September 15 in order to discuss progress made in the establishment of the New International Economic Order and actions related to economic cooperation (see footnote 3, Document 99).
