September 9, 1927, Senator Robinson, who was attending the Conference at the request of Mr. Kellogg, addressed the Assembly as follows: “It has seemed to us, in view of the difficulties of this question and of the well-known differences of opinion that exist among the nations represented here, that it is but just and appropriate to present a fair and short outline of the position of our country as we understand it. “When the first Federal Census was taken in 1790, it disclosed in the then territory of the United States of North America a population of only 4,000,000. Our country opened wide its gates to immigrants from every land on earth. They came from the remotest parts of the world and entered into our citizenship and became supporters of our institutions; so that after the lapse of one hundred and twenty years, when the Census of 1920 was taken, the total population of the United States was disclosed to be more than 106,000,000—twentyseven times the population disclosed by the preceding Census which I have already referred to. We found it necessary and desirable to partly close our gates against immigrants from other lands. This has been accomplished through legislation enacted by the Congress of the United States. We sympathize profoundly with the problems and difficulties of the great countries of the old world which are distressed and disturbed by conditions respecting over-population. We realize that in a measure they are in the situation of the father or the mother who witnesses a son or daughter depart from his home to take residence among strangers, and just as any fond parent follows his child with his prayers and his benedictions, his hopes and his aspirations, so the people of the countries in which immigrants have their origin quite naturally have a feeling and desire to follow them with their assurances of assistance and protection. But it seems to me, Mr. President, that it is not inappropriate here to make clear to this Conference what many of the Delegates already know has been the result of the experience of the United States of North America respecting this question. We understand that under the principles of international law as
