Human Rights insure that there is a basic consistency in the application of our human rights policies to bank operations. Differences between the Departments of State and Treasury on an individual MDB loan are usually resolved prior to Deputy Secretary Christopher’s formal recommendation to Treasury. There have, however, been a few instances where we have disagreed on the Deputy Secretary’s position on whether or not a specific project met basic human needs—and, in such cases, we have always prevailed. There have been no such cases for a long time, however; none since you came to Treasury, in fact. (I came close to bringing to you the Chile loan raised by Congressman Wilson, but did not because of the egregiousness of their behavior in the Letelier case.)2 U.S. Voting In the period since January 1, 1977, the United States has opposed—through “no” votes or abstentions—more than 90 MDB loans to 16 countries3 where we considered the human rights situation severe. Our general policy has been to support MDB projects for countries with human rights problems if the project serves the basic human needs of the people in the recipient country. This avoids penalizing the poor people of countries whose governments follow repressive practices, and reflects the fact that we consider human rights to include basic social and economic rights such as adequate food, housing, clothing, education and health care. U.S. decisions to oppose MDB loans on the basis of human rights considerations are taken only after a thorough examination of the current human rights situation and trends in a recipient country. In the past six months, we have opposed loans for Argentina, Chile, Laos, the Philippines, Uruguay, and Yemen (PDR). U.S. opposition to upcoming MDB loans to Korea is also likely given the deteriorating human rights situation in that country. The U.S. has veto power over projects only in the FSO (IDB). In other MDBs, our opposition to specific project proposals would have to be accompanied by that of several other members before a proposal would be formally denied. Some other countries have also had human rights concerns and joined us in opposing specific MDB projects. We have not formally “voted down” a loan on human rights grounds. On several occasions, however, we have influenced the MDBs and the re- 2 See Document 157. 3 Afghanistan Chile Guinea Philippines Argentina El Salvador Korea Uruguay Benin Ethiopia Laos Vietnam Central African Empire Guatemala Paraguay Yemen (PDR) [Footnote in the original.]
