Yugoslavia
751
raised during the visit, review the approach I plan to take, and request
your guidance.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Yugoslavia.]
Yugoslavia. I believe the Yugoslavs are looking forward to this visit
because of the early restoration of high-level US-Yugoslav contacts it
will bring. My primary objective in Yugoslavia will be to convince
President Tito and leading members of his government of your support
for Yugoslavia’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.2
I will state that the US respects Yugoslavia’s place in the non-aligned
movement. At the same time, we believe Yugoslavia must respect our
interests in multilateral as well as bilateral relations if our relationship
is to prosper.
By the time of my visit, we hope to have negotiated a satisfactory
solution to the most contentious issue in our bilateral relations—that
of the impasse of an export license for the Westinghouse-supplied
nuclear reactor destined for Yugoslavia. We hope the Yugoslavs will
give us the assurances we require on reprocessing and disposition of
fuel. I will state that we will want to assure dependable supplies of
fuel and equipment while taking necessary steps to avoid nuclear
weapons proliferation, and I will confirm that Yugoslavia will be wel-
come to join the nuclear fuel cycle evaluation effort.3
The Yugoslavs have indicated their belief that we are not forceful
enough in prosecuting Yugoslav emigre terrorists. Prior to my depar-
ture, I will discuss this issue with Attorney General Bell so as to be
able to assure Tito that we are determined to prevent and punish
terrorists; that we are giving high priority to the bombing of Yugo-
slavia’s Embassy last June4 and that we will vigorously prosecute those
2 On October 16, 1976, during a campaign press conference in Kansas City, Missouri,
then Governor Carter stated that he would not go to war in Yugoslavia even if the Soviet
Union was to invade that country. While his statements did not generate much attention
at the time, he was asked about them during the October 22 Presidential Debate. Carter
defended his assertion, suggesting that he would not go to war unless U.S. security was
directly threatened. The statement became a campaign issue, even eliciting the first
appearance of Ford’s Secretary of State Henry Kissinger on CBS’s “Face the Nation”
program on October 24, where Kissinger compared Carter’s remarks with those of Dean
Acheson’s remarks about South Korea just prior to the North Korean invasion in 1950.
(Don Oberdorfer, “Kissinger Assails Carter on Yugoslavia Statements,” The Washington
Post, October 25, 1976, p. A6)
3 Carter wrote in the margin below this paragraph: “Let Tito know ours is a multina-
tional concern—we are not singling out Yugoslavia for special stringency.”
4 The Yugoslav Embassy in Washington was bombed the night of June 9, 1976. The
Washington Post reported on June 10 that an anonymous caller claimed responsibility
for the attack in the name of the Pan-Epirotic Federation of America and Canada, stressing
however that the bombing was not sanctioned. The organization, the Post reported,
denied any involvement. (Douglas Feaver, “Yugoslavs Protest Embassy Bombing,” The
Washington Post, June 10, 1976, p. C10)
