First Responses
41
18.
Intelligence Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[cable number not
declassified]
Washington, November 10, 1979, 0225Z
COUNTRY
Iran
SUBJECT
Situation in and around U.S. Embassy in Iran as concerns instigators of the
occupation, access to Embassy and security considerations2 [less than 1 line not
declassified]
SOURCE
[less than 1 line not declassified]
1. The decision to occupy the American Embassy in Tehran was
made personally by the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini on or about 20
October 1979. Implementation of the plan was assigned to students
from the religious center at Qom who have taken the title “Islamic
Students Following the Way of the Imam”. ([less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] comment: The Mujahidin-e Islam probably furnished advisors
and officers (L-Encadrement) for the students.) ([less than 1 line not
declassified] comment: A confidant of former Iranian Prime Minister
Shahpour Bakhtiar in Paris said on 9 November that the occupation
of the Embassy was certainly a planned action authorized by Khomeini
and therefore the identities of the occupants of the Embassy are not
important in terms of freeing the hostages. The order will have to
come from Khomeini. He suggested National Voice and Profile of Iran
Director Sadeq Ghotbzadeh as the one person in the Khomeini group
who might be relatively reasonable, but noted that Ghotbzadeh is not
in Khomeini’s inner circle.)
2. The occupation was carried out by a group of about 100 persons
but that number is now at least 200. The only group located outside
the premises of the Embassy to guard against the curious is a team of
“Guardians of the Revolution”, about twenty to thirty of them by day,
and half that many at night.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 30, Subject File, Iran, [Retained] 11/1/79–11/15/79. Secret; [handling restriction not
declassified]. Sent to the National Security Agency, Department of State, DIA, Department
of the Treasury, Secret Service, FBI, White House Situation Room, NSC Staff, CIA Office
of Current Operations, and Department of Justice.
2 An unknown hand wrote in the right margin: “did they have the info in advance?”
