Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
315
now on a global scale. Correct political leadership plus a firm grasp of
the “military question,” these were the essential prerequisites for 1905
and the Five Year Plans, and they remain so for Soviet policy today. So-
viet consciousness of these historical analogies was vividly demon-
strated in 1975, the 70th anniversary of the writing of “Two Tactics,”
when the theme was played throughout the year in the Soviet press. By
1974, however, it was already clear that “law of primitive socialist accu-
mulation,” that is, large credits and technology from the West, was not
as active as expected. The U.S. would not be as easily “collectivized” as
the peasantry. The collapse in South Vietnam and the swing of U.S. mil-
itary attention back to Europe altered the “military question.” The
Middle East, of course, was also a strategic setback. The only thing left
of detente was SALT, and SALT’s importance for Moscow was every-
thing but arms control. It had become the single factor that might pre-
vent the alteration of the East-West relationship by the changing North-
South and East-West relationships. The Soviet slogan was and remains,
“the most important thing today is to prevent nuclear war” (omitting to
observe, of course, that it is the “least likely” kind of war today). And it
means, “If the U.S. doesn’t give us priority attention over West-West
and North-South, we have the military might to regain American
attention.”
As I understood your statement of the “priorities” of this Adminis-
tration, it took basic account of these realities of strategic and economic
relationships which Henry had reluctantly faced after 1973 but could
not adapt to without surrendering the primacy of “cooperation” over
“competition” on the East-West front.
Human rights meant recognition of the necessity of a national con-
sensus for the main thrusts of any foreign policy, and it meant recogni-
tion that some foreign policies and alliances are not viable for the U.S. if
our political values conflict too sharply.
Emphasis on the tri-lateral region meant recognition of the true
sources of our economic, political, and potentially, our military power.
And it meant recognizing that a large number of problems of interde-
pendency have been neglected for some time.
A new context for the East-West relationship meant evading the Soviet
strategy taken from “two tactics” and “primitive socialist accumula-
tion.” It meant leaving the cooperative door open, but it also excluded
the practice of paying the Soviets to behave, to refrain from bully-boy
tactics in international affairs.
Attention to the North-South dimension meant a lot of things, many of
which strike me as still muddled and confused, but it put priority on
the OPEC connection in the international economic structure, and it
seemed to recognize changing power realities in the third world as
more than a simple function of the East-West competition.
