790 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement 9. Duvalier’s tenure of power is now reasonably secure. The internal opposition is thoroughly discouraged and intimidated; the opposition in exile, denied further Cuban support, is no longer a serious threat. The military and security forces are effectively controlled by being divided into components no one of which is capable of acting separately against the regime, and by the appointment of commanders personally dependent on Duvalier and so divided by personal rivalries as to be unlikely to combine against him. The army, which includes the small air force and coast guard, numbers 5,200, but its ground forces are scattered over the country in small police and constabulary detachments, except for an understrength battalion at Port-­au-Prince. The National Police and the Presidential Guard, nominally part of the army, are actually independent commands under Duvalier’s direct control. Moreover, the 200-­man Presidential Guard separates the army battalion at Port-­au-Prince from any large supply of ammunition. There is, in addition, a civilian militia of about 400 men and women specially selected, like the Guard, for personal loyalty to Duvalier. 10. The Economy. Duvalier inherited a stagnant economy and today it continues in decline, but probably not sufficiently to provoke serious political consequences. The major problems are inadequate resources, low agricultural productivity, lack of diversification, and meager economic development. Moreover, domestic savings and investment—­ almost nonexistent—­and foreign investment are insufficient to keep up with capital deterioration, much less to increase production to support the expanding population. 11. Agricultural production is retarded by the prevalence of subsistence farming on small family plots. There are only two important commercial plantations in the country, one producing sugar, the other sisal. The major export is coffee, which grows wild and receives a minimum of processing from the peasants who collect it. Haiti’s continued heavy dependence on coffee, with its alternating high and low crop years and price fluctuations, results in periodic strains on the country’s solvency. Even though agriculture is the major economic pursuit, about a quarter of Haitian imports are food and other agricultural products. 12. While the government is adhering to a financial stabilization program prescribed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), its finances are in a sorry state, partly as a result of administrative ineptitude and graft. The public debt is close to $70 million and the rising burden of foreign debt (more than half of the public debt) and amortization now makes it difficult for Haiti to borrow more. In recent years, debt service and amortization have amounted to almost 10 percent of the budget. Haiti’s budget deficit amounted to $8 million in the 1958– 1959 fiscal year. Even though the government has suspended debt service and amortization, it probably will fall short of meeting current
