1366  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
country announced any new expert sales of nuclear power reactors 
during the reporting period. U.S. firms, however, are bidding on sev­
eral projects abroad.
5. The initial five year U.S. power reactor development program 
has undergone a number of modifications during the past four years. 
New experimental power reactors have been added to the program; 
research and development on materials, processes and advanced con­
cepts have been expanded; and cooperative industrial efforts have 
materialized as an important part of the program. Considerable experi­
ence in the design and construction of power reactors has been gained 
during these fours years of concentrated effort and we are beginning 
to accumulate necessary operating experience. In short, the AEC and 
United States industry as a whole have gained a considerable degree 
of sophistication in power reactor technology. This record of accom­
plishment has kept the United States in a position of world leadership 
in this field.
6. As the initially defined period of the United States power reactor 
development program draws to an end, Commission re-­evaluation of 
its objectives and plans, made with particular awareness of the increas­
ing importance abroad of nuclear power, resulted in its determination 
that the following objectives are desirable and feasible:
a. Achievement of competitive nuclear power in the United States 
during the next ten years.
b. Achievement of competitive nuclear power in friendly foreign 
nations during the next five years through a comprehensive program 
of assistance, clearly defined and vigorously pursued.
c. Fortification of the position of leadership of the United States in 
the eyes of the world and the peaceful applications of atomic energy, 
particularly with regard to power.
7. EURATOM. The incentives to be offered the Euratom Commu­
nity under the joint program being developed with the United States 
(see pars. 35–39) will require consideration as to their adaptability to 
other areas of the world. On the part of Euratom it will be necessary 
to obtain full support from the operating utilities within the six mem­
ber countries, and Euratom also plans to establish a mutually beneficial 
relationship with the International Agency and with the O.E.E.C. Nego­
tiations will be undertaken upon the request of Euratom to integrate 
existing U.S. bilateral agreements with member States into a compre­
hensive agreement with the Community.
8. In the course of negotiations with Euratom a special arrange­
ment was developed for safeguarding materials supplied to Euratom 
by the U.S. under the proposed joint program. Under this arrangement 
the U.S. will receive all of the guarantees and assurances required by 
the Atomic Energy Act that none of these materials shall be used for
