212
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
attempt to broker meetings between a foreign arms dealer and the
Pakistanis (who would make the actual purchases), and attempt to
monitor Pakistani purchases through this arms dealer.
2. The bulk of the purchases would be ammunition for Soviet-
made weapons captured by the insurgents from Afghan Government
forces, although it may be deemed wise to purchase some ammunition
for vintage weapons in the hands of the insurgents.
3. In addition to ammunition, a small amount of explosives, and
perhaps a limited number of Soviet-made antiaircraft weapons, be
purchased.
4. The insurgents are critically short of weapons for use against
Soviet-supplied helicopters and aircraft and are beginning to suffer
significant losses to the weapons systems, which they cannot counter.
Shortages of both light small arms/ammunition and heavier weapons,
in the face of increased pressure from the DRA, may cause the insur-
gents to lose heart and result in their being destroyed piecemeal.
RISK: Brokering Saudi payment for lethal military supplies should
involve relatively little risk of exposure.
COST: -0-
Option No. 3-b
Provide the Pakistanis with funds to purchase munitions abroad for
subsequent passage to the insurgents
1. Discussion: The Pakistani Inter-Service Intelligence Directorate
(ISID) has advised the CIA Chief of Station that, in ISID’s opinion,
despite the fall of Asmar and other recent favorable developments, the
insurgents remain very much in need of weapons, ammunition and
demolitions. According to an ISID representative, President Zia
endorses this view and is anxious that CIA provide this equipment
through the ISID. We have thus far advised the ISID that we do not
have authorization to provide weapons or ammunition. Nevertheless,
the ISID asserts that there are areas in Afghanistan where the insur-
gents’ weapons needs are very real. Reporting indicates that the insur-
gents are trying to secure new weapons. Moreover, the insurgency
continues to spread, involving a greater number of irregular forces,
while, correspondingly, Soviet aid to the DRA is steadily increasing.
2. If the Saudis do not indicate a willingness to pay for weapons
for the insurgents (Option 3-a), we would attempt to place the ISID in
contact with a foreign arms dealer, and, [less than 1 line not declassified]
monitor Pakistan purchases to verify that funds provided are properly
used. Funds to cover the purchases of ordnance supplies would be
provided by CIA to the Pakistanis. Comments on the types of munitions
involved are noted above and in Option 3-a.
