378 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV forces, or can be used in conjunction with the present SOSUS bottom-­ mounted arrays to extend the coverage and accuracy of the SOSUS system. Whereas previous ship sonars or arrays were limited to detection ranges of the order of 10 to 100 miles, SURTASS will have a range of 200 to 1000 miles, depending on propagation factors. SURTASS can be used also to provide a submarine surveillance or ASW capability in remote regions where we do not have bottom-­mounted arrays, e.g., the Indian Ocean. The system will become operational in 1981 on the TAGOS ships.12 As the programming and budget process proceeds, I shall be considering systems and ideas that we will want to implement. Technology offers us one possible way to offset some of the advantages the Soviets hold in so many aspects of the military balance; but unless we move from the idea stage to tangible increases in capability, the ideas will not mean very much. A number of these initiatives can take major steps toward incorporation into our military capabilities in the FY 80 program. Others will do so later. I and others in DoD will be considering with Cy and Zbig now to make maximum use of these actions internationally, and with the Vice President in terms of domestic perceptions. At some key internal decision points you will wish to make your own inputs on the interaction of perceptions and programs. You may wish to make the key announcements yourself.13 Harold Brown 12 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph. 13 Brzezinski returned the memorandum to Brown under cover of an October 14 memorandum in which he wrote: “I return for your records your memorandum to the President of September 11, with his marginal notes.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 5, Defense Department: 10/78) Brzezinski also sent a copy of Brown’s memorandum to Carter, with Carter’s handwritten notes, to Ermarth and Utgoff under cover of an October 14 memorandum. (Ibid.)
