606 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 203. Prospects. A continuation of the current pattern of Soviet pol­ icy toward the Satellites for the next few years is probable so long as outside events or developments within the Satellites themselves do not force a change. In general, the USSR is likely to limit its direct interfer­ ence in Satellite affairs as much as it believes feasible, striving to give these regimes the appearance of full sovereignty. Most of the orthodox Satellite leaders will probably be allowed to exercise day-­to-­day control over internal affairs, provided they retain control over their own parties and conform to Soviet-­established guidelines. The fact that these lead­ ers depend on Soviet support for their position and share many of the same interests tends to reduce the risk for the USSR in such a policy. The apparent right of Bloc leaders to speak relatively freely and frankly to the Soviets about their own problems and about intra-Bloc economic affairs will probably be maintained, although this right is undoubtedly viewed in Moscow solely as a consultative one. The renewed Soviet effort to push Bloc economic integration and to achieve a better divi­ sion of labor will receive continuing emphasis. But past resistance to this program, based on the national economic interests of the individ­ ual Satellites, has been stubborn and persistent and will almost cer­ tainly not be eliminated over the next few years. 204. We believe that the recurrence of popular revolt or of an attempt by a Satellite Communist party to defy Moscow on vital issues is unlikely at least over the next few years. Such developments are possible, however, and even probable if Soviet policies should again become indecisive, or if, because of Soviet internal or foreign policy considerations, controls should be significantly relaxed. In the event of a rebellion in the Satellites beyond the capacity of the local regime to repress, the Soviet leaders would almost certainly intervene militarily. Soviet reaction to an attempt of a Satellite to secede from the Bloc would probably be the same. In the event of another Satellite party “coup” like that in Poland—­aimed at greater autonomy rather than secession—­the Soviet response would be dependent on the particular local and inter­ national circumstances of the moment. One of the aims of the current “antirevisionist” campaign is to prevent any disaffected inner party faction from organizing a challenge to the official leadership. 205. We believe that the Soviet Union will almost certainly main­ tain or increase its efforts to reduce or eliminate the distinctive features of the Polish regime. But, since Gomulka would almost certainly resist pressures on any fundamental aspects of his policies and would have the support of the Polish people in doing so, we think that the Soviet approach will be cautious. If moderate pressure proves ineffective, however, the USSR might work for Gomulka’s ouster. Even in this case, we think that the USSR would resort to military intervention only if
