Chapter 7, January–May 1991  955
ten percent change in length if we would accept a fifteen percent change 
in throw-­weight. I was non-­committal but said I would report his ideas.
10. In other aspects:
— Nazarkin says that the Soviets will accept a commitment not to 
produce the seven RV SS–N–18 front end, although he was not quick 
enough to get that commitment into the letter to Baker after I sug-
gested it.
— I suggested we be allowed to inspect all SS–N–18s in order to 
“certify” (along the lines of the Soviet B1B language) that none can 
carry more than three RVs. Nazarkin says it would take two years and 
is impractical.
— Nazarkin continued to claim that downloading was part of the 
Houston package.
— Nazarkin says the ad ref agreement on rapid reload (my RFG 
XIV–067)5 is still under evaluation in Moscow and that the Soviet pro-
vision limiting the number of non-­deployed missiles at each ICBM base 
for silo launchers to four per ICBM type is not intended to be a rejection 
of that agreement.
What to Do Next
11. Of course, the Soviet walk-­back (and what it says about the 
internal political situation in the Soviet Union), along with the prob-
lems which already exist with CFE, may lead us to reconsider whether 
START signature in February should still be our goal. If, however, we 
are still going to try to sign START then, we need to salvage the cen-
tral elements of the Houston agreement right now, without waiting 
for a possible ministerial later in the month. A number of other issues 
depend on this package; if it isn’t settled by mid-January at the latest 
our chances of getting done by the summit will be nonexistent.
12. The central deal in Houston was the PPCM/B1B/B2 package. 
That’s what we have to salvage. I recommend a letter, within the next 
seventy-­two hours, which:
— Objects to Soviet walkbacks on the B1B and B2 and insists on the 
deal we cut in Houston, and
— In return, accepts the Soviet PPCM position as given in the 
November 24 Shevardnadze letter, including applying PPCM to 
the small ICBM.
In addition, I see no reason why we cannot accept—­here in 
Geneva—­the Soviet proposal to add pylons to the list of items we will 
exclude from air bases for non-ALCM B1Bs.6
5 Reference is to telegram 13804 from NST Geneva, December 21, 1990 (Department 
of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D90199–0027)
6 Gordon drew a short vertical line to the right of this sentence and wrote: “which 
pylons?”
