Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
477
(c) Encourage a more equitable distribution of wealth and the nec-
essary socio-economic reforms which will permit this.
2. Central America
Our goals are to strengthen the peace by assisting in the settlement
of long-standing territorial disputes and to promote economic coopera-
tion and integration.
3. Caribbean Basin
Our goals have been spelled out in the President’s Caribbean
policy.
The first circle—internal politics in El Salvador, Honduras, and
Guatemala—is the most urgent, but we will not have a coherent and
positive policy until we have begun to address all three sets of
problems associated with each concentric circle.
B. Our means for pursuing these goals are considerable. We have
relatively large bilateral assistance programs to these small and poor
countries, and a large proportion of the loans they receive from the
Inter-American Development Bank are concessional (from FSO) over
which we have a veto. This leverage has in the past translated into real
influence. For example, our decision to withhold support for a loan to
build a hydroelectric project in El Salvador last year led the gov-
ernment to lift the state of siege. Unfortunately, we continue to deal
with aid and loans one at a time without any overall strategic approach.
Perhaps the most important source of U.S. influence is simply U.S.
symbolic support, including Presidential attention. An expression of
interest by the President in the 10-year-old El Salvador-Honduras
border dispute encouraged the Hondurans to ratify a mediation agree-
ment in September 1977 (during the Canal Treaty signing in Wash-
ington).4 I would guess that a small touch by the President at a
well-timed moment could have a large impact on this area. (We may
want to factor into a future review the possibility of a short visit by the
President—perhaps as a follow-on to a Mexico trip5—to the area, and to
stimulate negotiations on El Salvador-Honduras, Belize, or on eco-
nomic integration to try to reach a conclusion before that. Such a visit
would also help to restore some sense of stability to a region still
rocking with Nicaragua.)
4 In his diary entry for September 8, 1977, the President noted that he had met with
President Romero that day: “My major purpose was to get El Salvador to agree to a medi-
ation formula for the border dispute with Honduras. He agreed to move on this, which
has kept the Pan-American Highway closed for a long time and resulted in severing of
relationships altogether between Honduras and El Salvador. Before they left Wash-
ington, this was done.” (White House Diary, p. 94)
5 Carter visited Mexico in February 1979, but no other Central American countries.
