December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 639 is old, and there are many leftists and Communists. The border between Iran and the Soviet Union is the longest, except for the Soviet border with China. We should not forget the old czarist ambitions and we must be very careful. What can Israel do? I will not exaggerate, but Israel can play a role. The Israeli Army is a good instrument, it is efficient, and we have land and air forces. Israeli pilots have confronted Soviet pilots, and in 1970 we shot down five Soviet-piloted planes.6 We have had combat experience. We can manage any threats against Israel. I have suggested that you take over the two air bases in the Sinai, and that they not be turned over to the Egyptians for civilian purposes. Etzion could be most vital for the protection of Saudi Arabia. You would not have to send F–15s to Saudi Arabia if you could have an air base at Etzion. We are prepared to give you that base, but Sadat apparently is not. Israel can do whatever is necessary to prevent Saudi Arabia from being taken over by Communism. We cannot lose Saudi oil to Communism. I would like to note that we used to ask for arms in order to defend Israel, but we have now reached the end of this thesis. From now on we will contend that Israel should be in order to fulfill the common interests of the free world. This is the situation as we see it, and we hope that you will look at it carefully. The world is in turmoil and the Soviets are taking over by proxy. Now I will turn to the negotiations with Egypt. It is my duty to say as a free man, and I am speaking frankly, that the negotiations are in a state of deep crisis. We reached an agreement at Camp David and we want to be true and faithful to that agreement, both in spirit and in letter. We accepted a draft of a treaty on November 11th,7 and the Cabinet decided that we would sign that treaty on November 21st. We gave up serious reservations that we have on parts of the preamble. Secretary Vance urged us not to reopen the text of the treaty. Then in Cairo they found a way to reopen the text of the treaty indirectly through interpretive notes on agreed minutes. In my opinion, there is no difference in how one reopens the treaty, through the texts or through notes. It means reopening the text because it changes the content. Now let me turn to the main issues. First the good news. The Government of Israel has accepted the American proposal8 on Article 4 (the Prime Minister reads the text of the interpretive note to Article 4). 6 In a meeting at the White House on August 5, 1970, Israeli Ambassador Yitzhak Rabin briefed Kissinger on the air engagement on the night of July 29–30 in which four of the five Soviet-piloted MiGs were shot down. A record of this conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXIV, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1969– 1972. 7 See Document 131. 8 The text of this proposal has not been found.
