Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
59
PART ONE: OVERALL CONCEPT
1. In the first three months after the Inaugural you will have the
unique opportunity—given the likelihood of broad popular and Con-
gressional support—to set U.S. policy on a new course. This will
require:
(a) Public enunciation of your overall concept and direction.
(b) Adoption of specific actions on pressing issues.
(c) Seizing the initiative in several policy areas in order to fore-
shadow and advance your overall strategy.
2. Four issues stand out as the most urgent of all:
(a) The need to put the East-West relationship on a more stable
basis;
(b) The need to set in motion a process pointing toward a compre-
hensive Middle Eastern settlement;
(c) The need to initiate comprehensive and constructive North-
South negotiations;
(d) The need to contain the arms race and to rationalize our de-
fense posture.
3. In your State of the Union Address2 you will have the opportu-
nity to sketch out the broad outlines of the foreign policy that you in-
tend to follow. In that Address you should explicitly reassert the tradi-
tional role of the President as the formulator and articulator of U.S.
foreign policy—making clear that henceforth the United States will
speak to the world through you. We recommend the following themes:
A. The depth, extent, and pace of global change is ushering us into
a new era of either global cooperation or fragmentation.
B. The United States has no choice but to be engaged in a pro-
tracted architectural process to reform and reshape the existing interna-
tional system. Unlike the years 1945–50, this calls not for assertive
American leadership but for more subtle inspiration and cooperation
on a much wider front. The new international system cannot be con-
fined to the developed countries but must involve increasingly the en-
tire international community of more than 150 nation-states. That com-
munity, in addition to the traditional problems of war and peace, now
confronts global problems never before faced by mankind.
C. That in the above context you set the following priorities for the
United States:
2 Presumable reference to the inaugural address, as Carter did not deliver a State of
the Union address in 1977. For the inaugural address, see Document 15.
