342 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —(3) The half billion dollar gold prize is again sparking interest in the U.S. in vesting—for example, the Merrigan investment initiative—and we can reasonably expect this pressure to grow; —(4) The British are continuing to press for our agreement to the delivery of the gold so that they can get on with their own claims settlement. Unless we are able to demonstrate some movement in the near future, they may seriously propose that the Commission order the delivery of the gold held by the Bank of England to enable HMG to bring into effect the 1964 UK-Czechoslovak agreed minute (ref B). —(5) Although we have legitimate reasons for failing to make a new proposal after Congress repudiated the 1974 Agreement, our position is vulnerable to attack from the interested parties. The claimants say we have done nothing to advance their interests since 1974, and that inflation has seriously eroded the value of any settlement. Congress can point to the clear mandate it gave in 1974 to renegotiate the 40 agreement. And the Czechoslovaks can say that they have demonstrated their intention to fulfill their legal obligation to the owners of the nationalized property by twice agreeing to pay compensation. They can also point to our failure to return to the bargaining table despite our unilateral repudiation of both ad referendum agreements; —(6) It would be more difficult to prevent Congress from mandating the vesting of the gold than it was to defeat the 1976 lawsuit. If vesting legislation were enacted, we would have considerable difficulties with the French and British Governments, and our relations with Czechoslovakia would be poisoned for years to come; and —(7) Assuming that the GOC did not reject the proposal out of hand, we would be able to point to continuing negotiations to deflect congressional proposals to vest the gold, as well as “separate peace” proposals from the British. 5. We see the following objections to proceeding as recommended above, but we do not believe any of them to be overriding: —(1) The chances of achieving a 100 [percent] cash settlement in the very near future are admittedly not great. Only Yugoslavia, among the Eastern European countries, paid anything approaching this amount. (It is interesting to note, however, that the primary reason for the high percentage of the Yugoslav settlement, which was reached in 1948, was the fact that we held Yugoslav monetary gold valued in excess of our claims against the GOY); —(2) Reopening the negotiations with the Czechoslovaks at this time could be seen as a signal that we intend to proceed with “business as usual”, despite Czechoslovak support for the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and continued repression of dissidents; —(3) Tabling this proposal could raise unrealistic expectations among the claimants. If these expectations are not fulfilled, they could
