1955  83
2. Provision for QUOTE Investigation upon request of Government 
UNQUOTE would destroy strictly limited nature contemplated repre­
sentation arrangement by making it possible for CPR through Indian 
Embassy request investigation of and make representations regarding 
unlimited numbers Chinese in US.
Other objections exist in matters of detail but they are secondary to 
these basic objections which disqualify proposal.
Dulles
74.	
Telegram 478 to Geneva1
Washington, August 12, 1955, 7:46 p.m.
478. For Johnson. Your 428.
1. Agree form should be unilateral simultaneous declarations and 
our 466 was designed to suggest the form of such a declaration.
2. QTE If desired by C.P.R. UNQTE can be deleted at your discre­
tion. We proposed it with a view to creating a situation such that in the 
C.P.R. Declaration the Government of the United Kingdom would not 
be obligated to seek the return of American turncoats in China whom 
we do not want to get back.
3. See no objection to insertion in 2(a) of words QTE if it deems 
such a complaint valid UNQTE as precondition to intervention on civil­
ians’ behalf. Some such language would conform to your original pre­
sentation which is unobjectionable.
4. 90-­day clause was designed to permit of subsequent modifica­
tion if conditions change. We do not want to be committed in perpetu­
ity to a situation where Chinese Communist spies could operate in this 
country, knowing that if caught there would never be any penalty other 
than their prepaid first-­class ticket to China. However, possibly it is 
sufficient to drop out reference to 90 days and merely provide that the 
Declaration shall be valid until notice of termination given or possibly 
nothing need be said explicitly about termination as long as it is under­
stood that it is not necessarily in perpetuity but subject to reasonable 
termination.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1255. Secret; Priority. Drafted 
by Dulles; cleared by Robertson and McConaughy.
