820  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Baker: We’re not prepared to say when the next summit should be, 
whether it should be in December, November or January—­that’s the 
only point I would like to make. That is consistent with your under-
standing, isn’t it?
Shevardnadze: In Washington, we didn’t decide the date. So it’s 
okay that we can say that we have an agreement regarding a summit, 
but that the date depends upon the readiness of issues like START for 
conclusion.
Baker: We’ll check with the President. I want to see if that language 
would be consistent with what he wants us to say. I’d like to say to the 
press that we’ve had a discussion of a summit meeting between our 
two leaders, that its timing will depend upon progress being made on 
agreements, but that our two leaders look forward very much to get-
ting together at some time that will be agreed upon. It will be a time 
that is both mutually-­convenient but also one that allows us to com-
plete the work we have to get done on START and other issues. I want 
to be able to say something that satisfies both your position and ours.
Shevardnadze: Well, it will be difficult now to speak of a precise date. 
And that, I think it is appropriate for us therefore to say that we talked 
about this, but we haven’t fixed a date.
Baker: At an appropriate time, which will be determined by the 
progress that we’re making on agreements, there’ll be a summit. And 
that could be in December of 1990, or could conceivably be in January 
or February of 1991. In any case, it will be in the Soviet Union, that’s 
our understanding. If that’s your understanding as well, then we can 
proceed on that basis.
Shevardnadze: If we could say something more definite on it in 
terms of a date, that would be desirable. People will be watching this 
and it would help drive the conclusion of the documents.
Baker: I understand that. But, we don’t want to have a debate in the 
US that we’re negotiating under the deadline of a firm date and that’s 
the only reason that we’re concluding these agreements. Let’s come up 
with a formulation that meets both of our needs. And if need be, I’ll go 
back to the President. But I’m trying to recall what the conversation 
was in Camp David, and I don’t recall there being an agreement on a 
date. I do recall that in Paris we discussed December, and I still think 
that that’s possible. But the President at this point doesn’t want to put 
a meeting or lay out the timeframe for a meeting before we have prog-
ress on the substance that will give us confidence that we can meet that 
timeframe. Now, if the question of December came up at Camp David, 
it’s something that I just don’t remember.
Shevardnadze: No, I think that the language was that we would have 
a meeting and maybe it could take place towards the end of the year.
