3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 352 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI 109. Memorandum of Conversation1 New York, May 25, 1978, 4:15–6 p.m. SUBJECT Vance-Gromyko Meeting PARTICIPANTS US Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance William D. Krimer, Interpreter USSR Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko Mr. Viktor M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter Minister Gromyko welcomed the Secretary at the Soviet Mission and asked him how he wanted to proceed. The Secretary first wanted to convey to Gromyko President Carter’s personal regards, and tell him that the President looked forward to their scheduled meeting Saturday morning.2 That meeting would take about 2 hours, or however long might be necessary, and the Secretary would suggest that after that he and Gromyko go back to discuss the matters remaining after the meeting with the President. Tonight the Secretary planned to return to Washington and would come out to the airport to meet Gromyko at 5 p.m. tomorrow. Gromyko said he planned to arrive about that time unless the skies cracked open or something else happened. The Secretary pointed out that the meeting on Saturday was planned for the ungodly hour of 8 a.m. in view of the President’s plans to leave town immediately after their meeting. Gromyko agreed and said he would plan to meet with the President for two hours or more and then with the Secretary. He would want to discuss the main question between our two countries, the one he and the Secretary had discussed in Moscow and earlier in Washington. There would not be much time to discuss other matters, although he supposed that the President or the Secretary would have some general remarks bearing on Soviet-American relations, and he would also have a few words on that subject. He asked the Secretary who would start off the conversation on Saturday. 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 8, Gromyko to US, 5/26–27, 1978. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Krimer. The meeting took place at the Soviet Mission to the United Nations. 2 May 27; see Document 115.
