1980  791
The Soviets, however, could shelter a large proportion of their political 
leadership and many key industrial workers.
—The Soviets have operational systems capable of attacking or 
degrading some US satellites and are probably working to improve 
their capabilities.
C. Future Soviet Forces for Strategic Attack
Possible Soviet Reactions to MX/MPS
19. Under SALT II. While the Soviets will try to halt or severely 
limit the MX/MPS system, they can also be expected to use the time 
between now and the middle 1980s to develop counters to both the 
hard-­target capabilities and the survivability features of the US system. 
One of the first indicators of the Soviets’ response is likely to be the mis-
sile they choose to flight-­test as the one new type of ICBM permitted 
them under SALT II restrictions. They could select either of two new 
solid-­propellant ICBMs [less than 1 line not declassified] a small system 
that could be deployed on offroad mobile launchers but could carry 
no more than a few MIRVs, and a medium system that could be fit-
ted with a large single reentry vehicle or with up to 10 MIRVs but, if 
deployed in a mobile configuration, probably would be restricted to 
improved roads or special deployment areas. Alternatively, the Soviets 
could develop a medium-­size liquid-­propellant ICBM to carry 10 RVs, 
but such a system could not easily be deployed in a mobile mode and 
we have no evidence that it is under development.
20. At present, the Soviets are keeping their options open. We 
assume that, under SALT II limitations, they would choose as their 
new ICBM a single-RV medium solid system to replace the SS–11, and 
would deploy it in silos and perhaps on mobile launchers. We think 
they would also develop—­but not flight-­test—­a MIRV version of this 
system and a more highly fractionated version of the SS–18. By these 
actions they could minimize disruptions to their present ICBM pro-
grams and be ready to flight-­test and deploy ICBMs with greater num-
bers of RVs if the SALT II limitations expired at the end of 1985. We 
do not have high confidence that the Soviets will follow this course of 
action. A 10–RV replacement for SS–17s or SS–19s, or both, seems only a 
little less likely than a single-RV replacement for SS–11s, especially if the 
Soviets expected SALT II limitations to be extended beyond 1985 and 
wanted to maximize their counterforce RVs within these limitations.
21. Under No-SALT Conditions. If the SALT limitations on offen-
sive arms were abandoned this year and the Soviets embarked on a 
major program of force improvement and expansion, they would have 
more options to respond to the prospect of MX/MPS deployment. They 
could take full advantage of their large ICBM throw weight and their 
ongoing R&D programs. Anticipatory actions could be taken gradually,
