Conference. In the divergencies of views which appeared at the outset
between the British and French Governments the view of the United States
was in principle in agreement with that of Great Britain and as the
compromise now reached with the French goes a considerable way towards
meeting the views of the United States and ourselves we entertain the hope
that it will have the approval and support of the American Government. But
we emphasise the fact that this Anglo-French agreement is not a treaty or
even a final binding agreement in regard to naval disarmament. Unless it
should lead to the signing of an agreed Convention at Geneva its purpose
will not have been achieved and it will be necessary to make further
attempts to arrange a compromise if we are not to abandon all hope of a
limitation of armaments by international agreement.
This compromise has now been submitted to the United States Government
in order that they may consider its terms and, should they see fit, give us the
benefit of their observations and of any suggestions which may occur to
them.
Premature publicity in regard to the details of the proposals would clearly
be undesirable. Both His Majesty’s Government and the United States
Government have been criticised on the ground that there was insufficient
preparation between Governments before Geneva Naval Limitation
Conference last year. However this may be we consider it very desirable
that confidential preparatory conversations which we hope will take place
between the two Governments before the meeting of the League
Preparatory Commission at Geneva should not be prejudiced by premature
publication. It seems only necessary to say to the Press that conversations
are taking place between the Governments concerned with a view to the
resumption of work of the Preparatory Commission and that it would
obviously be prejudicial to their ultimate success if tentative proposals are
at every stage to be prematurely published.
It has been stated in Press telegrams that this naval agreement with the
French represents a bargain one part of which is that His Majesty’s
Government agree to support the contention of the French Government in
the matter of military reserves. Here again there is some misapprehension.
His Majesty’s Government have reluctantly reached the conclusion that it
