Arms Control and Disarmament  1491
shall be carried out by decision of the Commission with the resources 
of both sides of the initial states parties to the treaty.
Control Posts on Ships
13. Control posts on ships shall be equipped with hydro-­acoustic 
and acoustic instruments, radiation registration instruments, as well as 
with facilities of a maritime type for collection and analysis of radioac­
tive debris.
14. Each ship control post shall be assigned a specific area of the 
ocean to cover.
15. The ship control posts shall be staffed by personnel of the 
state which owns such equipped vessel. The ship shall have on board 
one or two controllers of the other side (including one controller for 
navigation).
The Collection of Air Samples of Radioactive Debris
16. For the regular air sampling of radioactive aerosols, weather 
reconnaissance aircraft shall be used which make regular flights along 
routes in the open air space over oceans.
The said aircraft must be equipped with special instruments for the 
purpose of the detection and collection of radioactive aerosols.
At each base of these aircraft there shall be one or two controllers 
from the other side, whose functions shall include control over collec­
tion of samples and over their timely analysis at the radio-­chemical lab­
oratory of the base. One of the controllers must be on board the aircraft 
during air sampling. Air samples, the analysis of which indicates the 
existence of fresh radioactive debris from a nuclear explosion, shall be 
sent to the Commission, together with the conclusion on the results of 
the analysis of such samples as well as with technical documentation 
obtained on board the aircraft.
Arrangements for On-­site Inspection of a Suspected Nuclear 
Explosion
17. An inspection team shall be despatched to the site of a sus­
pected nuclear explosion by a decision of the Commission to be agreed 
in each individual case after careful examination of all available data on 
the identification of natural events. The adoption of a decision concern­
ing the despatch of an inspection team must be preceded by a manda­
tory study of the data from the existing network of seismic stations and 
of other data which can contribute to the identification of the events 
under study.
An inspection team shall be created and supplied with the appro­
priate equipment in each individual case by decision of the Commis­
sion, depending upon the task of the team before it. The size of the 
group shall also be determined by decision of the Commission.
