98  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
must be additive to the forces needed for Europe. The Second Division 
might become available for this purpose. We touched slightly on Africa, 
Latin America, and war-­at-­sea.
We also talked about East Asia. All agreed that we should make 
no further changes now except for the withdrawal from Korea. There is 
some thought that we might augment our presence in the area slightly; 
for example, we might fill out the fighter wing in Korea or undertake 
more exercises. We might also consider stationing more ground forces 
outside of Korea; but there is a question of room and whether it would 
be better to have them at home available for other purposes.
Our next step is to discuss strategic forces next week. Then I guess 
Zbig will synthesize the whole thing. I believe we can take this study 
to the President in the present form. We can get his views on the key 
questions and on the size of the Defense Budget.
Mr. Aaron: Can’t we get better costs? It’s hard to answer these ques-
tions without understanding that constraint.
Secretary Brown: It’s easy to cost-­out a particular force. Our diffi-
culty is in narrowing the range of estimated forces.
Mr. Jayne: I’m afraid if you don’t narrow the range of forces now, 
the President will do it for you.
Secretary Brown: We will work on it.
27.	
Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
Washington, July 13, 1977
Secretary Brown opened the meeting by describing its purpose; 
i.e., to review that portion of the PRM–10 Military Strategy and Force 
Posture Review that deals with strategic forces. He noted that while the 
subject of strategic forces was not quite so sprawling as general pur-
pose forces, it was still not quite so simple as some, included himself, 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Meetings 
File, Box 28, INT Documents: #5000s–#5100s: 7–8/77. Top Secret. According to the Sum-
mary of Conclusions, the meeting began at 2 p.m. and took place in the White House 
Situation Room. The participants were Warren Christopher and David Gompert from the 
Department of State; Harold Brown, Charles Duncan, David McGiffert and Lynn Davis 
from the Department of Defense; George Brown and William Smith from the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff; Robert Bowie from the Central Intelligence Agency; Randy Jayne, from the Office 
of Management and Budget; Spurgeon Keeny and Robert Behr from the Arms Control 
and Disarmament Agency; and Zbigniew Brzezinski, David Aaron, Samuel Huntington, 
Victor Utgoff, and Roger Molander from the National Security Council. (Ibid.)
