1955 397 3. In regard to Sino-US relations, Wang stated that Premier Chou had repeatedly declared that China did not want war with US and that China and US should sit down and enter into negotiations. This, he stated, was objective of introducing into present talks question of higher level Sino-US negotiations. 4. Wang quoted paragraph 4, article 2, of UN Charter. He referred also to my statement at last meeting that US as member of UN had agreed to refrain from threat or use of force. Wang stated that he wel­ comed my statement to this effect on behalf of my government, and that he very much desired that this principle should become guiding principle of US in Far East and rest of world. He stated that there was no dispute between China and US regarding the principles guiding United Nations. Question was how these principles could be concretely implemented. In this connection he cited Taiwan situation. 5. He stated that Taiwan was Chinese territory and that this was spe­ cifically provided in solemn international agreements in which US had participated. Wang quoted a statement of January 5, 1950 by President Truman to effect that US Government had always stood for good faith in international relations and specifically in Formosa (Taiwan) situation, that in Cairo Declaration of 1943 the US, UK, and China had announced objective of restoring to China territory stolen by Japan from China, such as Formosa, that US was a signatory to Potsdam Declaration which declared that the terms of the Cairo Declaration shall be carried out, that the provisions of the Potsdam Declaration were accepted by Japan at time of surrender, and that for four years the US and other powers had accepted the authority of Chinese authorities over Formosa. Wang stated that President Truman had added that US had no predatory designs on Formosa or other Chinese territory and that US desired to avoid courses of action leading to involvement in civil disputes in China. 6. However, Wang stated, the US now occupies Taiwan with its armed forces and has openly declared it would use force to encroach upon Chinese territorial integrity. He declared that this was origin of tension in Taiwan area and that China had never used or threatened force to encroach on territorial integrity of the US. China had repeat­ edly stated that China and US should respect each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and settle disputes between each other by negotiations. 7. He said that since I had stated at last meeting that US had agreed to refrain from threat or use of force, it followed that US should with­ draw its armed forces from China’s Taiwan. Wang declared that he would like to know whether US was prepared to do so. 8. Wang stated that at last meeting I had failed to mention fact that US had used force against China’s Taiwan, had dodged the question of US withdrawal, and had unreasonably tried to introduce question
