862 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement in numerous ARA examinations Nicaraguan situation and has good idea DEPT views. Judging from inquiries made of DEPT, next move of PRES Somoza, leading as it were from strength, being watched most closely everywhere.3 3 In telegram 7 to Managua, July 7, the Department noted, among other things, the following: With invasion danger to Nicaragua about eliminated and continued control country assured, Department is of opinion that GON still faces a serious problem. For reason set forth Deptel 333 Luis Somoza Government prone be viewed by various elements as continuation dictatorial regime despite democratic trend in Nicaragua. If non-­ communist opposition forces continue attempts to overthrow Somoza Government with cry it dictatorship much of Luis Somoza’s good work will go unrecognized in atmosphere created by emotional dictator vs. democracy storm building up in OAS. Department believes it is in best interest of GON to make every feasible effort reach agreement with responsible opposition leaders and thus bring about unity in efforts to solve internal problems. This solution would also have practical effect of making it easier for GON thwart efforts of outside-­supported groups with doubtful ideologies to make overthrow attempts. Seems to Department that our suggested course of action would be looked upon favorably by those elements now critical of Somoza Government and should do much to discredit any accusation that present Government is dictatorship. Your views on Nicaraguan situation, sought in Deptel 333, would be especially welcomed at this time. (713.00/7–359) NI–16. Telegram from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to the Department of State1  Managua, June 10, 1959, 6 p.m. 482. DEPARTMENT PASS DA FOR ACSI. Midnight conversations between General Somoza and MA subsequent EMBTEL 4022 indicated both Somozas convinced committee OAS indisposed provide effective assistance to prevent attacks on Nicaragua. In view foregoing premise and faced with the massive threats from both north and south which GON is convinced are INTL in character, and furthermore believing that U.S. Government will do nothing to displease Nicaragua’s enemies, General seriously considered (1) air attacks of his own against hostile forces based in Costa Rica; (2) possibility bombing Havana and (3) arming Honduran revolutionary 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 717.00/0–1859. Secret; Niact. 2 From Managua, June 18, not printed; 717.00/8–1359.
