September 18–December 16, 1978 341 dent replied that if that was the case he could not help matters. But he would not ask Sadat to say that the agreement with Israel was not related to the broader framework. Israel had already agreed to language in the preamble reaffirming her commitment to the broader framework. The President has tried to get the Egyptians to remove excess verbage from their letter and he has proposed simply to have the text of the framework agreement appended to the exchange of letters. Rosenne said that the implementation of the broader framework agreement might depend on some third party and that would give them the possibility of preventing the implementation of the Egypt- Israel treaty as well. Dayan added that Israel had accepted the reference to the general Camp David framework in the preamble. In addition, there might be an exchange of letters, although they would not necessarily be identical. But there should be nothing in the preamble other than what the American draft contained. The President asked whether Israel would accept everything else in our proposal. The Israelis are trying selectively to accept our suggestions. The President said that he had tried to get the Israelis to say what they could accept. Barak said that the text of the framework agreement could be annexed to the exchange of letters. This could be done with the letter on setting up negotiations for the West Bank and Gaza within one month. Barak said that when Israel agreed to reaffirm its commitment to the framework, it did so in conjunction with a section in the treaty which stated that the Egypt-Israel treaty would stand on its own feet. This is not a new point. The President asked the Israelis if they really wanted a peace treaty. Dayan said that he could not imagine anyone thinking they did not. The President said that he detected an attitude among the Israelis that they had gone too far at Camp David, and they now seemed to be trying to back off some of their undertakings there. Dayan denied this. The President asked why then they were not willing to reaffirm their commitment to those agreements. Barak asked if the West Bank framework did not work out for some reason, would the Egyptian-Israeli treaty stand? The President said yes. Barak said that is what the Israelis were trying to say. The President asked what would happen in a situation where the interim withdrawal would be complete, ambassadors had been exchanged, and then Israel would refuse to withdraw her military government or to redeploy her forces, or would not negotiate on the West Bank and Gaza, what should Egypt do? Barak said that Israel would then be breaking her agreement under the framework document. The President asked whether the Egyptian-Israeli treaty should then stand. Barak said that it should stand on its own, but Israel would then be in breach of another agreement.
