First Responses 55 provide an advisory opinion by tomorrow on revocation of existing visas which have not yet been used, exclusion of further Iranian nationals from entering the U.S., and the best means for prohibiting or delaying issuance of additional visas. One possibility is to request that all new visas be referred to Washington for review.3 It was noted that about half of the visas granted in the past year were to minority groups (Jewish and Bahá’í), and a formal exclusion could impact on these groups. (S) 2. Unofficial Trade Embargo.4 On the military side, State and Defense have talked to the principal companies involved and they will cooperate on a quiet basis. Commerce will have a paper ready today cataloguing other areas of commerce except food. Treasury will provide a recommendation tomorrow on how best to proceed. Secretary Bergland has provided to the NSC a survey of food exports to Iran which will be examined today.5 All agreed that interference with food exports is quite different from other commodities and should be handled with great care. Any work on a trade embargo is to be handled as extremely sensitive. (S) 3. Iranian Assets. There was no unusual movement of Iranian assets from U.S. foreign branch banks yesterday. The initial report of withdrawal of Iranian assets appears to have been exaggerated.6 Major U.S. banks have been asked privately to keep us closely informed of any request for withdrawal and to delay action on the grounds of assuring authenticity of the order after the change of government in Tehran. All communications on this are to be conducted through Treasury. State [less than 1 line not declassified] will turn off [less than 1 line not declassified] normal contacts with banks. Treasury has done a draft paper for the NSC on steps to be taken in the event of a freeze, and the machinery is ready if needed. Iranian assets are estimated at $6–7 billion in U.S. banks, versus about $3 billion in U.S. bank loans to Iran. (TS) 4. Energy. Foreign and domestic reactions to yesterday’s announcement7 have been uniformly positive thus far. DOE has prepared a list 3 Carter wrote in the margin next to this sentence: “I agree.” 4 On the front page of the Summary of Conclusions of the November 12 SCC meeting, Carter wrote: “Zbig: Expedite proposal for unofficial economic embargo.” The meeting did not discuss an embargo. (Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 105) 5 Carter underlined “paper,” “recommendation,” and “survey of food exports” and wrote “to me” in the margin. Several of these papers were conveyed to Brzezinski under a November 13 covering memorandum from Sick. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 29, Iran 11/15/79–11/16/79) 6 See footnote 5, Document 19. 7 See Document 22.
