Chapter 6, June–December 1990 843 — Elimination of Missiles and Warheads: This is a tough collection of issues which I think should be approached—­and solved—­as a package. First, there is the question of missile elimination. While Nazarkin earlier hinted at some flexibility, the Soviet position has hardened—­ while they are prepared to agree on a small quota of space launch vehicles, they want to eliminate the rest of the missiles reduced under START. Our position, of course, is not to eliminate any. Second, in a clear reference to SDI, the Soviets want us to sign up to language that would prohibit the use of any retained missiles for putting weapons in space. We have stone-­walled them on this. Third, there is warhead elimination—­the Soviets want to follow the INF approach (crushing the aeroshell but saving the physics package), but so far we’ve opposed any regime for warheads. The DOE, as you know, has come up with a concept that is similar to INF and that I think could be sold to the Soviets. My own personal preference would be to agree to both missile and warhead destruction—­this clearly would be popular on the Hill. But because it would be too difficult to get through the bureaucracy, Lint Brooks suggests the following package: — No missile destruction. — Warhead destruction along the lines of the DOE proposal. — No warhead destruction during downloading. — A ban on using START missiles to place weapons in orbit, but no ban on using these missiles for SDI testing. I know that this latter point will threaten the “precious bodily fluids” of the SDI community. If these missiles are necessary for SDI (which I don’t think they are), then we can hang tough. But if it’s only a matter of ideological purity, we should try for the compromise outlined above. — Third Country Basing: The real issue here is Holy Loch and we will be pulling our Poseidon boats out in 1991. Thus, I think it’s possible to solve this issue as long as we are prepared—­as a matter of principle—­to agree on banning the basing of strategic arms outside national territory. We recently sent Jim Timbie a proposal by classified fax along these lines. As the proposal makes clear, the Soviets might stick to their position concerning third country inspections. In the end, we may have to approach the British (at a very senior level) about on-­site inspection at Holy Loch. — ALCMS: I have saved the best for last. I admit I am worried about this one. Washington will need to examine several problems in short order if you are to make any progress in September: — ALCM Attribution: After all our to-­ing and fro-­ing on counting rules, we still appear to disagree on how to count an ALCM bomber
