978  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
other days of special significance to the two countries. Panamanian 
Govt would be informed by formal note of this forthcoming state-
ment two hours or so before it was given to press. An announcement 
before October 1 was desirable in order avoid implication that this was 
an action directly tied to inauguration of new Panamanian president 
(Theodore Roosevelt’s birthday on October 27 was incidentally men-
tioned as one day suitable for first flying the flag).
5. President also approved the practice of flying U.S. flag daily 
in front of Chancery without reference to or other connection with 
impending action on the Panama flag.
You are requested not to take any action on 1 through 4 above deci-
sions until further instructions. We shall soon be transmitting to you for 
comment drafts of a press release and note on the flag.
You should not consult with Governor or CINCARIB on these mat-
ters until further notice.3
Herter
3 On September 8, Ambassador Farland expressed his concern that the Department 
of State’s proposals contained in paragraph 4 (c) would, if carried out, enable the 
Communists and ultra-nationalists to characterize the decision to restrict the flying of 
the Panamanian flag with the American flag at one designated Canal Zone location as a 
half measure adopted begrudgingly. Farland believed that the proposal failed to meet the 
official Panamanian request for a regular display of the flag in the Canal Zone and would 
only serve to aggravate the situation and to perpetuate the issue as a source of agitation. 
(Telegram 132 from Panama City; 719.04/9–860)
On September 9, Maj. John Eisenhower telephoned Merchant to express his concern 
with the contents of telegram 132 from Panama City. He stated his belief that Ambassador 
Farland’s arguments were persuasive, and that he intended to show the telegram to the 
President. (Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Merchant, September 10, 1960; 
719.04/9–1060)
PM–54.	
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the 
President1

Washington, September 8, 1960.
SUBJECT
Relationship Between the Chief of the United States Mission in Panama and the 
­Governor of the Panama Canal Zone
At the meeting in your office on September 1st Secretary Brucker and 
I indicated our agreement on the primacy of the Chief of the United States 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.19/9–1260. Secret. Drafted by Long.
