3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
239
ting table. If the US would publicly announce such a position its influ-
ence would have a telling effect.
—Soviets arms supply to Ethiopia is insignificant (Neznachitel’
niy—Sukhedrev translated this as “not considerable”) although
Western commentators, especially in the US, exaggerate “tens of
times.” Similarly the Soviet airlift is by no means “huge” for it is simply
impossible to airlift large quantities of heavy equipment. Ethiopia was
much larger in population and size than Somalia. Yet it was Somalia
which had invaded Ethiopia and had its troops in Ethiopian territory.
How could this have happened if the Soviet Union had supplied Ethi-
opia with “huge” amounts of weapons, or even with as much as So-
malia had?
—He didn’t know about US arms supply policy but when Moscow
supplies arms it attaches official provision forbidding their use against
a third country; they must be used only for self defense. Somalia, how-
ever, had violated this agreement and had invaded Ethiopia in a
manner of which the US was well aware.
—He seemed to discern in our presentation concern over an al-
leged Ethiopian threat to invade Somalia. “As far as we know that is to-
tally excluded. We talked about that at a sufficiently high level with the
Ethiopians. They don’t have any plan to invade Somalia.”
—The US and USSR could cooperate productively by their joint ac-
tion to bring about an end to the armed conflict, the withdrawal of So-
malian troops and negotiation on a peaceful political solution. If we
could pool our efforts this would be a good example of US-Soviet
cooperation.
—The USSR is far behind the US in arms supply. Moreover in
many cases US supplied arms have been used for purposes which were
very remote from defensive.
—On Dec. 14 we will begin bilateral discussions on (conventional)
arms supply to third countries. If we could reach a mutually acceptable
position this would indeed be a major step forward with positive effect
on our bilateral relations and on the general world scene.
3. In response I said:
—It was wrong to say that we had made no public statement on
the desirability of ending the Somali-Ethiopian conflict. (Gromyko in-
tervened to insist that we had not called for withdrawal of Somali
troops from Ethiopian territory.)
—When the Somalis had approached us for arms we had made
clear that we would not provide them as long as the present conflict in
Ogaden lasted.
—We have strict provision for arms supply prohibiting the use of
US supplied arms in third countries. Applying this rule to present case,
