Venezuela 1217 predominant influence in the party was that of rural conservatives in western Venezuela, but since 1949 the reformist segment in the Caracas area has gained control. The Church’s increasing emphasis on social action to improve the status of the workers may enable Caldera to hold COPEI’s rural Catholic support while increasing the party’s attraction for urban elements. COPEI’s program is much the same as Acción Democrática’s, the essential difference being that between COPEI’s Catholic approach and AD’s secularism. 24. Unión Republicana Democrática (URD), led by Jovito Villalba, represents primarily urban middle class elements: intellectuals, professional men, and industrialists. Its main area of popular support is in eastern Venezuela. The party program is similar to that of Acción Democrática, but, like COPEI, it favors less government ownership of basic industries. In the abortive election of 1952, from which Acción Democrática was excluded, URD apparently attracted a heavy proportion of the AD vote, but it probably could not hold that support in competition with Acción Democrática itself. 25. Partido Comunista Venezolano (PCV). The Venezuelan Communist Party was organized clandestinely in 1931, emerged as a legitimate political party in 1945, was driven underground by Pérez Jiménez, and has now reemerged under the leadership of Gustavo Machado Morales. The party is numerically weak in comparison with the three major parties of the left (AD, COPEI, and URD), but it exerts considerable influence through its infiltration of key positions in organized labor, the press, the teaching profession, and student organizations. It has also achieved some success in its efforts to infiltrate the government and the major leftist parties. Its most immediate and pressing objectives are to preserve its present freedom of action and to prepare a firm base from which to influence future governments. The PCV’s public efforts are directed primarily toward achieving respectability and acceptance as the most patriotic and democratic of Venezuelan parties. Its stated program is a composite of those of Acción Democrática, COPEI, and URD, but more stridently nationalistic and anti-­imperialist. It is most vociferous in its support of the concept of “national unity”—­which is, in effect, the concept of a popular front against military reaction. However, the party remains fundamentally hostile toward Acción Democrática, which it recognizes as its most effective rival for popular and labor leadership. 26. Integración Republicana (IR), formed in 1958, appeals to those independent liberals who are repelled by the radicalism of AD and URD and the supposed clericalism of COPEI. Its own program is a slightly moderated version of the programs of those parties, but its leaders are of a more conservative type. It has attracted some men of national stature, chiefly businessmen, lawyers, and intellectuals.
