International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
451
legislatures. As a possible FRG commitment, I could put in the declara-
tion that “as a contribution to reduce world-wide disequilibrium the
German delegation stated that it could put additional measures to in-
crease demand and rates of growth to the legislature in the coming
autumn.”
Carter and Giscard: Do you have a number to add?
Schmidt: I can see additional measures designed to strengthen de-
mand and to strengthen economic growth. I am not talking of tenths of
percent of GNP.
Giscard: I appreciated Japan’s figures and deadlines—measures by
the end of September. Have you (Schmidt) thought of saying which
measures would be in your text?
Schmidt: The Government would, if others make commitments,
transmit to its legislature broader additional measures in the month of
September with a view to bringing about increased demand and higher
rates of growth. We will have to meet in our Cabinet, and with others,
in order to determine what types of measures our legislature will ac-
cept. Also, recognize that the opposition has a majority in the
Bundesrat. The opposition has other measures in mind. In principle, I
will get agreement to measures to stimulate demand and lead to higher
rates of growth. Others must also commit themselves in the same direc-
tion. I must also say that there is some skepticism as to whether these
measures can obtain growth.
Fukuda: I will give some phraseology for Japan early in the
afternoon.
Jenkins: At Bremen the communique took a commitment on
growth of a relatively general nature. What Schmidt has said will give
more sharpness to the declaration. The communique as a whole cannot
give quantitative indications for the EC because it cannot go beyond
Bremen.
Callaghan: We have made much progress externally to improve
our debt profile and we have improved our level of reserves. Our level
of inflation has been cut by two-thirds. We will ask for another year of
wage restraint. Our rate of inflation is now about the OECD average.
We will continue with counter inflation measures. Unemployment is
also down. Imports are high, and we have a high import propensity.
North Sea oil helps to finance our high imports and has given a healthy
boost to UK growth. We, of course, in this respect welcome high oil
prices, but will do our best to keep oil prices down, and we will use our
influence to achieve this because it is good for all countries.
We cannot make a contribution at this time to world growth. But if
there is an improvement in the world climate we will consider going
forward. Let’s discuss this over lunch and see how far we can get.
