106
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Next, as to aid, we should try to work in multilateral fora. An ex-
ample is what we are trying to do through the EC. We should create a
realization of the solidarity which exists. Like Truman’s Point 4 ac-
quired moral leadership in the developing world, if our coordination is
to establish more development aid, we should give it a political char-
acter. It would be extremely valuable to make this step together with
other steps, for instance the transfer of technologies. I also agree with
the point of Presidents Giscard and Carter. Public opinion should rec-
ognize how little aid the Soviets give. We should say, not only is it
scanty, but we do not consider it aid from the point of view of a con-
structive responsibility for the development effort. We should make
sure that our aid is given in relation to effective programs. As in the
IMF, we should use stabilization and growth as our criteria for giving
aid.
Fukuda: We live in a day of structural change. There are many
facets of this, and one is in recent North-South developments. Another
is the finiteness of resources in energy. We should have a sweeping re-
view of the situation. These matters are inter-related very closely.
Countries of the South should be allowed to participate in the growth
of the world economy. They should be given a role to play and be held
accountable for their role. CIEC is vital and its success or failure is of
vital concern to us all. We should think about how to ensure the success
of CIEC. If it fails, we throw the world into a chaotic state.
What can we do to ensure the success of CIEC? If we say some-
thing about the orientation of the Common Fund, it will be useful. Debt
is also an issue, and it will be useful for us to provide an orientation on
this.
President Giscard gave an effective inventory of the issues and
covered them very well in the Tokyo Round. We should give special
consideration to the developing countries and the matter of primary
commodities. When we discuss ways to aid the developing countries,
the most effective way is for our own economies to recover their health.
When we help increase LDC exports, we are doing something impor-
tant. When we reflate our economies, we help the LDCs.
Jenkins: CIEC should not be seen as a charitable operation. We
should go for better access to raw materials and stable investment. We
should see it as a two-way process. The developing countries should be
involved and their interests are wrapped up with ours. In many ways a
safer way to stimulate our economies is to strengthen demand in the
developing countries. We should make a success of CIEC, and I believe
we can do this without unwise actions. The preliminary meeting gave
us indications which were not too bad, but there still can be a confron-
tation. Our first need is for a united front vis-a-vis the G–8.
