708
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
287.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 30, 1978
SUBJECT
PRC Review of FY 1978 Arms Sales
The PRC has met twice2 to consider the FY 1978 arms sales pro-
gram including the ceiling management system, specific requests
which make up the FY 1978 plan, and the reduction in sales to be
achieved in FY 1978. This memorandum requests your approval of the
management system and the plan, and presents options on the reduc-
tion. (S)
I. Ceiling Management
The ceiling has been broken down as indicated in the table on the
following page. The allocations for follow-on support, MAP, and small
cases are based on Defense and State estimates of requirements for FY
1978.
The PRC recommends a flexible predictive approach to managing
the ceiling, with a particular focus on management of the ceiling dollars
available for sales of new systems. At the beginning of each year known
and anticipated possible sales for that year and beyond will be com-
piled. The PRC will make an initial assessment of those sales which
should be made during the year and will list them for your consider-
ation in order of priority. The list will subsequently be reviewed and
updated on a monthly basis providing the flexibility to incorporate
new information, and to respond to changing circumstances. This
process does not replace the normal clearance process during which
arms control, human rights and economic impacts are assessed for each
individual sale before it comes to you for final approval. However the
existence of the list, approved by you, will force the bureaucracy to
think in terms of trade-offs when new cases arise, thereby allowing us
to meet our restraint goals. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 24, Meetings: Policy Re-
view Committee Meetings (PRC), PRC 51: 1/26/78. Secret. Sent for action. Brzezinski
hand-wrote the date in the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum.
Above the date, Carter wrote “C.”
2 The first PRC meeting on FY 1978 arms sales was scheduled for January 10. No
record of this meeting was found. The second meeting is Document 286.
