220 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement war air and sea lift capabilities would be prejudiced by a simultaneous general war threat. Mr. Gates observed that our capabilities for air and sea lift for general war and for limited war were compatible. General Taylor was inclined to disagree with this conclusion and stated that one could not be sure where we would stand in regard to sea and air lift if there was both a limited and general war threat at the same time. Mr. Quarles pointed out that if events developed in that sequence, we could generate more capabilities by mobilization, but he acknowl­ edged that certain transport would have to be pre-­empted for general war preparation. General Pate said that under these circumstances the Navy would be in a building-­up phase. General Twining said you can’t have capabilities for both situations simultaneously. In the given cir­ cumstances, you would have to go all-­out for general war preparation and your limited war capability would have to suffer. General Twining said one cannot say categorically that there could be no limited war in Europe. Anything can happen. But we must keep the Russians believing that a limited war cannot happen there. The Russians apparently believe that now. They have not gained an inch in Europe since we promulgated our present strategic concept. We don’t know how a future President would reply to a nuclear attack in Europe, but we must keep the integrity of our present strategy. We must stay with it for awhile. Admiral Burke said that it was not a question of our capability but of the allied attitude toward our strategy. They know that in regard to nuclear weapons they are mendicants. If they are attacked “they can only cry”. What they want is a mortgage on our future action. They have hostages in the form of our ground forces in Europe. Is this not enough for the present? They apparently want some control over nuclear weap­ ons. But it is up to us to keep some control over their control. We must look out for the danger of possible “trigger happy” foreigners to whom we may have transferred some control over nuclear weapons. But we will have to take some chances in this respect. Secretary Dulles said that surely General de Gaulle will raise with him next month the question of a French nuclear weapons capability. The French will want to be on an equal basis with the US and the UK. If we turn down his request for some share in the nuclear deterrent, de Gaulle will press on to develop an independent nuclear weapons capa­ bility for France and an independent foreign policy which may even involve making an accommodation with the USSR. Mr. Gates asked if the cause of European concern was our failure to finish up the jobs in Korea and Indochina. If we did not push for victories there, perhaps the Europeans feel there is little chance that we will take risks in Europe where the dangers were much greater. Secretary Dulles said he doubted that this was the reason. He felt the
