824
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
9. China/Korea
U.S. Objectives: To appear responsive to Tito’s desire for frank
exchanges on China and Korea; to seek his views on both countries;
to convince Tito that we are seriously interested in seeing the Korean
problem moved toward resolution but not at jeopardy to our South
Korean allies.
Yugoslav Objectives: To convey Tito’s impressions from his visits to
China and North Korea last summer and to seek current US views; to
urge that the U.S. deal directly with North Korea to try to unstick the
Korean question; to act as go-between in exchanges between the U.S.
and North Korea.
Essential Factors: Tito was enthusiastically welcomed in both coun-
tries last summer and Tito later wrote to you about his visit. He is now
interested in hearing our views on Chinese domestic developments,
on Sino-Soviet relations and on US-China relations. Concerning Korea,
he wrote to relay Kim Il-song’s proposals for direct US-North Korean
contacts or for tripartite (US, North and South Korea) talks, on condition
that South Korean President Park be removed from office. Tito has
argued that Kim is more realistic than he seems and that we should
respond in kind. Yugoslavia’s affinity for the North Koreans derives
largely from Pyongyang’s participation in the nonaligned movement.
For our part, we see no indication that North Korea’s position has
changed and we see the proposal for direct contacts as an effort to
undermine our relations with the ROK. Interestingly, however, two of
Pyongyang’s staunchest supporters—East Germany and the USSR—
have recently hinted that the North should show some flexibility, in
answer to our efforts to reduce friction.
Points to be Made:
—The Chinese, with the conclusion of the Fifth National People’s
Congress, have moved further toward restoring the vitality of their
government and party following Mao’s death.4
—Despite some evident reduction in hostility, we expect no signifi-
cant change in Sino-Soviet relations. The Chinese have frequently reaf-
firmed that their general line remains unchanged; and both sides have
continued routine polemics.
—On our own relations with China, we are continuing to work
toward our goal of full normalization, but there have been no significant
4 The Fifth National People’s Congress was in session from 1978 until 1983. On
March 1, 1978, the Congress adopted the 1978 Constitution of the People’s Republic
of China, which restored some judiciary, political, and citizen rights removed by the
1975 Constitution.
