210 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I tries would be fighting anti-democratic movements tooth and nail. Now it, too, has lost its spirit and courage. If Communists do gain or share power, the political impact will derive in large part from what this change will say about the perceived poverty of democratic alternatives. A victory by the Socialist- Communist coalition in France next March would very likely hasten the entry of the Italian Communists into the government in some form. It would almost surely drive Germany to the right—thereby polarizing the European Community and NATO (in addition to the problems a Mitterand Government would directly pose for those institutions). The United States and Germany would be bound even more closely together, and would be effectively isolated in the Atlantic relationship, along with a more conservative but ineffectual Britain. A further fear is that the United States would in some way withdraw from the Continent—a fear that is actually greater than the fear that the Soviet Union would gain direct advantages from Communists in a West European government. The prospect of Communists in government also raises longerrange questions: which groups will manage social, economic, and political change in the major West European countries? Will they have enough political strength to manage these changes effectively? And who will provide the sense of direction and purpose for the European Community—assuming that it continues at all as more than a loose customs union? Relations with the United States At the heart of the Atlantic relationship, our European friends and allies look to us most for two kinds of “security”: military and economic. 1. Military security is more than just the continuation of our commitment to NATO, to its doctrines, and to deterrence of the Soviet Union. Here your London NATO visit—with your emphasis on reassurance and the steadfastness of American purpose—had a positive impact; and except for Germany, our allies place a lower estimate on the chances of a European war than we do. Even more important as a political factor in Atlantic relations, our allies need to have confidence in our ability to manage relations with the Soviet Union. Almost without exception, they have been noticeably uneasy during the past few months—in part reflecting disquiet at the beginning of every new Administration. But, there is also deep concern over the course of the SALT negotiations—as much for what “failure” would imply politically in East- West relations as for what it could mean in strategic terms. And widespread European concern earlier this year about our resolve in Africa
