3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
676
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
The Secretary pointed out that he had spoken of a Soviet unit
which runs a training center.
Gromyko said that he had used the Soviet terminology in speaking
of a training center. The term “unit” had been used by the Secretary,
but he would prefer to use the Soviet’s own terminology. They had a
training center in Cuba and will not change its function. In saying “will
not” he was putting it stronger than if he had said “does not intend.”
Gromyko asked the Secretary if he really believed that he could be
talking here to the Foreign Minister of the USSR, representing the So-
viet Union and saying these things to the Secretary plainly on behalf of
the Soviet Union and the Soviet leadership, while at the same time the
Soviet Union planned to threaten the security of the United States? The
mildest comment he could make on any such idea was that it was en-
tirely too bold. On the other hand, if the Secretary were to say that our
two countries had some agreement between us, the Soviet Union
would be forced to refute this for reasons of principle. The Soviet Union
had provided a unilateral clarifying statement, that statement was
strictly of a unilateral nature and was made as a result of the Soviet de-
sire to allay any concerns President Carter and the Secretary might
have with respect to Soviet behavior.
The Secretary said that we had not suggested an understanding,
and had spoken only in terms of unilateral statements.
228.
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter1
Moscow, September 27, 1979
Dear Mr. President,
I and my colleagues have familiarized ourselves with your
appeal.2
First of all, we must frankly inform you that we are extremely sur-
prised at the active participation of the administration in the openly
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General
Odom File, Box 32, MOLINK: 10/78–1/80. Forwarded to Carter under letterhead of the
White House Communications Agency, which classified the letter as Top Secret; Sensi-
tive; Specat. Sent via the Moscow/Washington Emergency Communications Link
(MOLINK). Printed from a version that does not bear Brezhnev’s signature.
2 See Documents 226 and 227.
