840 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Iranians—even Beheshti—now say that the hostage crisis should be put behind them; but they cannot figure out how to do it. We are poised to play an active role, including good working contacts with European governments, but we are unable to act until the Iranians have sorted out their problem. (S) Mr. Aaron noted that the hostage situation is a very serious problem in this country. A total of 70% of the American people believe that the foreign policy of this Administration is not successful, and that can be traced directly to the hostages and to the Cuban situation. It appears the Iranians are learning to live with the problem indefinitely. If we can think of any additional action, we should try. Mr. Christopher doubted we could help the situation by increasing the visibility without a solution. Mr. Aaron said the problem now is there is no hope. There is the feeling the hostages have vanished. We should do everything possible to locate them.10 Admiral Turner said that we suspect many of the hostages remain in Tehran. We are fairly confident some of them are at two former U.S. consulates, although they may be at 5–6 other places. We are using all our capabilities to locate them. (S) 8. Shah’s Illness. Ghotbzadeh believes that the Shah’s death would improve the political situation. Others think it would be of no significance. We have a series of decisions to make about our public posture and response in the event of his death. State was preparing a cable to Roy Atherton, and State and the NSC staff would coordinate on working out a public position.11 (S) 10 Carter wrote in the left margin: “I agree with Aaron. Explore every possibility.” 11 Turner’s talking points for the July 1 meeting emphasized that the Shah’s death would neither change the balance of power within Iran nor lead to release of the hostages. However, the United States could use his death advantageously as a decisive break with the past relationship, a way to persuade world opinion that the rationale for holding the hostages was gone, or as a starting point for a new round of negotiations. The talking points also suggested that the United States “be prepared to counter charges that we killed the Shah or that he is not really dead.” Lastly, the talking points recommended working with Sadat to guarantee that the funeral did not require government representatives. (Talking Points for 1 July 1980 SCC Meeting, “The Hostages and the Shah’s Health,” undated; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator, Box 13, Folder 3: SCC Meeting Iran) The CIA also prepared a paper, “U.S. Options Toward Shah’s Funeral,” July 7. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office Files, Box 65, Outside the System File, Iran Non-Meetings Hostage Crisis 4/80–11/80)
