August 8–September 17, 1978
69
(a) First phase. Peace treaty initialed. Line to which Israeli forces
withdraw in first phase defined; Israel settlements allowed to remain
under Israeli protection during this period; Israel would also retain use
of airfields in Sinai; some concrete measures of normalization of rela-
tions would be instituted.
(b) Second phase. Peace treaty signed and ratified. Israeli with-
drawal to international frontier; Israeli settlers allowed to remain under
Egyptian jurisdiction; airfields dismantled or made into civilian air-
ports; full normalization of relations completed; demilitarized and lim-
ited armament zones and third party presence in buffer zone defined.
4. Relationship Between Egypt-Israel Treaty and West Bank/Gaza
Agreement that: (a) Egypt would resume and continue to comple-
tion negotiations on Sinai issues; (b) when negotiations were completed
Egypt and Israel would proceed with initialing of the peace treaty and
implementation of the first phase, reserving the signing and ratification
of the treaty, and implementation of the second phase to coincide with
conclusion of a West Bank/Gaza treaty; (c) that if, however, Jordan and
Palestinian representatives refused to join in negotiations on the West
Bank/Gaza on the basis of the principles concluded at Camp David,
Egypt and Israel would, after an agreed period, proceed with conclu-
sion and full implementation of the Egypt-Israel peace treaty.
5. Peace Undertakings
Agreement on the main elements of peace undertakings that
would be part of the peace treaties between Egypt and Israel and on the
West Bank/Gaza, including: (a) end of economic boycott; (b) end of
Arab efforts to isolate Israel in international fora; (c) free passage in in-
ternational waterways; (d) Israeli rights of passage in Suez Canal;
(e) cultural and people-to-people exchanges; (f) commercial and diplo-
matic relations.
Agreement to set up working groups to begin negotiations on the
detailed terms of a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel.
