172 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 Britain and France that the United States will not tolerate their imperialistic policies. 3. [C.] Bring about the unity and co-operation of the various Islamic countries so that the Near and Middle East by mutual co-operation may better resist Communism. 3. Communism With regard to Communism in Iran the influence of the Moslem religion and more specifically my own influence has done and will do more to oppose Communism than $23,000,000 or even $23 billion of American aid. 4. The next most effective way of preventing Communism in the Middle East is for the Western powers to abandon their Imperialistic approach. Persistence of England and France in a colonial policy will only drive the Middle Eastern peoples into the arms of the Soviets. 5. Point Four and Military Aid From U.S. I have advised the Prime Minister that Iran should not accept the $23,000,000 Point Four aid offered by the United States if there are any strings whatsoever attached which restrict Iran’s Sovereignty, neutrality, or liberty of action. We do not need the aid that badly. 6. Similarly I do not believe that Iran should continue to accept military aid so long as it binds Iran to any commitments inconsistent with Iran’s Sovereignty. (Station Note: Although wording cannot be recalled, Kashani gave the impression that he was not in favor of military aid anyway.) 7. Solution of the Oil Problem The World Bank, like other international organizations is primarily motivated by its interest in preserving the privileges of the large powers and is not truly dedicated to helping the smaller nations. (Station Note: The United Nations support of Iran during the Azerbaijan Democratic separatist movement in 1946 was pointed out to Kashani as an example of United Nations support of weak nations. Kashani said that basically the larger Western nations who control the United Nations were motivated by wholly selfish interests in their 1946 protection of Iran. The United Nations has not acted similarly in the defense of Iran against British pressure.) If the World Bank sincerely wishes to find an acceptable solution to Iran’s oil problem, the following three principles must be adhered to: A. Absolutely no British nationals may be employed in Iran. B. The Iranian board of management must have supreme power over the Iranian oil industry. The Iranian board of management must have power to hire and fire foreign technicians. C. Foreign technicians hired by the Iranian oil company should be replaced by Iranian technicians as soon as Iranian technicians can be trained.
