624  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
power to control situation and action imperative to save country from 
anarchy.
With one exception, his replies to direct questions were extremely 
vague and evasive. He denied most emphatically that single Communist 
appointed to position in government. Some were anti-American but 
this did not make them Communists. He does not agree that failure to 
stand up to Communists at this time presents a danger. He does not see 
a need to curb Communist activities, organizationally or propaganda-­
wise, and all parties will be given opportunity to participate in free 
elections. Said he erred in exiling Communists when he was President. 
Should have kept them here and channeled their activities. No more 
than 25 real Communists in country at present time and plan now is 
to “canalizar” their activities; they would be watched and made use 
of. He implied without saying so directly that if need be proper action 
could be taken at proper time. Questioned he said he thought he had 
sufficient influence on junta to initiate control measures at proper time 
if needed. Specific instances of present open Communist activities such 
as the inflammatory program of Radio Universal were pointed out to 
Osorio and his only comment was “this is natural.” When asked explic-
itly whether or not he anticipated that a 6-­man junta could efficiently 
function or even last with inefficient operation for a period of two years 
until forthcoming elections, he circumvented the question and gave an 
explanation of how the military members of the junta had been permit-
ted to select 50 percent of the new government assignments and how 
the civilian members of the junta had selected the remaining 50 per-
cent. What needed now was unity so that urgently needed social and 
economic programs can be implemented. Changes had to occur within 
three months or serious threat to government will emerge from people. 
Support of extreme left as well as right needed for this and any restric-
tive action against former would disrupt unity and therefore could not 
be entertained. He not taking a direct part in affairs of junta but provid-
ing his counsel and advice. He reiterated throughout that army united 
and in control of situation but remarked on several different occasions 
that situation very delicate. Osorio readily agreed to suggestion we talk 
with selected army officers and suggested Major Rosales and Colonel 
Escamilla.
Osorio said government would abide by international agree-
ment[s]. Asked about economic integration treaties said these could 
go on but some of things agreed to would have to be changed. Could not 
for example permit free flow of corn into this country. U.S. could pro-
duce it too cheaply and too many Salvadorans depended on it for a live-
lihood. Present situation this regard chaotic. Did not know enough about 
proposal for new Central American bank to comment. Would have to be 
studied.
