328 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 welfare programs, becoming an increased burden on domestic program budgets. 2. A comprehensive U.S. embargo on food to Iran would signal a further toughening of U.S. policy but may have a relatively minor impact on Iran at this time. Iran appears to have found alternate sources for much of the food we had been providing, although the cost to Iran of relying on alternative supplies is likely to be high. U.S. success in persuading other countries (Western Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Thailand and Japan) to halt food shipments in the absence of UN sanctions relating to food would be uncertain. A food embargo would also hit poor Iranians and could lead to retaliation against the hostages—both physically and in denial of adequate food. 3. Alternatively, we could ourselves, or perhaps through the UN, impose a selective food embargo, focusing on items such as meat (25% imported), edible oil (80% imported) and sugar (50% imported) which would impact primarily on the middle class, not the poor, and would thus be easier to defend; would emphasize the decline in living standards for a major component of Khomeini’s support, the Bazaar merchants; and would be relatively easy to monitor in view of the limited sources of supply of these goods (except for sugar). The U.S. has been the principal supplier of edible oil; Australia, New Zealand, and the Bloc provide meat, and sugar comes from a variety of sources (but not the U.S.). 4. We could also ask the Security Council to impose the widest range of economic sanctions against Iran, including food and medicine exports to Iran and all exports from Iran except oil. While such a boycott on trade would bring severe pressure to bear on Khomeini, we are unlikely to get such extensive sanctions through the Security Council. 5. We could impose an indemnity on Iran of some large amount of money per hostage per day, as long as they are held. We could seek such an indemnity either in the next few weeks as part of a campaign of increasing pressure on Iran, or we could wait until the hostages were released and impose the indemnity as a punitive measure. Seeking the indemnity payment from blocked assets as part of a pressure campaign has certain advantages: it would receive widespread U.S. public support and it would place direct financial pressure on Iran which would mount as long as the hostages were kept; it is a highly visible step which is easily publicized through the media, including VOA. On the other hand, Khomeini and the students so far seem unmoved by the various financial measures we’ve taken and may thus be unmoved by the imposition of an indemnity payment. 6. An international boycott of Iranian oil would severely impair Iranian sources of funds. The consequent shutting down of most of Iran’s oil pumping capacity might in some instances permanently dam-
