1198
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Alliance relationships and the MBFR negotiations. Additionally, we
might attempt to straddle the issue by some drawdown from the tac-
tical weapons stockpile while reducing strategic force objectives.
3. One of the Savannah River reactors now is devoted to the pro-
duction of tritium. A cut-off of tritium production, since it has a half life
of 12.5 years, and has to be replaced every 4 to 8 years, would essen-
tially eliminate stockpile effectiveness in a few years.
4. Substantial production of highly enriched uranium (HEU) is in-
dispensable for fueling the nuclear navy. While the proposal is obscure
on this point (since it would presumably cover all such materials that
could be used in weapons), it seems difficult to imagine that we would
accept conditions in which we were unable to provide sufficient fuel for
Polaris, Poseidon and other nuclear powered vessels.
5. [5½ lines not declassified] To suggest that the IAEA, with minimal
clout, a spotty track record, and modest resources, could enforce such
an agreement strikes me as quixotic.
6. Given the requirement for some reactor products (i.e., one or
two operating reactors to produce tritium to maintain operable
weapons) and given the requirement for highly enriched uranium pro-
duction to provide fuel for naval reactors, any agreement acceptable to
us would imply the type of qualifications and ambiguities which the
Soviets could continuously exploit in raising questions regarding our
compliance.
7. Weapons production by the Department of Energy is responsive
to DOD requirements as established by the President. Our force struc-
ture is designed in response to national security objectives, which are
themselves constrained by ratified arms control agreements such as
SALT I and prospectively SALT II. It would seem to me that the appro-
priate initial determination is that of the force structure. Requirements
for weapons and, derivatively, for fissionable materials should flow
from that initial determination—without the imposition of an arbitrary
limitation on materials. We can be assured that the Soviets will not fail
to derive their fissionable material requirements in this manner. We
should take care to avoid haphazardly constraining our own force
structure through such a Procustean device.
8. While I have no inherent difficulty with a study of the issue,
since it is likely (for the reasons developed above) to put to rest this
type of long speculated-on initiative, I do have serious concern with the
proposed crash-effort study. The Special Session on Disarmament has
long been scheduled. Why could not this issue have been developed in
an orderly manner, rather than accept the risks attendant in attempting
to cram such a study into three weeks time?
