oppose the inclusion of any provisions looking toward the supervision and control of arms manufacture as distinct from publicity. These instructions remain the basis of this Government’s position. The Department regards its Draft Convention as affording a desirable basis of discussion and authorizes you to make such use of it, either in its entirety or by separate clauses, as seems to you most likely to support this Government’s interest or to make clear this Government’s desire to promote disarmament. The position of this Government with respect to the manufacture of arms, munitions and implements of war remains substantially unchanged. The same objections and same reservations set forth in its Instruction No. 276 of August 9, 1928, still apply to the proposals elaborated in the minutes and report of the second session of the Special Commission. However, within its reservations, it is felt that there is room for accommodation to the views of other Governments, where it seems likely that such an attitude would promote a general agreement to which this Government could subscribe. The Department, therefore, brings to your attention its views with regard to the draft convention adopted by the Special Commission on August 30, 1928.73 The Department considers that the words “government supervision” in the second paragraph of the Preamble are covered by your general reservation on the system of licensing under Article 3. As concerns your reservation regarding Category IV, under Article 1, the Department refers to its telegram No. 1, of August 28, 1928, particularly the sentence: “If the other Governments are not prepared to accept the inclusion in the provision of all those manufactured under military specifications, you should take the position that only aircraft and engines manufactured for the armed forces of the respective countries should be included.” Should you find that there is a greater possibility of agreement on the basis of this latter position, you are authorized to withdraw your above-mentioned reservation and to propose the inclusion only of aircraft and engines manufactured for the armed forces of the respective countries.
