1202 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Gray) did not fully agree with these recommendations. He believed that there should be a clear delegation of authority to make only local, not national, announcements upon the declaration of a DEFCON. He feared that panic might be stimulated by a public announcement made at any level of government lower than that of the President. The President asked what kind of an announcement would be made. Captain Aurand replied that the local OCDM Director would state that the Air Defense Command had declared a state of readiness, that people should continue their normal conduct, that telephones should not be used excessively, and that the public should listen for further announcements on the radio. There would be no reference in the local announcement to the reason for declaring a DEFCON; any such state­ ment of reasons would be reserved for the national announcement by the President. Announcements of this kind would apply to the declara­ tion of DEFCONs 1 and 2 and conditionally as indicated in the chart to the declaration of DEFCON–3. The President wondered how the Secretary of Defense and the Director, OCDM could coordinate with each other more rapidly than they could consult the President. Captain Aurand said that identical situations would obtain in many DEFCONs so that the proposed public announcements could be planned and “packaged” in advance. Captain Aurand added that there was a conditional [text not declassified]. The President asked how the Secretary of Defense and the Director, OCDM would consult regarding the public announcements. Mr. Gray said he presumed the two officials would consult in advance. The President wondered how authority could be given to local officials to make an announcement of the kind contemplated. Secretary Gates felt that a public announcement would have to be made at the national level quite frequently when DEFCONs were declared. He expected that a DEFCON–3 would be declared every month or so as a drill and he hoped there would not be a public announcement on each such occasion. Captain Aurand said no public announcement would be made in the case of drills. Governor Hoegh added that no public announcement would be made on DEFCON–3 unless the public had already obtained information concerning the alert; and then the announcement would be for the purpose of put­ ting the activity into a lower key. Mr. Hoegh recalled that in the case of last spring’s DEFCON–3, OCDM had announced in Denver that the activity was a test exercise. The President wondered why it could not be announced in most cases that a test exercise was underway. Governor Hoegh thought such an announcement would still require advance coordination. The President thought some of the difficulties in this field would be avoided if we could announce that a drill was
