Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  399
START needs a boost
From a more specific arms control perspective, we should remain 
firm in the intent not to let this meeting become a negotiation. However, 
we do need to emphasize our commitment to concluding START as 
soon as possible. We should avoid setting a deadline for this Treaty or 
for specific issues, but we can increase the drum beat on our agenda.
The Wyoming Ministerial was very important for START, less 
because it resolved specific issues, than because the Soviet Union recog-
nized that verification details are the long-­pole in the START Treaty tent 
and also because the Soviet Union began to clear the decks of obstacles 
they had presented, namely linkage to SLCMs and a new Defense and 
Space Agreement.
Above all, at the Malta meeting, we should acknowledge that we 
are entering the end game for START. The two heads of state should 
make clear that they expect their ministers and negotiators to step up the 
pace toward Treaty completion by late 1990 or early 1991. This will ener-
gize work on the myriad details involved and serve notice that bigger 
issues such as ALCM counting, Mobile ICBM sublimits will have to be 
resolved, probably by Ministers. We should be careful about sequencing, 
especially with respect to SLCM and to Defense and Space linkage.
Reduce linkage to START
While some would like for us to push resolution of the SLCM issue 
in the near term, we should not forget that Shevardnadze put down 
an important marker on this issue in Wyoming. The Soviet Union’s will-
ingness to unencumber the START Treaty text of the SLCM issue and 
to work it perhaps in a different forum—­one which does not even exist 
at this point—­suggests to me that Moscow is willing to accept far less 
than many people seem to think. In passing, I would note that last year, 
after our meeting with Soviet Defense Minister Yazov, the Soviet side 
seemed clearly prepared to retreat from its position on Krasnoyarsk. 
However, in anticipation of an upcoming Foreign Ministers meeting, 
an internal U.S. effort was made to come up with fallback positions on 
the issue; news of that effort leaked, and the Soviet Union subsequently 
stood firm. We should not make the same mistake with the SLCM issue. 
If we agree to a deadline for resolving this issue, the pressure will be on 
us rather than on the Soviet Union to provide a solution. The less time 
left to deal with the issue, the more the final outcome will look like the 
U.S. position. The same is true in Defense and Space.
Although the Soviet Union has agreed in principle to delinkage 
of START and Defense & Space, the Soviet negotiators have insisted 
on conditions for formal delinkage and have tried to strengthen their 
hand for  an informal political linkage. Gorbachev will likely pro-
pose at Malta an agreement “simply” to seek to “clarify” constraints
