1036  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
States Government, as one of the Guarantors of the Bio Protocol,4 in a 
permanent and mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute and the 
interest of the United States Government in seeing arms expenditures 
throughout Latin America minimized and expenditures for construc-
tive development maximized.
4 Reference is to the Protocol of Peace, Friendship, and Boundaries between Peru 
and Ecuador, signed at Rio de Jeneiro, January 29, 1942, and entered into force February 
26, 1942. Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and the United States also signed the Protocol as guar-
antors. For text, see 3 Bevans 700.
PE–9.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the 
Department of State1

Lima, May 8, 1958, 8 p.m.
1000. Department please advise Secretary.
VP schedule disrupted today because of demonstration at San 
Marcos University. Information yesterday indicated students San Marcos 
would close university, not permit VP to enter and demonstrate against 
him. VP decided this morning proceed visit San Marcos but meeting 
political leaders had to be rescheduled for afternoon. VP party stopped 
as it entered street in front San Marcos by hostile student crowd led by 
Communists. Nevertheless VP tried carry out scheduled visit. Embassy 
officer observed university gates promptly locked, VP asked students 
whether they were cowards and afraid to hear him talk. Shouting stu-
dents carrying signs reading “Fuera Nixon”, etc., made impossible VP 
proceed. Stores and other missiles thrown, one of which grazed VP. Police 
intervened and enabled VP party depart, VP then made unscheduled 
visit Catholic University where met by friendly students, and had highly 
successful meeting in which he was vigorously cheered and applauded. 
Student leader said his visit not official schedule and regretted therefore 
they could not welcome him officially but they welcomed VP as private 
citizen. VP said he came that capacity, “I went to San Marcos to see if 
there was liberty and freedom of speech and I found there was not. I 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-NI/5–858. Official Use Only; 
Niact.
