Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
109
own support and the continuing support of my country for the ideals of
the United Nations.
We are proud that for the 32 years since its creation, the United Na-
tions has met on American soil. And we share with you the commit-
ments of freedom, self-government, human dignity, mutual toleration,
and the peaceful resolution of disputes—which the founding principles
of the United Nations and also Secretary General Kurt Waldheim so
well represent.
No one nation by itself can build a world which reflects all these
fine values. But the United States, my own country, has a reservoir of
strength—economic strength, which we are willing to share; military
strength, which we hope never to use again; and the strength of ideals,
which are determined fully to maintain the backbone of our own for-
eign policy.
It is now 8 weeks since I became President. I have brought to office
a firm commitment to a more open foreign policy. And I believe that
the American people expect me to speak frankly about the policies that
we intend to pursue, and it is in that spirit that I speak to you tonight
about our own hopes for the future.
I see a hopeful world, a world dominated by increasing demands
for basic freedoms, for fundamental rights, for higher standards of
human existence. We are eager to take part in the shaping of that world.
But in seeking such a better world, we are not blind to the reality of
disagreement, nor to the persisting dangers that confront us all. Every
headline reminds us of bitter divisions, of national hostilities, of territo-
rial conflicts, of ideological competition.
In the Middle East, peace is a quarter of a century overdue. A gath-
ering racial conflict threatens southern Africa; new tensions are rising
in the Horn of Africa. Disputes in the eastern Mediterranean remain to
be resolved.
Perhaps even more ominous is the staggering arms race. The So-
viet Union and the United States have accumulated thousands of nu-
clear weapons. Our two nations now have five times more missile war-
heads today than we had just 8 years ago. But we are not five times
more secure. On the contrary, the arms race has only increased the risk
of conflict.
We can only improve this world if we are realistic about its com-
plexities. The disagreements that we face are deeply rooted, and they
often raise difficult philosophical as well as territorial issues. They will
not be solved easily. They will not be solved quickly. The arms race is
now embedded in the very fabric of international affairs and can only
be contained with the greatest difficulty. Poverty and inequality are of
such monumental scope that it will take decades of deliberate and de-
termined effort even to improve the situation substantially.
