Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 13. Comment: None of us has yet seen account of Brzezinski conversation with Pak Ambassador Sultan reported in Pak press 5 Jan.8 Nor did Zia seem fully conversant with extent of my continuing conversations with Shahi and Shahnawaz this week, or even this noon. Zia made no mention of Shahi proposal (septel) re making 1959 executive agreement into a treaty—a proposal which gives me concern because it could be a Shahi creation designed to produce a negative U.S. reaction which he might then use in arguments against us. 14. There can be no doubt, however, of seriousness of Zia’s interest in what we will have to say and what we will propose to do [garble— across] the whole range of assistance—military, economic, and political. There should be no doubt in Washington that in order to remain credible with the Pakistanis and to overcome their resistance to too close a re-identification with us, what we will propose will have to be substantial in volume and composition. 15. I want to reiterate forcefully my recommendation that in our own interests we should find ways to lay aside for the time being the crippling strictures of the Symington Amendment in order to produce an effective local response to Soviet aggression. Now is the time to reorder our priorities, and to decide which of our objectives is most important during the next few months. We obviously cannot pursue all of our objectives simultaneously because they conflict, and in my strong view our longer-range nonproliferation actions should be temporarily subordinated to the more immediate necessity of making an effective response to Soviet aggression. 16. I should add that Zia gave sharp warning—as Agha Shahi had earlier—against any leaks with Western datelines on plans regarding proposed meeting of Islamic Conference. In order to have any chance of success, he said, conference must not be accused of being Western inspired. 17. Zia was in good form, dressed in uniform for the first time in a long time—at least during my visits with him. Atmosphere was friendly but very businesslike. 18. Action requested: Instructions. Hummel 8 See Document 144.
