312 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement it be made very clear that an authorizing commander in fact knew that the nuclear attack had occurred on the continental U.S. He accepted the thought that it was insufficient in a case such as this to delegate authority to the Department of Defense but would wish to approve personally the specific authorizing commanders given authority under this section. After this discussion, which consumed about an hour and a half, the President felt that he wished to tighten up the general authori­ zation wherever it appears in the paper. For example, he wished the first sentence of paragraph 4 to read as follows: “When the urgency of time and circumstances clearly do not permit a specific decision by the President. . .” 2. I then indicated to the President that I had made available to Mr. Hagerty a copy of the OCB draft standby statements for possible use by the President in the event of the successful Soviet moon shot. General Goodpaster had earlier brought to the President’s attention the fact that between September 11 and September 15 there was a high degree of possibility that the Soviets would succeed in such an effort. 3. I then discussed with the President the question of attendance at NSC meetings. He approved the amendments on page 5 (attached) of the document entitled, “The Structure and Functions of the National Security Council.” Paragraph 8 b should read as follows: “Special request members: For all agenda items which are the subject of official interest to his respon­ sibilities until the President otherwise determined. (Currently the Attorney General, the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, and the Administrator of the National Aeronautical and Space Administration)” In the subsequent discussion, the President made it clear that he wished, of course, the statutory members (including the statutory advisers) to attend all regular NSC meetings. In addition, he wanted the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director, Bureau of the Budget to attend. He would also expect the Director, USIA, the Special Assist­ ant for National Security Affairs, the Executive Secretary of the NSC and the Deputy Executive Secretary of the NSC, to attend and sit at the table. For agenda items which are the subject of official interest, he would expect the Attorney General, Chairman, AEC and the Administrator, NASA to sit at the table. He expressed his view that this should mean that the Attorney General and the Administrator, NASA would not find it necessary to attend all regular meetings. However, he felt that he wished the Chairman, AEC to participate as regularly as his conve­ nience and conscience dictated. Particularly with respect to the Chairman of the AEC, the President expressed the following views: In the context of modern and perspective
