894
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
271.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Security
Assistance, Science, and Technology (Benson) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, October 17, 1979
SUBJECT
Trip to Yugoslavia
As you know I spent two and a half days last week in Yugoslavia,
primarily to listen to the Yugoslav’s views of the Westinghouse Nuclear
Power Plant project, a joint project of the Slovenia and Croatia federa-
tions.2 I also discussed the Foreign Military Sales program at some
length with Ambassador Eagleburger. Among others, my colleagues
and I met with the Presidents of Croatia and Slovenia, the Energy
Ministers of the two Republics, the Yugoslav Managers of the Project
as well as with Ambassador Eagleburger and members of his staff.3
My trip to Yugoslavia followed a visit Under Secretary Hodges and I
made to Pittsburgh to listen to Westinghouse’s side of the story.
Several points in the Westinghouse matter are now quite clear:
—The contract, signed in 1974 with some push from President
Nixon, is now in serious difficulties. The project is 80% completed, 18–
24 months behind schedule, and Westinghouse is suffering a serious
cash flow squeeze due to high inflation during the life of the contract.
—The two parties are heading for a major legal imbroglio which
will be of no long-term benefit to either and which will undoubtedly
be a burden on good Yugoslav-US relations. It could result in lengthy
arbitration during which construction could be halted, resulting in
serious political-economic problems for Westinghouse.
—In a continued effort to head off the potential legal confrontation,
I believe the US Government should extend its good offices to both
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR,
and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68, Yugoslavia: 8/78–12/79. Confidential.
Copies were sent to Newsom, Aaron, Vest, and Eagleburger.
2 Benson traveled to Yugoslavia October 10–12 to attempt to resolve the ongoing
dispute between Westinghouse and the Yugoslav authorities regarding the Krsko nuclear
power plant. In telegram 7797 from Belgrade, October 17, the Embassy reported that
the “visit has calmed the waters—at least for now.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790481–0525)
3 Benson met with Croatian President Flekovic on October 12. (Memorandum of
conversation, October 12; National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for
Security Assistance, Science, and Technology, Chron Files, Speeches, and Papers of Lucy
W. Benson (1979) and Matthew Nimetz (1980), Lot 81D321, Box 3, Lucy Wilson Benson—
Chron, October 1979) She met with Slovenian President Vratusa later that day. (Memoran-
dum of conversation, October 12; ibid.)
