First Responses 111 b. The Hughes/Ryan amendment provides that it is inapplicable “during military operations initiated by the United States under a declaration of war approved by the Congress or an exercise of powers by the President under the War Powers Resolution.” My General Counsel is of the opinion that the current level of activities in support of contingency planning would be subsumed under this exception if it were clear that any actual operation, when and if initiated, would be pursuant to an exercise of the President’s powers under the War Powers Resolution. The General Counsel cannot, however, render an opinion to this effect without appropriate assurance that any approval to carry out the proposed contingency plan will in fact be given by the President and in accordance with the War Powers Resolution. [portion marking not declassified] 2. Based on the foregoing, I must conclude that the CIA cannot properly provide the required assistance unless the legal doubts are resolved in one of two ways: a. Permission for the Agency’s General Counsel to consult with the Attorney General of the United States, or b. A written assurance from the President, either directly or through you, that any initiation of actual operations would be pursuant to an exercise of powers by the President under the War Powers Resolution. There is no guarantee under option a. that the Attorney General would agree with the preliminary legal view of the CIA General Counsel, in which case it might be necessary to proceed to option b., in any event or even to seek a Presidential finding under the Hughes/Ryan amendment.3 [portion marking not declassified] Stansfield Turner 3 Brzezinski forwarded this memorandum to Carter under a November 20 covering memorandum, which asked whether to proceed under the War Powers Act or to consult with Civiletti. Carter wrote at the bottom of Brzezinski’s memorandum: “Check with Fritz & Cy first, then discuss with AG directly re preference between options a. and b. Then give Stan necessary assurance. J.C.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 11/17/79–11/20/79) According to Carter’s personal notes, Brzezinski called him on November 21 on the secure phone. Carter “gave him permission to state to Stan Turner that if we had to do a rescue operation that I would do it under the War Powers Act.” (Carter Library, Plains File, Box 1)
