National Security Policy  1141
believes in the plan, he ought to ask for more forces—he says, that’s the 
damnest thing I ever heard, I never did think much of that guy Power, 
he didn’t shut up when I told him to. For 20 minutes all I was doing was 
saying yes sir, that’s right.
ADM BURKE: Have you ever seen my book?
CAPT AURAND: No sir.
ADM BURKE: You can borrow it tonight if you want to. I want 
it back though on Sunday. Its a good thing to look through. This is a 
short summary of the whole works—written by Burke, primarily. This 
is something that I told Lemnitzer and that is something that is written 
very restrained.
CAPT AURAND: One other important remark the President made, 
he said they told me there were 483 targets and he said, God. I said, Mr. 
President, I have seen and heard of plans that have many times more 
than that—and he said, well we’ve got to get this thing right down to 
the deterrence.
ADM BURKE: Maybe you can show the President this thing.
CAPT AURAND: Well, Kisty sure gave him the ungarbled word. I 
think it was the first time he ever got it from somebody who, in his esti­
mation, is in a position to make a —. You know, he had one session with 
Tom Gates and Gates was so interested that he asked him to come back 
and he also asked him if he wouldn’t give this to the Chiefs and Kisty 
said no, that I told my President that I would take a reading for him 
and that I’m perfectly willing to give it to you—it’s just the principle of 
advising, that I didn’t go to look at it from a military view.
ADM BURKE: What you might want to do Pete, is to show this 
book to Kistakowsky—this is my book—and I have said things about 
Power in here which I believed—it’s not quite true now because this 
was written over a period of weeks, but essentially, it is true. Ask 
Kistakowsky what he thinks of it and maybe the President would want 
to take a look at parts of that. You can tell him that it’s my book and you 
got to looking at the thing and you got interested in the thing. That’s 
my notebook that I carry in my pocket when I talk about it.
CAPT AURAND: Now he almost said that he thought that we 
ought to go to POLARIS entirely but he revealed the thought by saying, 
“You know I never have believed that we ought to have one weapon 
system but” and he never finished the sentence of what else he was 
thinking but the obvious fill in for that was “POLARIS ought to be it”. 
He was really steamed up. Fortunately I had it on my check off list to 
mention it to him and I didn’t even have to say word one. Here is this 
thing on Theodore Roosevelt. He said that he was glad to find out that
