1955 203 Enclosure2 AMBASSADOR JOHNSON’S REMARKS 12th Meeting, August 31, 1955 Mr. Ambassador, I have given careful consideration to the draft of the agreed announcement which you gave me on August 25th and the observations which you made at that time. I have prepared a new draft in which I have gone a long way to meet the points raised by your draft which departed somewhat from the suggestion which I had made. You will note that although I consider it entirely unnecessary I have made the first paragraph of our respective statements identical in line with your views on the subject. Although, as I have often stated, I know of no further measures which my government needs to take in order that Chinese in the United States can promptly exercise their right to return, I have inserted the phrase “will further adopt appropriate meas­ ures” with the thought that this will be applicable to the authorization to be given to the Government of India. You will also note that numbered paragraph (2) of our respective statements I have used the phraseology that our governments will authorize the Government of the United Kingdom, and the Govern­ ment of the Republic of India, to assist the return to their respective countries of those who desire to do so. It seems to me that this much more accurately describes the exact situation since obviously neither of the third countries named could carry out these functions without the authorization of our respective governments. The essential element, therefore, is that our respective governments give this authorization and that this is clearly set forth in our respective statements. With respect to paragraph 2 (a) of our respective statements, I have made a slight addition to the last sentence of your draft in order to make it clear that these functions are to be performed only with regard to those persons who desire to return. With respect to paragraph 2 (b), I have deleted the phrase in your draft “on behalf of the Government of the United States of America”, in the one case, and “on behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of China”, in the other case. In the case of Americans, any financial assistance in most cases would originate with the relatives or firms of the persons concerned. You are, of course, entirely free to make whatever arrangements you way desire for reimbursement by 2 No classification marking.
