3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
415
1. PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE BUILDING
The U.S. Embassy in Moscow is composed of three connected
buildings oriented north and south. The center building is the
Chancery. The north and south buildings are primarily residential
apartments.
a. South Building: This structure has seven floors, an attic, a base-
ment and a subbasement. It is made primarily of brick. It matches
floor-to-floor the floor levels in the Chancery for the seven floors of its
height. The Chancery has 10 floors. It is a corner structure, so it has no
adjoining buildings to the south or east. To the west, it adjoins a Soviet
apartment building up to approximately the fifth floor.
b. Chimney: There is a chimney which (above the fifth floor south
wing) protrudes from the west side of the south wing. It seems to come
from the Soviet apartment roof (two floors below the south wing roof),
is attached to our south wing west wall, and terminates in a standard
chimney cap about 15 feet above the south wing roof (on the west
edge). The outside dimensions of this chimney are roughly five feet
square. The inside dimensions are roughly four feet square (as will be
seen below).
c. Soviet Apartment Complex: This exists to the west of our south
wing complex described above. There are five stories plus an attic.
Their fifth story, however, does not seem to correspond directly to
ours. The attic peak seems to come to our fifth or sixth floor level. Their
first floor (or basement?) is slightly below ground level. The windows
are much smaller (like what you would have in the basement of some
American homes). We have never noticed any lights on in these
windows at night.
d. Below the fifth floor, the chimney structure is inside our
building. There is a small room approximately six by fifteen feet in each
apartment that abuts the chimney on the six foot side (to the south) and
the Soviet apartment on the fifteen foot side (to the west). On the
ground floor of the south wing is the charwomen’s changing room.
2. On 25 May, a hole (1) (2) was made in the seventh floor wall of
the chimney in apartment 7A. (Numbers in brackets are keyed to at-
tached photographs.)4 [7 lines not declassified]
[4 pages (30 paragraphs) not declassified]
17. We are continuing tests of the antenna.
[1 paragraph (19 lines) not declassified]
19. ANTENNA DIMENSIONS ARE:
[1 page (8 paragraphs) not declassified]
4 Not found attached.
