January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1267
autonomy negotiations are viable and that they ultimately offer the
best hope for progress. The negotiations are tough, but they are slowly
getting somewhere.
—Our concept is that we need further work by the negotiating
teams before the key issues are delineated in such a way that we can
begin to plan for a major push to get trade-offs on these issues. We are
working to get the parties back to the table as soon as possible so that
we can work intensively toward this.
—We understand European concerns at the slowness of the talks
but we would ask them to analyze carefully the pressures they believe
are building on them. Are the Arabs really going to rush to actions that
would be as self-defeating for them in the final analysis as they would
be damaging to the West? Is the security of the moderate Arab states se-
riously threatened by the present negotiations? Our own judgment is
that while the key moderates have reservations about the autonomy
negotiations they have no alternative plan and do not plan to join any
radical bandwagon to produce a confrontation with us on the peace
issue. They are concerned but not seriously threatened. We believe we
have the time to see this process through but also want to stress that it is
our intention to help complete it as soon as possible.
—We and the Europeans have a shared interest in the fundamental
importance of a comprehensive Middle East peace. Actions which the
Europeans can take to further this objective would be welcomed by the
United States. Our own specific reaction to any European proposal will
be determined by whether an initiative will be supportive of a negoti-
ated solution.
—Our reaction to any consideration in the UN of the peace process
will be based on the fact that Resolution 242 is the agreed basis for a
peace settlement and it is the foundation of the Camp David process
and the current autonomy negotiations. Any effort to alter the ground
rules of the negotiations would be fundamentally counterproductive.
Resolutions which seek to establish or define “rights of the Pales-
tinians” or “self-determination for the Palestinians” are likely to be con-
strued in Israel as changing 242 and cause a similar adverse impact on
the peace negotiations.
—We have another concern that bears on any initiative the Euro-
peans might take. We should not offer the Arabs the false hope of an
easier alternative that will save them from joining the negotiations or
giving serious consideration to the eventual negotiated outcome of the
autonomy talks in the cold light of available alternatives. You should
stress that no other means has been suggested that offers the Pales-
tinians the hope of as many real gains in the near future as the Camp
David process.
