Chemical and Biological Weapons
165
US presentation made in fourth round (July 1977),2 contained few sur-
prises; however, it represented most detailed and concrete exposition
of Soviet position to date. It incorporates US proposals in certain points
and suggests a Soviet willingness to enter into a phase of serious nego-
tiations now that both sides have presented their basic position. A basis
to begin negotiations in the next round now appears to exist.
2. As regards form of joint initiative, USSR appears to have moved
towards US concept that joint initiative to CCD should take form of
agreed key elements, through some differences possibly remain. Re-
garding the content of the basic provisions, there appears to be substan-
tial degree of convergence in US and Soviet positions on scope of con-
vention (types of weapons and activities to be banned) and disposal of
prohibited weapons and facilities, although some important differ-
ences remain and Soviet text is unclear on others.3 On issue of verifica-
tion, two sides remain far apart. Despite some minor positive elements
in Soviet presentation, position on the key issue of international verifi-
cation involving on-site inspection remains basically unchanged. Re-
garding entry into force of the treaty, unclear wording of Soviet basic
provision no. 23 raises the potentially troublesome possibility that they
may insist on ratification by all permanent UN security council
members as a precondition. End summary.
3. US and Soviet Delegations held six meetings in Geneva from
Aug 16 through Aug 26, 1977, to continue their negotiations on ele-
ments of a convention prohibiting chemical weapons, with the purpose
of preparing a joint initiative for submission to the CCD. This was the
fifth round of bilateral negotiations held in accordance with the US-
Soviet communique´ of July 1974,4 and the third meeting of the joint
working group established as a result of the Moscow discussions be-
tween Secretary Vance and Foreign Minister Gromyko in March 1977.5
The atmosphere of all meetings was cordial and workmanlike.
4. In the first four meetings which were held on Aug 16, 18, 22 and
23, Soviet rep (Likhatchev) made a detailed presentation of Soviet posi-
tions on content of possible convention prohibiting chemical weapons
which he characterized as supplementing proposals contained in So-
viet 1974 draft CW convention and as, in effect, a response to the US
proposal presented in the fourth round in July 1977.6 At the end of his
presentation, Amb Likhatchev handed over a working paper contain-
2 See Document 71.
3 The basic provisions of the Soviet text are in telegram 7212 from the Mission at
Geneva, August 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770304–0696.
4 See footnote 2, Document 61.
5 See Document 64.
6 See Document 71.
