394
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the negotiation of inspection provisions for the PNE Treaty of 1976
which involved only procedures to confirm that individual explosions
did not exceed the 150-kiloton threshold. Even so, negotiation of the in-
spection provisions for the PNE Treaty required most of two years.
For all these reasons, we believe we can best serve our interest in
moving rapidly toward negotiations and the prospect of sound results
by pressing the Soviets at the highest level to forego a PNE exception in
the CTB treaty, while offering them a significant face-saving ele-
ment—deferral rather than permanent prohibition of PNEs. One pos-
sible straw in the wind: a Soviet military official commented to one of
our Delegation officers in Geneva that the PNE issue might be like the
XVIII Amendment to the U.S. Constitution—drinking was banned but
later permitted by further amendment.8
Verification
The elements of a reasonable verification package might also now
be pressed on the Soviets. We could pick up their willingness to have
on-site inspections whenever there is mutual agreement to permit one.
But we could reasonably insist that there also be agreement on the
rights that inspectors would need to perform their mission effectively.
Similar agreement was elicited from the Soviets in the PNE Treaty.
In addition, we could ask for agreement on a relatively small
number of automatic and secure seismic stations in each of our coun-
tries. The Soviets may not ultimately accept this; but they have not yet
been firmly negative, and it seems worth a try. If we did succeed, it
would be a breakthrough, valuable in and of itself, and also helpful
domestically.9 You will have before you shortly an interagency study
on the value of different numbers of automatic seismic stations, and
this should permit you to decide more precisely on what we should ask
for. We would not, however, have to specify the exact number in the
memorandum for Dobrynin. That could be decided later.
With the Soviets, we could make the pitch that we are meeting
them halfway in not insisting on mandatory on-site inspections—an
historic shift for us. Actually, from our standpoint, it is arguable that
the difference between “mandatory” and cooperatively-arranged in-
spections is largely illusory.10 A provision for cooperatively-arranged
8 Brown lined through the sentence “One possible straw in the wind: a Soviet mili-
tary official commented to one of our Delegation officers in Geneva that the PNE issue
might be like the XVIII Amendment to the U.S. Constitution—drinking was banned but
later permitted by further amendment.” In the right margin he wrote an arrow and said
“I agree fully with the position proposed by US, but not with the Sov officer’s analogy.”
In the left margin he wrote “take out.”
9 Brown wrote “I agree” to the right of this sentence.
10 Brown wrote a check mark to the right of this sentence.
