1094 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI work on treaty provisions, that would be the breakthrough we need to put us on track to sign START this month. Heavy Bomber Contingency Operations Most of the remaining bomber issues can be left to the experts. One cannot—heavy bomber contingency operations. It is a sensitive political issue you and I need to address. As you know, B–52s carrying conventional weapons played a major role in restoring the independence of Kuwait. It is absolutely essential to the US that START not inhibit our ability to use bombers in similar operations in the future, operations unrelated to the central strategic relationship between the US and the Soviet Union. Inspections at airbases preparing for contingency operations could preclude such operations in the future. The purpose of inspections is to monitor compliance, not to observe sensitive operations. Such operations are rare, and inspections of airfields are subject to a quota, so in practice the situation may never arise in which a side asks to conduct an inspection of an airfield which is engaged in a contingency operation. But we need to provide for this possibility. Therefore, last December we proposed a very limited exemption from the inspection regime in order to allow heavy bombers to be used under special circumstances for purposes not inconsistent with the treaty. Ever since, we have repeatedly adjusted our proposal to take into account Soviet concerns: —Our proposal now includes timely information to the other side if a request for an inspection is made during such an operation. —We have offered an extra inspection not counted against the quota if an inspection is cancelled because of a contingency operation. —We made adjustments to take into account your concern that you don’t want any implication that the Soviet Union supports operations against third countries. Last week during the Bartholomew/Obukhov talks, Amb. Brooks put forward a package that would resolve this and several other issues. On Monday,3 after you agreed to this meeting at which we are to resolve all issues, your representatives in Geneva told Brooks that Moscow rejects any form of exemption for contingency operations. Mr. Minister, there is not going to be a treaty if we can’t protect the US ability to conduct such operations, operations that are not 3 July 8.
