290 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI naval forces. In a sense, the USSR is surrounded. That is the reverse from the U.S. In Europe and Asia we saw the Soviet Union push out in all directions. Marshal Akhromeyev: We can exclude China. Mr Gates: Not in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Lt Gen Scowcroft: You had the military benefit of internal lines of communication. You have large forces nearby. Our naval forces developed to respond to you around the land mass. Marshal Akhromeyev: There are now different circumstances. Admiral Crowe: There’s a glitch. He’s not determined to eliminate the whole Navy, but focus on the aircraft carrier. Marshal Akhromeyev: Our principal policy is to not damage US national interests and to consider the national interest of the Soviet Union. Lt Gen Scowcroft: The threat is the size of carrier aircraft and the numbers of aircraft on board designed for strikes against the Soviet Union. There are not more than 25 such aircraft on each carrier. Admiral Crowe: About 32. Marshal Akhromeyev: I didn’t want to discuss this in detail. It would be useful to start discussion on the forces of the two sides. Lt Gen Scowcroft: As regional changes develop, we would look at these as practical matters. Naval forces reflect the naval competition on the two sides over the narrower mission of maintaining lines of communication in the Atlantic. Marshal Akhromeyev: I would also imagine that our naval forces would be cut, to include attack submarines which is a U.S. concern. We feel a larger time pressure. Soon this will have a negative bearing on all in our life. Mr Gates: It’s important that people on both sides not become too impatient. Large changes on both sides clearly can’t be separated from historical relations on both sides. There are also positive attitudes in this country. One problem here are impatient people and people who want relations to move faster than conditions [warrant]. Political evolution on both sides has not progressed far enough. While naval forces are important, relations must continue to evolve. Marshal Akhromeyev: Once we start talking on the subject of the navy, it will take years. Lt Gen Scowcroft: The premise for our talks is that there are no forbidden subjects for conversation. END
