1957 1367 Wang also made strong statement re stationing guided missiles Taiwan. Spoke of guided missiles being atomic weapons. Statement included “strong protest in name of his government” at this “act of aggression”, “hostile act and another serious provocation” proving fal­ sity US professions peaceful intent. “US must be held responsible for all consequences this act aggression”. If US purpose is to achieve peaceful settlement good faith should be demonstrated by acts, etc. If US were not in military occupation of Taiwan reunion would have been realized long ago. China will never tolerate and certainly will liberate, etc. etc. I replied along lines para three Deptel 1181 and Deptel 1193 including reaffirmation lawful administration Taiwan by GRC, mutual defense treaty with GRC and that those who had no aggressive intent had nothing to fear. With respect Dr. Lin pointed out she had, in fact, returned in con­ trast the eight Americans still in Chinese prisons and those who would never return because of death under mistreatment. Cited fact she had not contacted Indian Embassy if, in fact, she felt she was being obstructed. Also strongly made point agreed announcement thus far no advantage but rather disadvantage to US. Interesting to note that in today’s meeting for first time Wang con­ sistently used terminology “Geneva agreement” in referring agreed announcement and to “Geneva talks”. Next meeting July 11. Popper 808. Telegram unnumbered from Geneva1 Geneva, May 15, 1957 Unnumbered. From Johnson. 1. After Wang declined open, I opened 67th. It had been 20 months since he and I first entered agreement here to resolve first question with which we called upon to deal. It had been 20 months during which the high hopes of myself, my government, my people, that this prob­ lem of civilians could be resolved, had been disappointed. It had been 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/5–1557. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Johnson, Popper, and Freeland. Sent via pouch. Received on May 20.
