International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
609
used means of protectionism after three decades of tariff cuts negoti-
ated under the aegis of the 1947 General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, the Tokyo Round resulted in a series of “codes.” These codes,
adherence to which was voluntary, governed the use of subsidies and
countervailing duties, standards and regulations, customs valuation
techniques, government procurement, and the licensing of imports.
Agreements were also reached on trade in civil aircraft, meat, and dairy
products. (“Multilateral Trade Negotiations,” Department of State Bul-
letin, June 1979, pages 30–31) See also Document 216.
President Jimmy Carter welcomed the Tokyo Round agreements,
asserting that they would “increase the opportunities of all nations,
rich and poor, to exchange their goods under equitable conditions.
Through such fair and open trade, we strengthen peace and trust in the
world and make more efficient use of the world’s human and material
resources.” Carter continued: “The agreements steer us away from de-
structive protectionism and into a path of greater export opportunities,
with the prospects of new jobs, improved productivity, and increased
industrial and agricultural production. The new opportunities that are
thus developed will be realized through vigorous efforts by gov-
ernment, industry, and agriculture to promote exports.” For the text of
Carter’s remarks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book I, pages 662–663.
210.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 23, 1979
SUBJECT
US Economic Policy—The View from Abroad (U)
1. I’m struck by the difference between the way US anti-inflation
policy is seen abroad and at home. This difference suggests how the
Administration could posture itself to greater advantage domestically
on the issue. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
File, Box 129, 5/2/79. Confidential. Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of the
page: “cc Jody. C.” Brzezinski also initialed the memorandum. Hutcheson forwarded a
copy of the memorandum to Powell under cover of a May 2 note. (Ibid.)
