Eastern Europe Region least initially, dissent confronted the regimes with a challenge that had to be assessed and kept within bounds.11 It has probably caused some differences within leaderships over tactics12 to be used in muzzling dissent, although these differences have not been obvious or persistent. The more organized dissidents—those in Poland and Czechoslovakia— probably created some strains, albeit limited, between the regime and segments of the populace by strengthening endemic popular antipathy toward such institutions as the police, bureaucracy, and the censor. The dissidents frequent use of legalistic tactics in challenging regime practices has made the authorities, in turn, more attentive to legal procedures in dealing with the dissidents. [classification not declassified] The dissidents’ protests against repressive and restrictive regime policies—including tough police countermeasures that substantiated the initial allegations—provided an issue that, within the context of the Helsinki review process and the US emphasis on human rights issues, placed the East European regimes on the defensive in foreign affairs. How best to throttle dissent reportedly caused some differences for a time between the Soviets and East Europeans.13 The Soviets have clearly been inclined toward a more heavy-handed approach than most of their East European allies.14 [classification and handling restriction not declassified] Some of the East European regimes clearly saw dissent as a potentially troublesome obstacle to their desire to maintain or expand economic and, in some cases, political relations with the United States. Consequently, the regimes’ handling of dissident activity appears in some limited ways to have taken the US human rights interest into account. The Polish decision in February 1977 to grant amnesty to workers jailed the previous summer in connection with disturbances over proposed price increases was announced less than a week after the United States expressed concern for Soviet and Czechoslovak dissidents. The move was an unexpected capitulation to dissident demands, and was probably intended to enhance Warsaw’s image in Washington and reduce the possibility that the dissident question might intrude on bilateral relations. To be sure, Poland has consistently handled its dissidents more subtly than most other East European states, but the regime’s moves probably reflected more its concern with domestic 11 An unknown hand underlined this phrase and wrote “2” in the left-hand margin corresponding to “VARIOUS STATE CABLES” at the bottom of the page. 12 An unknown hand underlined this phrase. 13 An unknown hand underlined “reportedly caused some differences for a time between the Soviets and East Europeans” in this sentence. 14 An unknown hand wrote “ANALYSIS” in the margin below this and the next four paragraphs.
