Chapter 7, January–May 1991 1011 technical requirements. We also do not need more new ideas like “characteristic length” if we really want to see this treaty completed. Recent Progress 5. The focus on our inability to solve the handful of big issues has probably obscured for Washington the fact that we have been making impressive progress on all the lesser issues all through the treaty documents. The result is that today’s JDT is a great improvement over the December 17 version. 6. Believe it or not, the throw-­weight protocol is essentially finished. The inspection protocol is also finally rounding into shape. A year ago, no one would have believed that these two documents would be running ahead of the others, the conversion or elimination protocol is in good shape, as is the definitions annex. Problems related to support equipment and route notifications seem to have been finally resolved. 7. The Ambassadors and JCS have been making a strong push on the heavy bomber/ALCM issues. There is some progress here, but problems remain on OSI and MOU issues in this area. The Soviets continue to be obstinate in insisting on “symmetry,” whether or not it makes sense when viewed against treaty constraints. They will have to yield on this. For our part, we should be more reasonable on pre-­ inspection movement restrictions at weapon storage areas, inspection rights for weapon storage areas at B–2 bases from EIF, issues related to alert heavy bombers and admitting that an ALCM becomes an ALCM when it leaves its production facility. 8. The sides are starting to engage on the numbers for inspection quotas. We have the impression that the Soviets will emphasize keeping the total number of inspections as low as possible, but have some flexibility on individual quotas for types of inspections. Thus we may need to be ready to make some hard decisions regarding which types of inspections are most important to us. Recent Problems 9. There has been little progress on the hard issues with which the ungroup grappled. The Soviets have hardened their position on size criteria. A new complication is that they have revealed that the launch assist device for the SS–18 is installed in the SS–18 canister at the Pavlograd plant. This means these huge canisters will be coming out of this plant and, of course, they do not want them inspected. 10. The Soviets are dug in on the 40% rule as it applies to new types of missiles with unconventional front ends. We tabled the language the ungroup considered on no deployment until agreement is reached in the JCIC and they rejected it.
