618 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II “High Level Commitment and Support “We need soon broad reaffirmation of the policy by the President and the Secretary, along the lines of the President’s statement of December 6, 1978. “Ratification of International Human Rights Treaties “Five international human rights treaties are before the Senate: The Genocide Convention, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the American Convention on Human Rights. Adopted by the UN and Organization of American States, they have been ratified by the vast majority of countries. U.S. failure to ratify the treaties undercuts our efforts in the human rights area. A strong early effort by the Secretary to persuade the Senate to act favorably would signal his personal commitment to the human rights policy and would reassure the human rights community that the policy will be pursued vigorously. “The Genocide Convention merits top priority. Adopted by the UN in 1948, it has been ratified by more than 80 states and has deep symbolic significance. The President has strongly urged ratification, and the Administration should make strenuous active efforts to achieve this, preferably before the Madrid CSCE Review meeting in November. “CSCE Review Conference “The human rights community would welcome strong affirmation of our commitment to solid[ify] human rights gains at the Madrid Review Conference, maintaining balance in CSCE with military security issues. The community and the various ethnic organizations which follow CSCE are aware that efforts to develop an allied position on military security issues have not been matched by progress in the human rights area. We must strive to eliminate the imbalance. “U.S. Leadership Role in UN Human Rights Bodies “Our leadership can be enhanced by adopting positions more responsive to the human rights concerns of non-aligned countries. The recent session of the UN Human Rights Commission, one of the most successful, was marked by our close cooperation with non-aligned countries. HA feels strongly that we should further strengthen this alliance by: stronger support for UN actions against apartheid in South Africa, an evenhanded position on the human rights conditions of Arabs in the Israel-occupied territories; effective efforts to respond to complaints lodged against the U.S. by Native Americans and other of our minority groups; responsive positions on economic and social rights, in particular the right to development. A strengthened alliance would
