Bolivia  159
export market is an absolute necessity. To transport the amount of oil 
necessary to make an operation of this size successful would require 
the building, at a tremendous expense, of an additional and larger pipe-
line to the seacoast.
The history of this situation is that Mr. Whiteford and Gulf Oil had 
an open bid for a number of weeks to carry out this program and he 
has the feeling that he had the complete support of President Siles and 
also the General Manager of Y.P.F.B., Eduardo Hinojosa, who he says is 
a Penn State graduate and a first class oil man.
Apparently, as is so often the case, the situation became embroiled 
in domestic politics and the President of the country and the General 
Manager of Y.P.F.B., were not able to carry through to a successful con-
clusion the steps necessary to be taken to consummate the arrangement.
Mr. Whiteford insists that the loan requested at this time of from 
$8 million to $10 million would not aid, but would rather complicate 
the long-­range problem for, as above stated, this would be but the first 
step in a much larger program that would be necessary to complete the 
transaction.
Mr. Whiteford makes the constructive suggestion that if the 
President and the General Manager of Y.P.F.B. could control the situa-
tion it probably could still be worked out whereby Gulf or a consortium 
of companies would go in on a 50–50 basis, not only to develop the field 
but also to provide the larger financing needed, namely, the building 
of an additional pipeline, and assuming the responsibility for the basic 
development of the markets.
There would have to be an agreement reached to the effect that 
any money paid by the oil companies as a bonus would have to be 
earmarked so that it could be used for the further development of the 
producing properties that are already discovered and under the oper-
ation of Y.P.F.B.
I have obtained Mr. Whiteford’s permission to discuss this prob-
lem with Ambassador Victor Andrade, with whom I have been in touch 
since our return and from whom I have obtained the information with 
reference to the outstanding oil concessions, etc. In view of what has 
transpired, I think it would be unwise to even approach any other oil 
company or oil executive until after we have explored the possibility 
outlined above.
I will keep you and the State Department informed as to develop-
ments, but if you have any suggestions to offer in the meantime, please 
pass them along.
Very sincerely,
Samuel C. Waugh
President
