Chapter 4, February–April 1990  541
agreement at the June Summit; (3) follow-­on negotiations would turn 
immediately to the longer term goal of eliminating land-­based MIRVs.
On the other hand, if you can’t agree on a ban on mobile MIRVs 
in the current START treaty, perhaps we could still announce that we 
would like to begin talks immediately after the two Presidents initial a 
START agreement at the Summit to eliminate mobile MIRVs and even-
tually land-­based MIRV systems as well.
Lastly, let me just say that we think this could be seen as a major 
step toward enhancing strategic stability and it could answer the crit-
ics who claim that the current START really now amounts to business 
as usual and does not really reflect the changes that have been taking 
place in the world. But I want you to know that the very last thing 
we want to do is to delay the completion of START. So if you have no 
interest in this, let us know because we just don’t want to do anything 
that would stand in the way of completing START. I think that a ban 
on mobile MIRVs would really help bring stability and I know it would 
also mean significant economic savings for both of us as well.
Shevardnadze: Let me respond in this way. Certainly the discussions 
on strategic stability are very important and are of special concern to us 
and I believe that our Ministerial in Washington and in our ministerials 
after that we are going to need at least one session for discussion of the 
prospects for strategic stability.
Second, let me agree that whatever suggestions or ideas will be 
drawn up, they should not impede the completion of the START treaty. 
Our first objective is the completion of the START treaty.
My next point on which you propose is, I just want to say, is that 
you probably did not expect an immediate positive or negative answer 
right now.
Baker: No, no, no. I expect you to take it back and have a chance to 
take a look at it.
Shevardnadze: Thank you. The proposal is quite clear and I should 
also let you know that we have been having talks within the Soviet Union 
and we have been thinking quite a bit, at least I have been with my col-
leagues, about how we can make strategic stability more certain and if we 
are going to achieve greater strategic stability we are going to need some 
major tradeoffs between our two countries. Without major tradeoffs, 
there would not be forward movement. The guideline for us ought to be 
that these tradeoffs should be done on the basis of equivalency. I would 
like to emphasize that we also have been developing some ideas but they 
haven’t taken a final form yet, so I would not rule out the possibility that 
when I come to Washington I will not only have a response to what you 
have outlined, but I may have some ideas of ours as well.
Let me say, now, however, how much I value the fact that you 
brought new ideas and that you presented them in this fashion.
