German Democratic Republic
417
behavior by younger people. They have been captivated, not by German
“socialism,” but by the culture and lifestyles of their Western peers.
Unable to travel to the West and resigned to an ersatz emulation of
Western ways, younger people have increasingly sought solace in alco-
hol, drugs, rowdyism, and petty crimes.
While East German youth are basically apolitical, some of them
are intrigued by West German coverage of East German dissidents,
and the more educated are aware of the dissidents’ ideas. It is conceiv-
able that some could one day be converted to an anti-regime “cause”
cloaked in Marxist revisionism. But, more immediately, East German
youth are more likely to be concerned about Honecker’s new efforts
to limit Western influences; they no doubt worry about the conse-
quences of maintaining their Western contacts and encounters.
The regime fears a recurrence of youth riots—such as broke out
spontaneously at a rock concert at Alexanderplatz on October 7, 1977.
The Alexanderplatz riot manifested anti-police and anti-state attitudes
and demonstrated that frustrations among East German youth can give
rise to violence and conflict. Thus, it is not surprising that the Honecker
regime has stepped up its socialization efforts in the schools, most
recently by introducing military training in high schools.
(C) International Considerations and Ramifications
There is no evidence that East Germany’s new hard line was
instigated directly by the USSR. But Moscow no doubt encouraged
and perhaps even guided the sequencing of the SED’s moves so that
the broader dimensions of detente were not seriously disrupted. The
Soviets reportedly have been wary of GDR–FRG relations creating a
momentum that could not be easily controlled. At the same time,
Moscow has been concerned that Honecker’s emulation of West Ger-
man consumer standards had led to a corrosive ideological influence.
This could be tolerated when it promoted GDR stability but became
more disturbing when it threatened future unrest by setting goals that
could not be achieved.
The Soviets probably blessed the new restrictions on the grounds
that FRG–GDR–USSR detente relationships were sufficiently institu-
tionalized that Ostpolitik would not be derailed. Thus, the GDR–FRG
relationship would be momentarily cooled, Western penetration would
be cut back, but Soviet Westpolitik would go on.
That calculated gamble, thus far, has been correct. There does not
appear to have been a serious rupture in inner-German relations—in
fact, FRG–GDR talks have just resumed—nor have the events jolted
the West German citizenry. Generally, West Germany has tended to
interpret the East German events as a not-so-unusual political “spasm”
which everyone hopes will prove more restrictive in theory than in
