256 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII i. In sum, the US deplores the Soviet action in Afghanistan, regards it as reckless adventurism, feels that superpowers should not behave in this manner, is deeply concerned at the human suffering among the Afghan population, and will do everything in its power to deal with this problem in a constructive, statesmanlike manner. It calls on all nations, and particularly nations with significant Muslim populations, to appeal to the Soviet Union to allow the Afghan people to settle its own problems in line with the principle of no interference in the internal affairs of other nations. Hands off Afghanistan! 2. Dispatch a mission to Pakistan to investigate conditions in the Afghan refugee camps there. a. In line with the mission’s (undoubted) shock at the abysmal conditions within the refugee camp, issue a statement publicizing those conditions. b. Turn loose our refugee apparatus on the problem and call for assistance both from the American public and from other countries and international organizations. c. Place the blame for this human catastrophe on the Soviets, where it belongs. 3. Explore, directly or indirectly, with the Saudis, the Libyans, the Chinese, and other potential sympathizers with the Afghan Muslim cause, the possibility of stepping up covert assistance to the insurgents and the use of bases and refugee camps inside Pakistan to support the insurgency. 4. Call an SCC to examine our policy toward both Pakistan and Afghanistan. One aim of such an SCC should be to find the correct mix of incentives and guarantees that we would need to stiffen the spine of the Pakistanis to resist Moscow’s and Kabul’s pressure to help destroy the insurgency. This is an immediate goal and an important one, which might become more important to the President as the election period wears on. (As a Government, we must be in a position to defend ourselves against charges that we are sitting back and allowing the Soviets to add another country to the Communist camp without doing anything about it, as well as charges from the other direction that we are not doing enough to relieve the human misery caused by Soviet action in Afghanistan.) In sum, major Soviet combat involvement in a long-term insurgency in Afghanistan is something which the US Government must respond to in a concrete way and with both a public position and a private action plan. We should be ready to move on this as soon as possible, but first we need clear-cut overall guidance.
