1472 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement and authority as Ed would normally be a Counselor in any post but one such as London. Thus any meetings Ed may have will be on an even more routine level than those I have been having. I think, for example, that they will refuse even to enter into any discussion whatever of mat­ ters such as renunciation of force. This was foreshadowed by Wang’s remarks today. In any event it was clear that at today’s meeting Martin’s appoint­ ment was an eventuality for which they were in no way prepared. My main satisfaction from the meeting was that for the first time in two years I had the initiative with him. I am sorry about the mix-up on the press guidance telegrams. When I received 557 I thought that was all there was and that I had bet­ ter get our lines clear on press matters. Late that evening we received 556, long after I had sent out my message to you. It turned out 556 had been badly garbled in transmission and that they had been working all day to clear it. The press here are very unhappy with me but I am stick­ ing to the line of no comment. Of course, with the upcoming NATO meeting in Paris and all the other news I don’t think that the matter is going to make a very big splash any place. I felt a little bit at a loss to expand on the theme of why a judicial assistance agreement was “impossible and unnecessary” and hope that I did not say any of the wrong things. I was also somewhat at a loss to handle his emphasis on a U.S. Court having communicated with the PRC and tried to shift it back to the subject of Wirin. As a final note, my thanks and appreciation to you, Dave and the others in CA who have borne the brunt of the work of giving me such excellent backstopping. Give Walter Robertson my best and say that I am looking forward to seeing him soon. Now signing off from Geneva. Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador P.S. We have arranged with the Consulate here promptly to tele­ graph to Ed and the Department anything the Chicoms send over. Ed will write you directly about the future administrative matters men­ tioned in your last letter to me. Incidentally, Ekvall has never got paid for that trip from France to here last summer. Can we not see that he gets paid before he leaves? UAJ
