825.506/5: Telegram
[Document 404]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, May 13, 1927—5 p.m. 
[Received 11:15 p.m.]
64. Your No. 19, May 5, 10 a.m. Just prior to its receipt I had made
informal representations to Minister of Foreign Affairs as to proposed
insurance law, and have subsequently conversed with him. He says my
representations will receive serious consideration but have been sent by him
to the Minister of the Treasury whose project this is. Its provisions are
correctly stated in your cable. As yet it cannot be said to have had
indorsement of Cabinet although probably reflecting the avowed policy of
this administration to promote national interests in every way possible.
German and British Ministers who have made rather vigorous protest owing
to their large interests, believe project will be adopted and this is not
unlikely, although not apt to occur at once, and some substantial
amendment may be made. Ministers of Treasury, Interior and Public Works
dined with me last night. The first-named told me the matter was not ready
for immediate enactment, although he felt that much if not all insurance
should be effected in Chilean companies and that French companies had
been driving them out of the field by rather unfair methods. I pointed out
mutual advantages that would permit French companies to continue
business and unfairness, practically amounting to that which might be
considered destruction of property rights, if French companies were
prohibited from carrying [on] a business which they had established in the
past at considerable expense. Except in this respect I do not see anything
confiscatory. Chilean Government appears inclined to consider this as
simply withdrawal of a license to each business issued without any
consideration entitling it to be considered permanent and does not consider
it confiscatory. Am acting independently of British and German Ministers
but in close touch with them. Minister of Hacienda in submitting his project
to commission appointed to consider insurance question said that it was not
official and should be considered only as basis for study. I know of no
