purposes. If such is the case, the High Contracting Parties undertake that the
shipments shall become subject to Articles 2 to 5.”
While the Department concurs in the view that arms not in Category I should be
shipped without license (except in the case of the prohibited zone) there is no reason
why there should not be full publicity as to such shipments. In this way it would be
much easier to detect and thus to prevent the shipment in large quantities of arms which
are alleged to be for sporting purposes though in reality they may be for military
purposes. Each of the High Contracting Parties would be free to provide the necessary
machinery to secure the desired publicity but the items of information desired might
well be indicated in the convention and it might further be provided that all such
information should be sent to the International Central Office. The War Department
prefers that Article 6 be omitted.
ARTICLE 7
“The High Contracting Parties further undertake to prohibit the export of
arms, munitions and implements of war enumerated in Article I, to the
maritime or territorial zones specified in Article 9.
“Nevertheless, the High Contracting Parties may grant export licences,
notwithstanding this prohibition, provided that they conform to the
provisions of Articles 3 to 5. The competent authorities must satisfy
themselves, before issuing the licences, that the arms, munitions or
implements of war are not intended for export to any destination or for
disposal in any way contrary to the provisions of this Convention.”
If the Conference adopts the suggestion with respect to the separation of the
Convention into two parts, i. e. one covering publicity and the general control and the
other the prohibited areas, it would be necessary to indicate definitely in Article Seven
the extent of the prohibited zone. It is also desirable to include in this article a provision
for most-favored-nation treatment.
ARTICLE EIGHT
“A Central International Office shall be established by the Council of the
League of Nations for the purpose of collecting, preserving and publishing
documents of all kinds exchanged by the High Contracting Parties with
regard to the trade in and the distribution of arms, munitions and implements
of war, as well as the text of all laws, orders and regulations made for the
carrying out of the present Convention.
“Each of the High Contracting Parties shall publish an annual return of the
export licences which each may have granted in respect of arms, munitions
