694
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
8. I told him I particularly interested in events recent days. I would
like to know more about effort replace him by General Zahedi. He said
on evening of 15th Col. Nasiri had approached his house apparently to
arrest him. Col. Nasiri himself, however, had been arrested and
number other arrests followed. He had taken oath not try to oust Shah
and would have lived up this oath if Shah had not engaged in venture
this kind. Clear Nasiri had been sent by Shah arrest him and Shah had
been prompted by British.
9. I asked Mosadeq if he had reason believe it true Shah had issued
firman (decree) removing him as Prime Minister and appointing
Zahedi in his place. Mosadeq said he had never seen such decree and if
he had it would have made no (repeat no) difference. His position for
some time had been that Shah’s powers were only of ceremonial char-
acter; that Shah had no (repeat no) right on his personal responsibility
issue firman calling for change in government. I said I particularly in-
terested in this point, and I would like to report it carefully to United
States Government. Was I to understand (a) he had no (repeat no) offi-
cial knowledge that Shah had issued firman removing him as Prime
Minister, and (b) even if he should find that Shah had issued such
firman in present circumstances he would consider it to be invalid? He
replied “precisely”.
10. Before departing I told Mosadeq that during 24 hours since my
return Tehran, members American official family here had received in-
timations from various Iranian authorities which caused me believe
some Iranian officials suspected Embassy harboring Iranian political
refugees. I would like tell him point blank this untrue. My present
policy in this respect was as follows: (a) if political refugees should en-
deavor to enter Embassy, efforts would be made to stop them; (b) if
they should succeed in entering compound, efforts would be made to
persuade them to leave voluntarily; (c) if they should refuse to leave
voluntarily, it my intention to notify Iranian authorities that persons
had taken refuge in Embassy and that I was telegraphing my gov-
ernment for instructions.
11. Mosadeq thanked me for my statement and said he would like
add statement of his own. In case any Iranian political fugitives would
take refuge in Embassy, he would like Embassy keep them there. I
asked if in such event Iranian Government prepared defray expenses
for lodging and food or whether he would expect this to come out of
Point IV funds. He said Iranian Government would be glad, despite
limited budget, pay expenses those refugees.
Henderson
