Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1123 8. Minor glitch on photos due to be exchanged at signature. Soviets can’t do SS–24 (silo) out of canister, SS–24 (mobile) out of canister, or SS–25 out of canister at treaty signature. I have agreed that those can be provided at the distinguishability exhibition. They will include the SCDMs for both missiles. All other required photographs will be provided at treaty signature. 9. In reviewing the treaty, you will note that “agreed statements” is a growth stock. We had twelve of them ten days ago, now we have thirty-five. Most of the new ones have been in play for a while (forty percent rule, special purpose submarines), but some are the result of solving last minute issues with agreed statements. Sounds like a lot, but most make sense. 10. Remaining substantive issues: (A) Site diagrams for mandatory SSI. Based on their description, all the Soviet site diagrams show is a perimeter fence. Given that the Soviets don’t yet know what’s inside that fence, I still worry about being able to finish before signature. If I can’t, I’ll agree to exchange 30 days after signature. (B) Procedures for technical exhibitions (inspection protocol Section XIV) are not yet agreed. Linked to the new side by side exhibitions, which may complicate resolution. Most significant issue is whether launcher and missile get exhibited in same location. (C) Weights. Laying down the new guidance that procedures on determining the weight by some other method get worked in the JCIC in advance. We’ll see how it plays. (D) Waiting Moscow approval of our proposal to make the voluntary cessation of encryption terminate after a year. The Geneva Soviets like it. (E) Moscow wants some—probably harmless—changes in words on acceleration profiles (what do you do if you make no measurements). We have some ideas. Should be no problem. (F) Problem with the agreed statement on ALCM attachment joints (described in last Sitrep). I will try new text; if it doesn’t work, I will drop it and make a statement for the record. (G) Notification on the departure of a mobile launcher of prototype ICBMs from its production facility is not agreed. Not sure why; Nazarkin is checking. (H) Language on looking in empty launch canisters is not agreed. (I) Still working on reference cylinders for inspections (new Annex 12 to the inspection protocol). (J) Soviets resisting commitment to disassemble SLBMs into stages during the exhibition conducted in connection with elimination. I will probably drop.
