Human Rights
165
making arbitrary or selective moral judgments. Thus, in general, they
seemed to resent our manner of handling human rights in the IFIs. We
therefore need to have systematic discussions with other like-minded
countries to explain our human rights position, not only on IFI loans
but also concerning our approach on other forms of assistance, particu-
larly when there appear to be inconsistencies in our position. By con-
sulting with other countries through our Executive Directors in the IFIs
and directly with their governments, we will avoid confrontations and
stand a chance of building a consensus in favor of our position on the
human rights issue.
I recommend that we discuss these matters in the next meeting of
the Inter-Agency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance.
C. Fred Bergsten5
5 Bergsten signed “Fred” above his typed signature.
56.
Memorandum Prepared by Representative Donald Fraser1
Washington, June 10, 1977
Other issues.
1. There is a need for up-to-date reporting on human rights condi-
tions. It would be desirable to make an annual report on all countries,
not just on those countries to which military equipment will be sold.
Raw data, of course, need not be published. Such reports provide an
opportunity to show positive change without making a direct link to
U.S. efforts.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 16, Human Rights—Don Fraser. No
classification marking. Tarnoff sent the memorandum to Christopher, Derian, Nimetz,
Bennet, Holbrooke, Todman, and Maynes under a June 11 covering memorandum noting
that Fraser had left his memorandum and an additional memorandum outlining country
situations with Vance following Fraser’s June 10 meeting with the Secretary. Tarnoff indi-
cated that Vance had requested a short status report on the issues contained within the
two memoranda. (Ibid.) Briefing memoranda for Vance’s meeting with Fraser are in the
Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1976–1977
Human Rights Subject Files and Country Files, Lot 80D177, PGOV—Congressional. No
record of the meeting has been found.
