National Security Policy 1201 1. ATTACK WARNING CHANNELS AND PROCEDURES FOR CIVILIANS (NSC 5513/1; NSC Action No. 1565; Memos for NSC, same subject, dated February 20, 1957, December 3, 1959, December 14 and 28, 1960) Mr. Gray introduced this subject to the Council. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s Briefing Note is filed in the Minutes of the Meeting and another is attached to this Memorandum). In the course of his briefing, Mr. Gray called upon Captain Aurand, Chairman of the Special NSC Committee on Attack Warning Channels and Procedures, to summarize briefly the changes which the Committee proposes, with particular attention to revisions considered to be of a policy nature. Captain Aurand referred to the chart now contained in NSC 5513/1 and to the proposed new chart as circulated to the Council on December 14. He said the Committee proposed two changes in attack warning channels and procedures which involved policy considerations. The first change involved the use of the CINCONAD DEFCONs as triggers for action, replacing strategic warnings, defense emergencies, and air defense readiness. The DEFCON system was a new system established by the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff as a uni­ form alert mechanism. In the process of adapting the old chart to the DEFCON system, the Committee had noted the DEFCON–3 called by Secretary Gates from Paris last spring. Some of the actions taken by the military as a result of the DEFCON came to the attention of the public and the press and a certain amount of public confusion resulted. The Committee believed that steps should be taken to prevent public con­ fusion or panic when a DEFCON is declared. The President asked what was meant by the term DEFCON. Captain Aurand replied that DEFCON stood for “defense readiness condition”. DEFCON–1 and DEFCON–2 (the most serious DEFCONs) cannot be declared without public knowledge. The DEFCON–3 called from Paris last spring resulted in an excess amount of telephoning in some cities such as Denver with the result that the switchboards were jammed. Captain Aurand then turned to the second policy rec­ ommendation by the Committee, namely, a recommendation that the President delegate authority to the Secretary of Defense and the Director, OCDM jointly to make public announcements when DEFCONs are declared in order to avoid public speculation and con­ fusion. DEFCONs would be declared with such speed that the matter would not come to the attention of the President before announce­ ments were made locally. Mr. Gray said the Planning Board had generally concurred in the recommendations of the Special Committee as summarized by Captain Aurand. However, the Chairman of the Planning Board (Mr.
