Guatemala  727
GT–39.	
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, Prepared in 
the Office of the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 14, 1960.
The Secretary telephoned Mr. Gates who was then meeting with 
the JCS. Mr. Gates said they are ready to reload some Marines on a 
carrier and to sail the carrier the long way around Cuba to put it in the 
vicinity of Guatemala. Gates said the Marine amphibius group and the 
carrier can be in the area by the 17th or 18th and Gates said they were 
about to send a despatch on this giving the specific orders. Gates said 
this has all been done, but it can of course be cancelled. The Secretary 
said the situation has changed somewhat since the Secretary talked to 
Gates this morning. The Secretary said he had spoken to the President 
and got his approval to necessary actions so long as they do not get 
out of the OAS channels. [text not declassified] The Secretary said he had 
talked with Ambassador Muccio and then read Gates a report of Mr. 
Mann’s subsequent talk with Muccio.2 The Secretary said we had also 
sent telegrams to Nicaragua and Costa Rica so we might get requests 
for help from them as well as Guatemalan.3 The Secretary said on the 
carrier business, he felt there was no harm so long as it stays out of 
territorial waters. Mr. Gates said they decided to reload the Marines 
and tell them to sail in that direction. Gates said they will reload the 
carrier with propeller A-­d’s (?) with a half squadron of fighters and 
sail to Guantanamo through the West end of Cuba so it will be in the 
area by the 17th or 18th. The Secretary said we would know more in 
the morning, but this is a good precaution anyway. Mr. Gates said he 
would send over a copy of the actual despatch setting forth the specific 
orders on this operation.4
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, “Phone Calls & Miscellaneous Memos, 
November 1960–January 1961.” The telephone conversation took place at 2:50 p.m.
2 For a report of Assistant Secretary Mann’s talk with Ambassador Muccio, see 
Document GT–37.
3 Guatemala and Nicaragua made such requests. For documentation, see footnote 3 
to the memorandum of November 16 from Secretary Herter to the President, p. and the 
compilation on Nicaragua, Document GT–42.
4 Reference possibly is to the telegram from the Commander in Chief, United States 
Atlantic Fleet, Adm. Jerauld Wright, to the Chief of Naval Operations, Adm. Arleigh A. 
Burke, date time group 14904Z November 60. (ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot 62 D 24, 
“Central America”)
