594 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement available to selected elements of the government, but the general popu­ lation is inadequately prepared against large-­scale nuclear attack. 166. Air defense capabilities. Present Soviet air defense capabilities against attack by aircraft and cruise-­type missiles can be summarized in general terms as follows: (a) Against penetrations conducted during daylight and in clear weather, at altitudes between about 5,000 feet and about 45,000 feet, capabilities are greatest. (b) At altitudes above about 45,000 feet, capabilities would decrease progressively as altitude increased, except in the limited areas equipped with surface-­to-­air missiles where capabilities would be unimpaired to at least 60,000 feet. (c) At altitudes below about 5,000 feet, capabilities would decrease progressively as altitude decreased, and would probably be seriously reduced at altitudes below about 1,500 feet. (d) Against penetrations conducted at night and under condi­ tions of poor visibility, the capabilities of the system would be greatly reduced because of the limited availability of all-­weather fighters and surface-­to-­air missiles. (e) Against varied penetration tactics utilizing altitude stacking, diversionary maneuvers, decoys, and electronic countermeasures, the capabilities of the system would be diminished through disruption and saturation. 167. The amount of warning time available significantly affects the capabilities of air defenses in various areas of the Bloc. Early warning radar could now give Moscow and many other targets in the interior more than one hour’s warning of attacks made with present Western bomber types. The more limited early warning time available in Bloc border areas would reduce the effectiveness of the defenses of even heavily-­defended targets in such areas. As the speeds of Western deliv­ ery vehicles increase, the problem of warning time will become more critical, despite probable Soviet employment of picket ships, airborne radar and other extensions of warning capabilities. 168. Over-­all Bloc capabilities against aircraft and cruise-­type mis­ siles will increase, however, through improvements in the performance characteristics of most Soviet air defense equipment and especially through the wide employment of semiautomatic air defense control. Air defense guided missile capabilities will increase. Higher-­performance fighters will be employed, and the proportion of all weather fighters in Soviet forces may increase to about 60 percent. But the Soviets will continue to have difficulty in opposing very low altitude attack and air defense electronic systems will still be subject to disruption and satura­ tion. The USSR will probably not have an operational weapon system
