218
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and Dayan. The Cabinet reportedly decided last night that the settle-
ment will be removed.3
8. There is certain to be greatly heightened interest and focus—as
well as controversy—over the settlements issue as a result of the Camp
David Accord calling for a freeze on settlement development for at
least 90 days. Israel has steadily expanded its settlements in the occu-
pied territories since the 1967 war. There are five types of civilian settle-
ments, in addition to para-military Nahals. The most successful civilian
settlements are associated with large kibbutz federations. The kibbutz
is a communal settlement, in which the land is leased from the State,
and worked collectively. A moshav is a smallholders’ community, in
which each settler works a separate piece of land leased from the State.
A dormitory settlement is a type of bedroom community, where most
residents work elsewhere. A regional center is a larger community, sur-
rounded by four to six small agricultural communities, for which is
provided administration, support, and services. And finally, an urban
center is a community planned and built by the government.
9. The 48 settlements on the West Bank, pose the greatest problem,
as far as pressure for new settlements is concerned. Comparative pho-
tography of one such community on the West Bank, Shiloh, illustrates
the rate at which one of the settlements can be expanded. A comparison
of photos taken on November 13, 1977 and February 14, 1978 shows
that the number of housing units at Shiloh had increased substantially.
Tel Aviv has also continued to increase housing units at other existing
settlements in the last several months, suggesting that Israel wanted to
achieve as large a buildup as possible in the territory before negotia-
tions with Egypt caused a halt to further development. Between late
March and mid-July, 500 housing units were added at 17 settlements.
These new units could accommodate up to 2,000 more settlers. They
appear to be part of a broad-based plan, rather than efforts of one reli-
gious group or political party. (Secret/Noforn)
10. Steadfastness front. According to Embassy Damascus4 all
“steadfastness” states except Iraq are expected to be represented by
their leaders at today’s meeting in Syria.5 A Foreign Ministry official
3 The Israeli Cabinet issued an ultimatum on September 20 to the Gush Emunim
settlers, warning that if they refused to leave by September 21, Israeli troops would break
up their unauthorized encampment. (William Claiborne, “Israelis Order Settlers to Leave
West Bank Hilltop,” The Washington Post, September 21, 1978, p. A10)
4 Telegram 5502 from Damascus, September 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780381–0794)
5 The third summit of the Arab Steadfastness and Confrontation Front, or “Stead-
fastness Front,” convened in Damascus on September 20. The group, consisting of Al-
geria, Iraq, Libya, the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen, Syria, and the PLO,
formed at the end of 1977 in opposition to Sadat’s dialogue with the Israelis. In addition
to producing a formal charter for the Front, the summit participants drafted a proclama-
