696 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 3. Accordingly, USLO should approach the Foreign Ministry at an appropriate level to make the following points, stressing that we do not intend any publicity or widespread briefings of other countries: (A) U.S. and USSR will shortly begin talks in Washington at the assistant secretary-level to determine whether there is any prospect of complementing U.S. arms transfer guidelines by similar restraints on the part of other international arms suppliers. (B) The talks are taking place at U.S. initiative, and the U.S. does not know whether there is any prospect for Soviet cooperation. The U.S. will stress, however, that there are limits on our willingness to take unilateral measures. (C) If successful, such talks could enhance our prospects for international restraints on arms transfers, thereby reducing the potential for Soviet opportunism. (D) Obviously, we would welcome Chinese cooperation in this field, but our talks are not conditioned on this. If the Soviets seek to tie any agreement to Chinese cooperation, we will reject such an effort as inappropriate. (E) We will keep the PRC informed of any significant progress in the talks. Christopher 283. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1 Moscow, December 13, 1977, 1030Z 17935. Subject: Soviet Attitudes on Conventional Arms Transfer Controls. Ref: State 293007.2 Summary and Introduction The Embassy’s assessment of Soviet attitudes towards the Conventional Arms Transfers (CAT) talks is that the Russians will initially play a conservative, waiting game. We base this assessment on our evaluation of a variety of factors which we believe contribute to (A) an inhibition on the part of the Soviets to change their current policies in this area and (B) a desire to explore and assess parameters of U.S. intentions 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770463–0539. Confidential; Immediate. 2 On December 8, the Department of State had asked for the Embassy’s “assessment as to likely tactics Soviet Delegation” to the CAT talks. (Telegram 293007 to Moscow, December 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770456–1169)
