1977  203
Tasking: The Departments of Justice, Commerce and Defense shall 
work with the FCC in carrying out this function. The NSA is to provide 
technical assistance as necessary.
—2.d. [6 lines not declassified]
Tasking: [3 lines not declassified]
—3.a. The private sector telecommunications carriers should be 
briefed on the nature of the threat and appropriate government R&D 
information shall be made available so as to help and encourage them 
to devise adequate protection strategies. A similar program shall be 
pursued for government contractors and other most likely affected 
industries, corporations and private sector entities.
Tasking: The Executive Agents shall, as in 2.c. above, prepare a 
program for briefing the private sector and appropriate government 
contractors. They are further enjoined to work with the DOJ and FCC 
as necessary. The briefings are to be reviewed and cleared by the 
subcommittee.
REMARKS:
It was noted by the Director, NSA that thus far, 11 carriers and 
17 defense contractors had been given a classified briefing. He also 
pointed out that the DOD Joint Logistics Commanders were presently 
working on proposals to be submitted to the Joint Chiefs concerning the 
threat and providing options to be used by Defense contractors to pro-
tect information, both classified and unclassified relating to National 
Security. It was not determined who would pay for implementing pro-
tection measures—­an open issue which may require a policy decision.
It was also noted that while high level executives within the tele-
communications companies had been briefed, it was obvious the work-
ing levels therein had not been, as evidenced by the number of requests 
being submitted to GSA for specialized carrier contracts for services. 
Further, it was the consensus of the subcommittee that classification, in 
large part, stifled open and honest dialogue with the commercial sector.
Did knowledge of the threat cause the commercial sector to suffer 
by reduced use of the phone or by modifying their information han-
dling techniques?
Are the companies therefore put at a disadvantage in economic 
competition? Similarly, what will the impact be on a government agency 
if significantly altered information handling techniques were imposed.
Tasking: The OSTP/NSC will assess downgrade and/or declassi-
fication aspects.
Department of Commerce (covered in part under 2.c.) in conjunc-
tion with Defense prepare and submit to the subcommittee a position 
paper and strategy for transfer of R&D information to telecommunica-
tions carriers. Department of Defense shall also present their prepared
