1980  859
202.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, July 2, 1980
SUBJECT
False Alerts (U)
I sent you memoranda on June 7 and 13 discussing various aspects 
of the false missile warning displays which resulted in alerts of Strate-
gic Air Command bomber crews on June 3 and 6.2 We have continued 
investigating those incidents and this memorandum summarizes our 
present understanding of the cause, enumerates the corrective actions 
underway, and assesses the public and congressional reactions. (U)
The Cause (U)
NORAD attributes the source of the spurious data to the intermit-
tent failure of a 46¢ micro-­electronic integrated circuit (often referred to 
as a “chip”) in a data communications interface device at the NORAD 
Combat Operations Center in Colorado. Although NORAD has been 
unable to get the suspected circuit to fail again under test,3 the NORAD 
evaluation has been confirmed by an independent task force of highly 
competent and respected computer experts enlisted from the private 
sector. (U)
Corrective Actions (U)
This particular electronic fault will be corrected by replacing the 
suspected integrated circuit; however, to prevent a similar, future 
hardware failure from causing such an undetected error, we also are 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 42, Missile Warning Incidents: 11/79–8/80. Top Secret. Carter wrote in the upper 
right corner of the memorandum: “cc Harold, ok J.” Brzezinski forwarded the memoran-
dum to Carter under cover of a July 11 memorandum in which he noted that Brown was 
“managing a difficult situation as well as can be expected. It is important for you, in my 
view, to let Harold hold the lead on this problem and keep it at Defense and NORAD, 
not letting the focus shift to the White House. No investigation will satisfy everyone, 
and the more information made public about the investigation, the easier it will be for 
the critics to exploit it imprudently beyond what is sound for national security.” Carter 
underlined the phrase “Harold hold the lead” and wrote at the top of Brzezinski’s mem-
orandum: “Zbig, I agree. J.” Brzezinski returned Brown’s memorandum under cover of a 
July 17 memorandum in which he noted Carter’s comments and added: “The President 
has affirmed his decision for you to hold the lead on any future investigations and cor-
rective actions.” (Ibid.)
2 See Documents 190 and 193.
3 Carter underlined the portion of this sentence that reads “has been unable to get 
the suspected circuit to fail again under test” and drew an exclamation point in the right 
margin next to it.
