Afghanistan
393
5) Preparations for opening the Consultates General in Kiev and
New York will be suspended.
6) Radio Liberty, Radio Free Europe and Voice of America broad-
casts will be stepped up along the lines proposed in the State Depart-
ment’s December 31 paper.4 The necessary funds will be made available
by OMB. Worldwide diplomatic demarches and ICA actions will be
increased to publicize the Soviet role in Afghanistan.
7) Our posture toward the Afghan Government will be not to
conduct any formal business for the time being. The number of Ameri-
can personnel at the Embassy will be reduced to ten. The question of
recognition of the Babrak regime does not arise.
8) The Consular Review Talks which are now in a state of suspen-
sion will not be resumed.
9) On a case-by-case basis, The Department of State will reject and
delay visas for official visits to the United States.
10) Soviet media representation in the United States will be reduced
to the same level as U.S. media representation in the Soviet Union.
11) Shipment by C5A aircraft of the MHD channel will be deferred
indefinitely.
12) Negotiations with the Soviet Union on the General Exchange
Agreement will not be resumed.
13) We will cancel the following:
—The Agriculture Joint Committee Meeting scheduled for January
in the USSR.
—The Health Joint Committee Meeting scheduled for February
in Moscow.
—Representative Green will be urged to cancel his Congressional
Delegation visit to the Soviet Union scheduled for January 11–18.
14) Any meetings at the level of Assistant Secretary or above will
be reviewed on a case-by-case basis with the presumption that they
will be cancelled unless there are overriding reasons not to do so.
15) On the Olympics, we will take the following position which
may be used publicly: “Our European Allies have questioned whether
we should proceed to participate in the Olympic games in Moscow.
We will assess this question and review the position taken by other
countries in reaching our decision.”
16) U.S. travel controls on Soviet officials and the enforcement of
these controls will be reviewed to ensure greater reciprocity with the
treatment accorded our officials in the Soviet Union.
4 See footnote 10, Document 135.
