734 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Bartholomew: Let me explain why we need the flight test limits. Two flight tests a year would not only allow you to maintain the viability of the SS–18 force, but to continue its modernization with the Mod 5 and 6. This is a major change in the US position, accepting the inevitability of the modernization program now underway. What 2 flight tests would not permit is development of Mods 7, 8, and 9. In light of where we want to go in future negotiations, and the evolution of the international situation we want to see, there is no reason to pursue Mods 7, 8, and 9. Two flight tests per year allows the Mods 5 and 6, and puts a hold on further modernization past that point. This limit on flight testing also prevents development of new, more capable types of heavy ICBMs, as we have have agreed would not be done, while maintaining confidence in existing types. Karpov: Let me say again that we have weighed carefully all the proposals made by the US, and we can’t go further than what we have proposed. President Gorbachev made this clear to Secretary Baker in Moscow. We cannot limit heavy missiles further in this negotiation, we can return to this in future negotiations. (Break to 3:30 p.m.) Bartholomew: I invite you to address the question of Backfire. Karpov: I expect to receive some information from Moscow and suggest we postpone this subject to this evening, when I will be prepared to engage on this question. Bartholomew: Let us then turn briefly to non-­circumvention. In Moscow our negotiators worked out a solution. The Ministers reviewed that solution. Your minister said he wished to consider the documents further. Can you tell me this issue is now closed? Karpov: I believe it would be premature to say the issue is closed. During the Moscow ministerial Minister Shevardnadze suggested the US should make a more detailed statement regarding its strategic cooperation with Britain. And the way that material was proposed in the US draft drew criticism from Minister Shevardnadze. Additional study did not remove concerns regarding the additional document with the US statement on its commitments to Britain. It appears that this commitment has been couched in very broad terms, and provides for expanding cooperation with the UK over and above Trident. In that connection we propose the following complete solution to the non-­circumvention problem: — The tentatively agreed text for Article XIII, as agreed in Moscow, we can consider an agreed text. — We should also propose to consider the draft agreed statement an agreed text with some editorial changes. In particular, we confirm that the word “numerical” has been dropped. This text can be considered agreed.
