transportation, a mile-ton-hour may be employed and for aircraft a lift tonnage standard might be employed. The limitation of land armament as it now exists involves different and more complicated factors than the limitation of naval armament, because no two armies are organized in the same way nor have they fixed elements which can be compared in the manner that the war ships of one nation can be compared with those of another. Infantry divisions in different countries vary in strength from 7,000 to 20,000 and the types of military service include conscription, militia and voluntary. There is no unit in an army which can be satisfactorily used as a yardstick. Any plan for the limitation of armament, to be successful, must contain within itself the elements of simplicity and facility of determination. Limitations can be placed upon the strength of the Regular Army, upon the number of reserves, upon the militia, which is partly trained, and upon those reserves which are trained still less. It is considered that the only equitable standard by which it is possible to measure the naval armaments of one country against the naval armaments of another is either (1) the amount of tonnage possessed or allowed to be possessed in each type of combatant vessel, or (2) the total tonnage of all types combined. Under method (1), each type should be considered separately and unrelated to the tonnages of other types, although it may be pleaded that geographical location, outlying bases, overseas possessions, interests, etc., and extraneous political or economic considerations might tend to stress the need for one type over another type and therefore demand greater allowances of tonnage in one type and lesser tonnage in another, for comparison in total strength. The fixing of such relationship would be almost impossible, therefore it would seem imperative that the comparison rest in tonnages of types—considered each by itself—rather than in any attempt to deal with tactical and strategic employment of the various types. In arriving at the value of the tonnage already possessed, consideration should be given to the ages of the individual units in each type in order to arrive at an equitable agreement as to immediate scrapping and replacements.
