328  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
“equivalent survivability.” We will need both the policy and the pro-
gram for SALT III, where civil defense should play the same role that 
the ABM played in SALT I. If the Soviets will not cut back their civil 
defense, that is a sure sign of their seriousness about their war fighting 
doctrine and program efforts.
Brown rejected Brzezinski’s assertions on this point. Brzezinski 
once again emphasized the crisis control problem in which we could 
find ourselves between the two unhappy choices of war or surrender.
Brown then tried to express the spirit of the policy. It should be 
“equivalent effectiveness of civil defense when added to our strategic 
forces.” Tirana reasserted the need for a policy rationale for state and 
local leaders. Cutter insisted that the local leadership will not under-
stand “equivalent survivability.” Keeny added that they can under-
stand “insurance.”
Brown remarked that civil defense is part of the strategic bal-
ance. Keeny agreed that the option for evacuation may be useful but 
expressed fears that the costs are understated.
Brzezinski observed that if we initiate civil defense talks now, the 
Soviets probably would not respond, but with a U.S. program enhance-
ment, they probably will respond in a year or two.
Brown, answering Keeny, insisted that the cost figures for Option 3 
would provide some real evacuation capability.
Keeny insisted that the Soviets have never practiced evacuation. 
[name not declassified] supplied the intelligence information that in fact 
a major civil defense exercise was held in Moscow last April and that 
urban exercises for parts of cities are frequent. Keeny still insisted that 
Soviet civil defense is wholly ineffective.
Harold Brown said that we are in a position to recommend pro-
gram Option 2c with a question about how much to add for “continuity 
of government” which should be left to be answered by a short study. 
On the policy question, he added, we want something like “insurance 
of the strategic balance.”
Brzezinski insisted that the rationale of “equivalent survivability” 
with some policy word like “insurance” is what we need.
General Smith observed that we need to reduce the asymmetries 
between Soviet and U.S. civil defense postures and, therefore, a policy 
must rationalize such a reduction.
Brzezinski added that “equivalent survivability” as it is defined in 
the paper is more clear about our purposes.
Gelb stated that civil defense is part of the overall strategic balance; 
equality of civil defense programs is not what we are after in a policy.
Brzezinski insisted that we will need a short follow-­up meeting on 
continuity of government and a new policy statement.
