128
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Pros: Same as financial assistance proposals, although by supplying
direct aid of this nature we should become more deeply involved with
the Afghans and thus better able to influence events. The medical
supplies and some of the other equipment could be handled under the
rubric of “humanitarian assistance.” Once a supply channel to the
rebels is established, it later could be used, if desired, to provide them
with other types of material including lethal equipment.
Cons: Full GOP cooperation would be required. Security would be
difficult to maintain.
5. Unconventional Warfare Support—On-Site Survey
As a prerequisite for direct U.S. unconventional warfare assistance
to the Afghans, an on-site survey in Pakistan would be required to
develop a detailed operational plan. The team would hold discussions
with GOP officials and dissident leaders, survey potential training
and support facilities in Pakistan, determine support requirements and
control procedures, and finally draft a plan of action. The survey team
would consist of approximately five specialists and the survey would
take three-four weeks.
Costs: [1 line not declassified]
Pros: Survey results should greatly improve our knowledge of
Afghan rebel capabilities and provide essential information needed to
make informed decisions on whether, and how, to aid them. Security,
or at least plausible denial, could be maintained. However, our commit-
ment to the Afghans would deepen as a result of the survey, but not
to the extent that we could not pull back before making a final decision
to participate directly in supporting Afghan unconventional war resist-
ance from Pakistan.
Cons: Full GOP cooperation would be required. Although the sur-
vey team’s visibility would not be high, absolute security could not be
guaranteed, and U.S. involvement would become less easily deniable.
6. Unconventional Warfare Support—Phase I
Provide resistance organizational training in Pakistan to 40 Afghan
tribesmen from five separate areas. Develop a resistance strategy with
clear cut lines of command. Assign autonomous areas. Equip with
communications and medical kits. Locate resistance areas and specify
potential base and safe areas. Training would include: fundamentals
of resistance, mobile guerrilla warfare, psychological ops and propa-
ganda, air reception, intelligence. The training is estimated to take
eight-ten weeks [1½ lines not declassified].
Costs: [1 line not declassified]
Pros: Further improve the rebels’ unconventional warfare capabili-
ties, and enhance the possibility of achieving a successful outcome to
the conflict.
