1164  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
707.	 Telegram 230 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 7, 1956, 2 p.m.
230. From Johnson.
One hour fifty minute meeting this morning. I opened with state­
ment along lines paragraphs 1 and 4 Deptel 248, handing him copy Aug 31 
press release. He replied with statement on renunciation force and trade 
reiterating old points and then made fairly extensive prepared statement 
on plane incident during which he refused pick up Aug 31 press release, 
as “only PRC has right make protest this incident” and handed me copy 
Sept 2 PRC press release. In reply I pointed out that in my original state­
ment I said I did not intend enter into discussion plane incident here and 
was giving him copy press release as matter of courtesy in order that 
his authorities would have full and accurate text. Noted we had already 
received through UK copy Sept 2 PRC release but glad take copy he had 
handed me. Then made fairly extensive statement on trade and renun­
ciation force making it more explicitly clear than in opening statement 
that I was not willing discuss trade until they had accepted principle of 
renunciation force and agreement reached on text declaration. In course 
this statement emphasized our record flexibility on language renuncia­
tion force statement and willingness to consider and reconsider any lan­
guage that preserved essential principles. Hoped he would be in position 
next meeting abandon May 11 draft and seriously negotiate with me on 
text which would preserve area of agreement shown our April 19 draft. 
Avoided any expressed or implied commitment we would present new 
draft. In reply Wang accused me merely repetition old positions and stated 
PRC “would have to consider making its position public”. With respect to 
plane incident picked-­up copy August 31 press release as “informal doc­
ument for their information only.” I expressed regret they intended again 
resort publicity and propaganda and said that if they made statement US 
would, of course, have to consider making reply.
I then made strong and extensive statement on implemention in 
reply to which he asked whether US willing to release all Chinese in 
prison US “so they could return.” I of course immediately reiterated 
our position on Chinese prisoners and pointed out PRC bears full 
responsibility any delay in return any who might desire do so.
I agreed his suggestion next meeting Thursday Sept 20. Returning 
Prague tomorrow, arriving Sunday evening.
Gowen
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–756. Confidential; Priority; 
Limit Distribution.
