162 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI deployed as a mobile ICBM; most believe it would be captured as a modern ICBM if it is not deployed in a mobile mode. (This may or may not be legally correct based on our present tabled position; it is almost certainly correct as a practical negotiating matter.) Issue 1—NDM Limits. The United States position places a number of constraints on nondeployed ballistic missiles, including geographic restrictions, data exchange and movement notifications, all of which would continue to apply regardless of the decision on numerical limits on NDMs. This paper deals exclusively with the issue of such numerical limits. The most important consideration in reviewing the need for such limits is the degree to which they are needed to preclude Soviet refire, force reconstitution, and ballistic missile breakout. Soviet nondeployed missiles could be used to reload and refire existing launchers, if the necessary transportation and handling equipment was available and survived the initial exchange. Soviet nondeployed missiles could also be deployed in a crisis on soft launchers or on covert mobile launchers brought out of storage. These issues are discussed in Tab B, used in the 1988 decision, and Tab C.8 Three other factors are relevant: — There is not yet agreement on the number of non-­deployed ballistic missiles the United States will require. Past estimates range from several hundred to well over one thousand, not all of which would be retained for operational purposes. Because of U.S. production practices, the United States may have a requirement for a greater number of NDMs for a given force size than does the Soviet Union; we plan to produce at the most economical rate and stockpile missiles for use in future years. Stretching ballistic missile production could result in significantly increased costs; for example, the Congressionally mandated stretchout of Peacekeeper from 5 to 14 years increased unit cost from $16 million to $60 million. Production stretchouts also lead to reliability issues because of changing production populations. Additional detail on U.S. and Soviet production and NDM stockpile requirements is at Tab D.9 — The United States is committed to support the United Kingdom TRIDENT program. Non-­deployed TRIDENT II (D–5) missiles for United Kingdom SSBNs will be stored in the United States. Since British reliability figures are to be based on the entire D–5 population, procedures must allow for treating British and U.S. NDMs as part of the same population. 8 Attached but not printed. Tab C is an undated paper titled “Alternate Approaches.” 9 Attached but not printed. Tab D is an undated paper titled “Soviet Requirements for Non-Deployed Missiles.”
