tariff autonomy, I frankly acknowledge my doubts of the tactical expediency of making public avowal of the willingness to adopt that theorem at a moment when we are being argued and bullied into accepting it by a radical group which has no real faith in its own propaganda and would resent it if we granted their demands under circumstances which gave the advantages of this concession to any of the several military cliques which are likely to profit by it. … Either way the kaleidoscope falls, the majority of agitators would feel that we foreigners had backed the party momentarily in power. I venture to refer to my telegram 293, of July 28, 9 p.m. [a.m.]. About the whole of the present agitation is an unreality which makes it likely that action taken in Washington on sound abstract basis would locally appear to be a means of foreign support of Tuan or some favored successor in the same way that the Japanese support[ed] him in 1917 and 1918. 7. I have therefore ventured to tell my Japanese colleague that I would be willing to convey to you … an explanation of my personal view that it would not be tacitly [tactically?] sound to announce publicly at this time that we are prepared to go beyond the terms of the Washington Conference provisions lest we should thus prejudice the possibility of our restraining the importunities of artificially formed unions of coolies and school boys who are organizing to uphold diplomatic relations of the Government. 8. … Seeking, however, to detach myself from any preconceptions that antedated a first-hand experience of the abnormal Chinese reaction to the Shanghai incident of May 30th I cannot but acknowledge (if the Department desires my frank opinion) that it would be wiser to adhere literally to the provisions of the Washington Conference and let any developments therefrom be recommended by the Special Conference, rather than anticipate them at this time when even the most reasonable concession is liable to be interpreted as an abdication on principle of rights which we possess and ought not to surrender except upon adequate assurances of at least an honest effort to extend to our interests the treatment that one civilized government accords to the citizens of another. That is not now the case and I foresee no possibility of its being the case so long as China continues to be a congeries of competing military factions. We are in fact dealing not with a government but a simulacrum, which there are certain obvious political conveniences in recognizing. To go beyond the letter and beyond the spirit of our Washington treaty obligations in recognizing the hypothetical sovereignty of that government is not only to exceed what I recall as the purposes of the Washington Conference but also to encourage a spirit of irresponsibility with which even the soberest Chinese have recently been infected through various Bolshevik and juvenile nationalistic influences. 9. If the Japanese Government finds it of importance to make an issue on the question of Chinese tariff autonomy, as to which I felt warranted in conveying as personal opinions certain theretofore accepted views of the Department, I candidly think it
