434
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
S/P forecast stresses (paras 6 and 9, reftel A), it is in U.S. interest to
encourage continuation of these policies. Few would argue against
view that it is in U.S. interests to nurture Hungarian awareness of and
pride in its Western cultural heritage and to expand cooperation with
West so that humanism, liberal ideas, and pluralistic ideals continue
to permeate Hungarian society to detriment of Moscow influence. I
believe that, to extent that Hungary develops profitable relations with
U.S., its unquestioning responsiveness as a Soviet ally will be propor-
tionately reduced. I estimate that, barring a sharp turndown in U.S.-
Soviet relations, Hungary will continue to pursue relatively liberal
policies over next few years as it has since 1975.
2. Overview: Over past two years Hungary has shown a noticeable
interest in improving relations with U.S. Bilateral relations have pro-
gressed at a steady rate, reflecting pace and level that Hungary is
prepared to accept in its special relationship with USSR. Improvement
in our relations has been marked by signing of a cultural/scientific
agreement, expansion of USIA activities, settlement of all outstanding
financial obligations to U.S. (including payment by GOH of World War
I flour debt and agreement on settling blocked forints account problem),
a series of high-level visits by leaders of two countries, progress on a
number of divided family cases, a constructive bilateral approach on
CSCE, an agreement on reciprocal visa facilitation for diplomats and
officials, removal of all internal travel restrictions on official Americans,
and improving Embassy contacts with Hungarian counterparts. GOH
strengthened its position in past year by improving somewhat its bal-
ance of trade, adroitly carrying off price rises on meat and other con-
sumer items, and by tactfully ignoring letter of support sent by 34
Hungarians to Charter 77 signers. Dropping hard-liner and pro-Soviet
Arpad Pullai from HSWP Secretariat during year also strengthened
Kadar’s hand and was large step towards ensuring that his successor
is likely to be someone of Kadar’s stripe. Despite this significant forward
movement U.S.-Hungarian relations in the future will be conditioned
by the following factors, most of them outside realm of bilateral
relations.
(A) U.S.-Soviet relations: U.S. relations with Hungary are depend-
ent on the state of relations between Moscow and Washington. If, for
whatever reason (e.g. demise of Brezhnev, return to Cold War, etc.),
U.S. relations with Soviet Union degenerate, U.S. relations with Hun-
gary would also suffer, as testified to by current minor dampening
during human rights debate and in aftermath of Secretary’s visit to
Moscow.4
4 Vance traveled to Moscow March 27–30, and presented the Soviet leadership with
a U.S. proposal for arms reduction. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union,
Documents 16–23.
