Afghanistan
491
172.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
Washington, January 17, 1980, 9–10:45 a.m.
SUBJECT
SCC Meeting on Southwest Asia and the Persian Gulf
PARTICIPANTS
State
OMB
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Deputy Director John White
Deputy Secretary Warren
White House
Christopher
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Defense
Hamilton Jordan
Secretary Harold Brown
Jody Powell
Ambassador Robert Komer
Hedley Donovan
David Aaron
JCS
Chairman General David Jones
NSC
Lt. General John Pustay
Colonel William E. Odom
Captain Gary Sick
CIA
Thomas Thornton
Deputy Director Frank Carlucci
Fritz Ermarth
Robert Ames
Charles Cogan
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Dr. Brzezinski explained that the purpose today is to cover a num-
ber of points, not all of them for decision, but as information and
recommendations to the President as a backdrop for the decision he
will shortly be making about our policy toward Southwest Asia and
the Persian Gulf region. He noted the agreement about the strategic
dynamics of the Soviet military move into Afghanistan expressed at
the previous SCC,2 the consequences for Pakistan and Iran, and also
the importance of Soviet influence in Yemen and Ethiopia.
Dr. Brzezinski also added that the Soviet publication “New Times”
has issued a call for all Communist states and parties to seize new
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 40, Brzezinski, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia: 2/1–5/80: Briefing Book I. Secret; Sensitive.
The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. In the upper right corner,
Carter wrote: “Zbig—These are very serious matters. The discussions are necessary but
any proposal for contentious action must be submitted to me first. J.” For other excerpts
of the summary of conclusions and a January 18 memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter
transmitting it to the President, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East
Region; Arabian Peninsula, Documents 42 and 43.
2 See footnote 16, Document 152.
