in reaching an agreement in case an impasse should be reached. The
following paragraphs may offer a basis for profitable discussion.
The conditions prevailing in different regions of the world are so varied and
the factors entering into the situation are so divergent that constructive
achievement in the matter of the limitation of land armament appears to lie
in regional agreements rather than in an effort to work out a general plan for
the limitation of land armament applicable to the whole world.
In considering the limitation of land armament it is recognized that it is
impossible to deprive a nation of the strength which it may derive from the
past military training of its inhabitants. It is, however, possible for nations
to agree upon the number of men who will receive military training each
year, the amount (length, degree, nature) of training they shall undergo, and
the reserve equipment which shall be maintained.
 
In this connection it should be noted that the placing of all peacetime
military forces on a common ground as to procurement, would facilitate an
accurate estimate of the relative size of the armies of the various countries
as a basis for the limitation of armaments.
In connection with the discussion of mobilization stocks or reserve
equipment, it must be borne in mind that on the outbreak of war, the
military power of any nation, from the point of view of the army, is
determined largely by two factors, the active army, including trained
reservists; and war reserves of materiel.
It is desirable that a limitation be placed upon the size of active armies, and
it is equally desirable that a limitation be placed upon the peace-time
reserves of materiel. It should be borne in mind that consideration of the
size and composition of these reserves of materiel might lead to an effort to
bring in the consideration of the industrial power and resources of a country
unless the discussion were limited, as it should be, to actual and tangible
reserves of materiel maintained as such under national control.
Limitation of Naval Armament.
