Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America 1049 parts and to operate on the basis of a psychological sense of equality. In any case, he said, he wanted to express his sincere appreciation for the day. He said he had telephoned President Lopez Portillo, who had expressed himself as very pleased with the visit and had sent his best regards. Secretary Vance agreed that this had been a very important day. He said that the United States signing of the Treaty of Tlatelolco is of great significance. He said we are particularly grateful to the Foreign Secretary for his extraordinary kindness in going to the lengths of bringing the Treaty to Washington for us to sign. He reminded Secretary Roel that President Carter had already told him of his gratitude.3 The luncheon concluded with mutual expressions of esteem and friendship. 3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Secretary Roel from 1:00 to 1:03 p.m. on May 26. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary). 415. Editorial Note On June 8, 1977, First Lady Rosalyn Carter met with Brazilian Foreign Secretary Antoˆnio Francisco Azeredo da Silveira in Brasilia to discuss President Jimmy Carter’s desire to maintain “close cooperation and consultation with Brazil” on a number of subjects, including the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. She also asked him to waive the conditions Brazil had articulated regarding ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Silveira replied that while Brazil believed in safeguarding nuclear materials, “it will never accept restrictions on the transfer of technology.” He also said that while Brazil had not ratified the Treaty, it “considers itself committed” to upholding its principles, and had adopted such conditions “as a means of pressuring the Soviets to adhere” to the Treaty. (Telegram 4682 from Brasilia, June 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770205–0025) The Ambassador to Brazil, John Crimmins, later informed Washington about the status of a variety of nuclear issues with Brazil, including the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and advised the Department to follow up on Mrs. Carter’s presentation to Silveira, perhaps via a personal letter from Carter to Brazilian President Ernesto Geisel. A private comment by Geisel to the First Lady that “he would consider this matter,” Crimmins suggested, might indicate his openness to such a personal entreaty by Carter. The Brazilians, Crimmins stressed, remained “sus-
