714
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Kingdom is the only non-Palestinian element in Jordan. I am not rec-
ommending anything. Jordan is a Palestinian state.
You are trying to convince us to establish a second Palestinian
state. We’ll go far, but we will never agree to a second Palestinian state.
You should make that clear now. We should make clear what we plan
to do. There is no way to prevent Jewish settlers from settling in Judea
and Samaria. We can’t prevent this while Israel has one-half million
Palestinian Arabs in its pre-1967 borders. No geographical line can di-
vide the Jewish people from the Arab population. We have to live here
together. When I use the figure of one million Jewish settlers in twenty
or thirty years, I can assure that they will live there. In Jerusalem, in
greater Jerusalem, there is a crucial problem to have one million Jews.
They will live there and elsewhere. We were very careful to settle Jews.
We fill all of the empty houses. We don’t settle them in areas of heavy
population. We settle in empty areas or where there is only a small
Arab population. This is our homeland. But our approach is not reli-
gious. It is only based on security. We are settling people there. This is
part of our national security concept. It is a vital means for protecting
our population. It is easier to proceed if things are clear.
We have the problem of water. One-third of Israel’s water comes
from the aquafer in Judea and Samaria. This is a matter of life and death
for Israel. We have problems of internal security, of Arab terrorism. If
the day comes of true peace, with no terrorism, Israel will be the first to
stop our activities in the inhabited Arab areas. We only put settlements
in the most vital areas. There is plenty of land for one to two million
Jews. We won’t restrict the Arab population, but we won’t restrict the
Jews living there. This is a matter of life. My generation has seen war.
We have seen many terrible things. Remember we can only make a mis-
take once. We want to exist. We are striving for peace, but you can’t
frighten us by war. We want peace, but we will go on for ten wars to
preserve our security and independence.
Minister Burg: One should be enough.
Prime Minister Begin: We should adjourn now. We are having
lunch downstairs together. We can then come back, or take a break. We
have one other problem with the letter which has to with the counting
of time from the establishment of the administrative council in Gaza.
This cannot be accepted. The transitional period can only begin when
the autonomy is established in Judea, Samaria and Gaza. This is an im-
portant remark for the record.
President Carter: The liaision relationship must be established.
Egypt must be able to use its beneficial influence to work with the Pal-
estinians. I thought that Dayan and Khalil had resolved this. We need
to bring this to a head. We’ll try to use the language of Camp David.
