Panama  901
Item 9 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached:
I refer to Your Excellency’s note P.r.e.u. 505/1021 dated September 
12, 1958,12 as well as the Aide Memoire dated October 8, 1958, requesting 
the closing of the Mindi Dairy and Mount Hope processing plant. Under 
the criteria of Item 9, the Government of the United States undertakes to 
terminate the manufacture and processing of goods for sale to or con-
sumption by individuals whenever and for so long as such goods “are 
determined by the United States of America to be available in the Republic 
of Panama on a continuing basis, in satisfactory qualities and quantities, 
and at reasonable prices.” As a result of the request by Your Excellency’s 
Government, and in the light of these criteria, the Canal Zone authori-
ties have given consideration to the problem of the supply of milk and 
milk products which loom so importantly in the lives of the people both 
in Panama and in the Canal Zone. My Government has concluded that, 
despite a certain progress that has been achieved by Panama’s dairy indus-
try in recent years, circumstances still oblige the Canal Zone to rely on the 
Mindi Dairy for a portion of its milk supply. Therefore, my Government 
considers it must defer termination of the activities of the Mindi Dairy 
and Mount Hope processing plant until the public milk supply of Panama 
is produced under proven conditions fully assuring that supply in accor-
dance with the criteria of Item 9. In order to help the Government and 
dairy industry of Panama achieve a record upon which the Canal Zone 
might rely in applying the criteria of Item 9, the United States will, of 
course, continue to give assistance and advice when so requested by Your 
Excellency’s Government.
Sale of Alcoholic Beverages:
The Government of Panama has sought the cooperation of Canal 
Zone authorities in eliminating contraband activities said to exist at the 
present time in the sale of alcoholic beverages by Panamanian dealers 
to consumers in the Canal Zone. This matter has been discussed with 
the Governor of the Canal Zone and the Commander-­in-Chief of the 
Caribbean Forces, and I am happy to assure Your Excellency that the 
authorities in the Canal Zone will gladly give consideration to any prac-
tical system that the Government of Panama might suggest to ensure 
a more effective control, such as the establishment of a single outlet in 
Panama on each side of the Isthmus.
Luxury Merchandise:
It has been and continues to be the opinion of my Government 
that there are no provisions under existing treaties and agreements 
12 The Embassy at Panama City transmitted the text of the Foreign Ministry’s note 
under cover of despatch 191, October 14, 1958, not printed. (6.11.1913/10–1458)
