1444 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement pointed out here this morning, there are tens of thousands of Chinese nationals residing in the U.S.A. They had been residing there even before his authorities took control of the mainland of China. Most of them have been residing there for many years. With respect to the students, it is entirely understandable that many of them do not desire to return. He seemed to take the position that because they have not returned or because some of their relatives desire to have them return, they are prevented from returning by some mysterious obstructions imposed by my authorities. The fact of the matter is very clear on the face of it that those who have not returned have not done so because they do not desire to return. As I had pointed out to him many times, we have no desire nor reason to detain people in the U.S. against their will. He and his authorities continued to make vague unsupported statements that these people are being obstructed in returning. It is incredible to me that he finds it possible to make such statements in the face of the facts. The facts are that the very agency which he himself suggested has not called to our attention a single case of obstruction. The Chinese in the U.S. have continued to be entirely free to depart for his country if they desired to do so. The sole question—let me say the sole determing factor—is their own desire. He had again this morning presented vari­ ous figures. With regard to the 56 names he had submitted to me, I had told him in the past and I told him again categorically this morning, they and every other Chinese are entirely free to leave the U.S. if they desire to do so. 3. I continued. He had talked about the figure of 103 and again misrepresented that figure. As I had told him at the time I gave him those names, they were not names of persons who necessarily desired to return to his country. They were names of persons, and I repeated this, they were names of persons to whom orders were issued prevent­ ing their leaving the U.S. during the Korean war for reasons of national security. The fact that such orders were issued or that I gave him their names here was not the slightest evidence that they desired to return. It had no relation whatever to their desires. It was a purely preventative measure and, as I told him at the outset of our talks here, those orders have been entirely withdrawn. The fact that the orders were withdrawn and the group was free to return any time it wanted to do so is estab­ lished by his own statement that eighty-two in fact have returned. With regard to those in prison I outlined to him the measures which we had taken to determine their desires after he rejected the first proposal that I had made in this regard, and those who desired to return have done so regardless of the length of their sentences. 4. I continued. These are the facts with regard to the return of Chinese from my country to his country. They are not vague, unsup­ ported allegations; neither are they unilateral statements on my part. They are facts known to all the world; they are facts established by
