Chapter 4, February–April 1990 453 favor to you but is also something that serves our interests. That is what I meant by saying we want to pursue points of mutual advantage. Shevardnadze: Yesterday I spoke at the Plenum and my remarks will be published tomorrow; but I find it interesting that the thoughts you have just outlined coincide almost exactly with what I said in the Plenum. Specifically, I said that in order to implement our plans for democratizing and renovating our society we need a favorable international environment. I used these very words, and I believe that US-Soviet relations are very important in effecting that environment. I also believe that international relations are affected by what happens here in the Soviet Union. If one sees destabilization in the Soviet Union, it can affect the situation outside the Soviet Union. Anyway, I think that our thoughts are working very much along the same lines, that is also true for our two Presidents. Baker: I hope that you have noticed that the President and I have been saying in almost every statement that we have made that we support what you are doing and we value it very much. I have said for some time that instability in the Soviet Union is not in the interest of the US. I have said this with regard to the Baltics, which is a sensitive matter for us because we have never recognized incorporation of these republics in the Soviet Union. More than this, I believe it is in our mutual interest to reduce the risk of confrontation and war and to reduce the burden that defense spending puts on our respective economies. We could both profit from a peace dividend. [Omitted here are discussions not related to START.] Baker: Why don’t I run through my broad agenda on arms control and then you can have your people study the papers I hand over to you. I have some important changes in our negotiating posture in START. I am going to present some significant proposals not only on the three issues our Presidents wanted us to resolve—ALCMs, non-­ deployed missiles, anti-­telemetry encryption—­but also on CFE and CW. I brought along our negotiators in both of those areas. I know you are familiar with our proposal on manpower. We also have one on air power. I think and I hope that our CFE proposals will remove some of the differences between us and that we can move the negotiations along very promptly. I’ve got some proposed elements of common ground on manpower and combat aircraft and I’d like to give it to you. (Baker turns over paper2) If you can agree on these, I think we could give CFE a major push forward. If you have a counterproposal, as you were suggesting to the press, I’d be pleased to hear about it as soon as you can tell me so that I can respond. 2 Not found. See footnote 3, Document 71.
