XXXVIвҖғ Summary of Print Volume III
and subsequently to lower threshold limits. Adequate safeguards 
would be provided on banned testing levels while there would be no 
increase in the agreed upon on-Вӯsite inspections. (239, 240) Despite skepВӯ
ticism about the SovietsвҖҷ interest, the U.S. delegation introduced the 
concept at the Geneva talks.
In spite of the U.S. doubts, the Soviet Union informed the Geneva 
Conference in March 1960 that it was prepared to discuss a treaty based 
on the threshold concept. They wanted to begin discussion on susВӯ
pending tests above a 4.75 seismic magnitude. (247, 248) However, disВӯ
agreement over testing under the 4.75 magnitude destroyed hopes for 
a possible agreement on the threshold concept. The Soviets wanted a 
moratorium for testing under 4.75, while the United States wanted only 
a set moratorium period with an agreement to conduct joint research on 
underground test detection technology. (250) The Soviet downing of a 
U.S. UвҖ“2 reconnaissance plane over the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960, 
together with disagreement over the moratorium and U.S. frustrations 
over the Soviet refusal to consider seriously any type of controls, once 
again prevented any break-Вӯthrough on the nuclear testing issue at the 
Geneva negotiations. (253)
A fresh start seemed possible at the Ten-Nation Disarmament ConВӯ
ference on March 15, 1960. President Eisenhower hoped to persuade 
the Allies to focus on larger disarmament issuesвҖ”Вӯnamely, a suspension 
in the production of fissionable materials. (244) Here too a stalemate 
resulted. Ambassador Eaton, Chairman of the U.S. delegation, reported 
that the Western position at the conference was increasingly weakened 
by Allied interest in obtaining a disarmament accord at any cost. Eaton 
recommended revising the U.S. plan to appease allies, especially France, 
which were worried that U.S. intransigence would ruin any hope of an 
agreement. All such proposals proved futile, however, when the Soviets 
walked out of the conference on June 27, 1960. (256)
Meanwhile, the United States began to develop a new approach 
to disarmament negotiations. Preliminary talks began on a cooperaВӯ
tive research program with the British and Soviets that was designed 
to improve the ability to detect underground nuclear explosions. To 
improve trust and cooperation in the program, all the nuclear devices 
to be used for the testing research would be inspected by all three counВӯ
tries to confirm that they would only be used for peaceful purposes. 
In case the Soviets refused the joint research project, the Eisenhower 
administration also proposed a fallback plan whereby the United States 
would open up its nuclear devices to the United Nations for inspection 
before beginning unilateral research testing. This time the administraВӯ
tionвҖҷs plans faced obstacles, not just from the Soviets, but also from an 
election year Congress that did not like the idea of unilaterally showing 
U.S. devices to the Soviets for nothing in return. (259)
