1436 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 836. Letter 60 from Johnson to Clough1 Letter No. 60 Geneva, October 9, 1957 Dear Ralph: As stated in my summary telegram, there was nothing new at this morning’s meeting. He obviously had no new instructions, his perform­ ance was almost listless, and his replies entirely perfunctory. As you will also note he cut the meeting off short. I feel that given the situation I made out very well today and that his position on the correspondents was very weak. I think that they full well realized this and that they do not have much of a public issue unless and until Chinese correspond­ ents apply for visas and are refused. I am surprised that this has not been done up until now but perhaps they did not have their “ducks lined up” and think that it is very likely that they will do so before the next meeting. It of course depends on what their principal objective is. They can hardly expect to be successful in making us formally and pub­ licly retract the “reciprocity” issue. They have not been successful in rousing our own press to the fray. The press elsewhere seems to have a marked lack of interest in the whole subject now. However, if we were to turn down an application from one of their correspondents they would probably be successful in again arousing interest in the subject both in our own press and abroad. One can only speculate as to whether they really desire to have any American correspondents enter their country. If they do not, the present impasse may not be unwelcome to them and they might let it continue rather than take the risk of it being broken by our issuing visas to one or more of their correspondents. Nevertheless, in connection with the possibility of some Chinese correspondents entering the United States I think that we should be prepared for the possibility of their attempting to contact some of the Chinese students, particularly those for whom they have names and addresses, and for the difficulties that may well ensue. Given past atti­ tudes of the students I think that we can depend on most of them being unwilling to see correspondents, particularly one from Communist China, and of their attempting to use this as proof that we are “terroriz­ ing” the students. If they do see any, I think that we can depend on the students taking at the best an ambivalent attitude on their reasons for not returning. I do not have any suggestions at the moment for meet­ ing this problem but merely mention it as something we should think about. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Drafted by Johnson who signed the original “Alex.”
