854  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
2. OUTER SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Noted the President’s request that the Special Assistant to the 
President for Science and Technology, with the participation of the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of 
Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, and other interested depart­
ments and agencies, arrange for the preparation of a study, to be pre­
sented to a joint meeting of the National Security Council and the 
National Aeronautics and Space Council, appraising the relative capa­
bilities of the United States and the USSR in the field of outer space 
science and technology.
NOTE: The above action, as approved by the President as of 
October 26, 1959, transmitted to the Special Assistant to the President 
for Science and Technology, the Administrator, NASA, the Secretary 
of Defense, and the Director of Central Intelligence for appropriate 
implementation.
3. HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF LONG-­RANGE GUIDED 
MISSILES WEAPONS SYSTEMS
a. Noted the President’s request that the Secretary of Defense 
arrange for the preparation for the President during the next three 
months of a factual history of the development by the United States 
of long-­range guided missiles weapons systems (including ICBMs, 
IRBMs, fleet ballistic missiles, and aerodynamic long-­range missiles).
b. Noted the President‘s request that the Director of Central 
Intelligence arrange for the preparation for the President of a history of 
the development by the USSR of long-­range guided missiles weapons 
systems, complementary to the study referred to in a above.
NOTE: The action in a above, as approved by the President, sub­
sequently transmitted to the Secretary of Defense for appropriate 
implementation.
The action in b above, as approved by the President, subsequently 
transmitted to the Director of Central Intelligence for appropriate 
implementation.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.]
Marion W. Boggs
