730
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tiative will reinforce, and in turn be reinforced by other U.S. efforts
abroad.16
—My position is that I should chair the Working Group and NSC
should continue to participate fully as a key member as it has up to
now. This ensures coordination with ongoing foreign policy reviews.
Moreover, if NSC were made co-chairman, in the eyes of the public and
Congress this would not separate hunger from NSC’s major policy re-
sponsibilities such as weapons sales, nuclear proliferation, and rela-
tions with the Soviets and Chinese.17
Finally, I was designated the lead person in the White House on
this issue by you in an August Cabinet meeting.18 Changing this posi-
tion may create confusion in the private sector and Congress as to your
intention to crystallize public support for basic human needs using
world hunger as the rallying point.
Decision:
World Hunger Working Group chaired by Peter Bourne (as stated in at-
tached proposed presidential memorandum to heads of departments
and agencies)
World Hunger Working Group co-chaired by Peter Bourne and NSC
(NSC, State, and OMB support)19
16 Erb sent Brzezinski a memorandum on September 13 indicating that OMB also
agreed that the NSC should co-chair the Working Group. According to an attached Sep-
tember 15 note from Gates to Erb, Aaron had spoken to Bourne that morning concerning
the chairmanship; Gates noted that the chairmanship question had not been settled.
(Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box HE–6, Executive, 1/20/77–
9/29/77) In his September 15 memorandum to Brzezinski (see footnote 1 above), Erb reit-
erated the position that the NSC should chair the group.
17 A concluding typewritten sentence, “Stu Eizenstat concurs on this position” is
struck-through.
18 Presumable reference to the August 1 Cabinet meeting during which the Presi-
dent noted that Bourne had assumed responsibility for the administration’s drug, world
health, and hunger programs. He instructed Cabinet members to cooperate with Bourne,
as he “needs to rely on staff assistance from the Departments to carry out his assignments
from the President.” (Carter Library, Vertical File, Cabinet Meeting Minutes, 6/6/77–
9/26/77)
19 Although there is no indication that the President approved or disapproved these
options, he did sign two memoranda that established the World Hunger Working Group
chaired by Bourne and the Working Group on Food and Agricultural Policy chaired by
Bergland. See Document 230. The earlier version of Bourne’s memorandum did not con-
tain these two options.
