Peru 1111 bringing the International Petroleum Company’s La Brea y Pariñas concessions under the Petroleum Code.5 I said I felt IPC would be willing to give up certain privileges in order to adapt its operations to the Code.6 He said this solution would never be acceptable to the opposition. He stated Pedro BELTRAN had suggested this but it was not acceptable and such a move had no chance at all for approval. I asked why he was so certain of this. Sr. Ortiz de Zevallos said (IPC’s) La Brea y Pariñas concession terminated in 1972.7 On that date, “Talara (the Company’s refinery and installations) will belong to Peru.” The opposition realizes this and if a bill is presented “adapting” IPC to the Petroleum Code it would call for an extension of IPC’s concessions for an additional 20 or 30 years. He said “IPC does not have a friend in Congress, not one, therefore they are not going to be allowed to extend their concessions.” I then asked him whether Peru intended to operate its own oil industry. I said if IPC realized it was not going to obtain an extension of its concession rights then I could imagine the company would cease its investments, terminate its exploration and development operations, and that by 1972 the industry would be in such condition that it would be very difficult for the Government (if it failed to renew the concession before that date) to assume responsibility for operating the industry. I said if the Government did have to take over the industry one of the first necessary moves would be to increase the price of products—a step which would be most unpopular with the people. Sr. Ortiz de Zevallos said, “The company will have to keep the industry going during this time—why shouldn’t it, it has made so much money in the past and with its latest price increase, why shouldn’t it?” The President of the Chamber of Deputies spoke again and again about the unpopularity of IPC. He said the company had no friends anywhere in the country. He said not a Member of Congress or a Cabinet
