United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  97
ETA–38.	
Editorial Note
On July 11, 1960, during his news conference at Newport, Rhode 
Island, at which Secretary Herter was present, President Eisenhower 
commented on the basic ideas that would guide United States partic-
ipation in the forthcoming meetings of the Committee of 21 at Bogotá, 
Colombia. He announced, inter alia, that the United States was commit-
ted to cooperative action aimed at helping Latin American governments 
to achieve “soundly based” social and economic progress, accelerate the 
trend already evident toward greater respect for human rights and prin-
ciples of democratic government, and improve the opportunities of the 
bulk of the population in Latin America “to share in and contribute to 
an expanding national product.” For the full text of the President’s state-
ment, see Public Papers of the Presidents, Eisenhower, 1960–61, pp. 568–575.
ETA–39.	
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the Assistant 
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) 
and the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs 
(Mann)1

Washington, July 20, 1960.
I raised with the President yesterday the question of [illegible in the 
original] having made a definite commitment to Secretary Anderson 
that [illegible in the original] new funds would be asked for at the com-
ing session of Congress to implement his new proposals with respect 
to Latin American development. I pointed out that we were very dis-
turbed that such a firm commitment had been made since this would 
again open us up to the possible criticism that we had made a vague 
recommendation but had not followed it up with something specific.
The President assured me that no definite commitment had been made. 
He said that he had discussed with Secretary Anderson the [illegible 
in the original] of increasing the Development Loan Fund appropria-
tion, with specific [illegible in the original] for Latin America, as well 
as [illegible in the original] soft loan component of the Inter-American 
Bank. [illegible in the original] said that [illegible in the original] raise 
with Secretary Anderson that another [illegible in the original] should 
1 Source: Department of State, PPS Files, Lot 67 D 543, “American Republics 1960–
1961.” Secret. Drafted by Herter.
