total tonnage in 10,000 ton cruisers. I take it from all that was said
yesterday that we probably could not do it anyhow, and this would be a
perfectly safe agreement, at least the delegation at Geneva and the Navy
authorities here agree so, but they insist that if they build cruisers less than
10,000 tons they shall have the right to arm them with eight inch guns. Of
course this is a technical question on which I am not qualified to speak and
I am governed by the opinion of the Navy officials. However the fact that
we have 75,000 tons of these modern cruisers makes it safe for us to agree
on the percentage I have suggested. I think the Navy would be willing, if
we desired to build more than seventy percent of our total tonnage, to build
7,500 or 8,000 ton cruisers if they could arm them with eight inch guns.
Personally, I am under the impression that if we desire more cruisers we
could use some smaller cruisers at home bases, I mean by that in the
neighborhood of the United States and Hawaii, just as well as the British
Government would do, but I do not feel competent to decide this question
myself.
We sent a telegram yesterday authorizing them to agree that we would not
build over about seventy percent of our cruisers in 10,000 ton size before
the expiration of this treaty in 1936, but insisted on arming all our cruisers
except those we already had with eight inch guns. Of course, there is
absolutely nothing in Great Britain’s claim that the building of small
cruisers is an economy, because taking a certain tonnage, say 300,000 tons
of cruisers, of course it is more expensive to build small cruisers than large
cruisers and it is just the same with battleships if you wish to maintain the
same total tonnage. This economy program which Great Britain is putting
forward is without the slightest merit and is put forward in my judgment to
camouflage a demand for an enormous tonnage of cruisers.
The British delegation have been called home to consult the Cabinet. What
the result will be I cannot say, but I doubt very much whether Great Britain
will be willing to make any agreement which our Navy officials would be
willing to make and which we could get ratified by the Senate. I told the
British Ambassador yesterday that the American delegation had made great
concessions in raising the total tonnage of cruisers, that we did not believe
that the Japanese would even come up to this basis, that if the British
Government was trying to force the United States to build a major portion
