January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1349 Israel, he said, had its own worries, did not rely on others and tried to take care of its own security. It was naturally interested, however, in the strategic situation in the area. In recent times, there had been many signs of free world weakness. Israel was very satisfied, however, with U.S. efforts over the past months to strengthen the position of the free world in countries surrounding it. These efforts, Shamir said, obviously affected Israel’s security. (S) Together with Israel’s satisfaction with this effort, Shamir continued, concern had to be expressed that Israel with all its possibilities appeared to be omitted from U.S. planning. Israel knew its weaknesses and also its advantages. It had experience in the security field and a capable army. Its stability was assured by a democratic system. It was committed to free world values. With these possibilities, Israel could not understand why the U.S. was ignoring it. An additional element to be considered was that when people in the area, especially Egypt, saw that Israel was being ignored, this indicated to them that the special relationship was getting weaker. This, in turn, had an effect on the peace process. In other words, if the U.S. was building closer strategic cooperation with Egypt and Israel was not included, this meant to Egypt that Israel was not an ally of the U.S. and this perception harmed prospects for peace in the area. In short, Israel believed it was a mistake from the viewpoint of the free world to be omitted from U.S. strategic planning in the area. (S) The Secretary noted that Minister Shamir had raised two sets of issues; one concerning Israel and its Arab neighbors and the other concerning Southwest Asia and the Persian Gulf. These were related but not quite the same problem. Regarding Israel and its neighbors, success in the autonomy negotiations would be critical to the area in the long term, both for Israel and for the moderate Arab states. The U.S. recognized that a precondition to this success was Israel’s understanding of the U.S. commitment by others. This commitment was evidenced not only by a great deal of unnecessary repetition and reassurance, but also by U.S. actions. Since the 1973 war over $12 billion had been provided to Israel, more than half of it during the current administration. Israeli capabilities had expanded dramatically at the same time as the threat against them had been reduced. Egypt was at peace with Israel. Despite all the assistance the U.S. was providing and would provide to Egypt, its military capabilities had decreased over the past five years and would continue to decline as its Soviet equipment deteriorated. (S) In deciding on arms transfers to Israel’s neighbors, the Secretary continued, the U.S. consistently sought to assure that these transfers would not have a damaging affect to Israel’s military superiority. That was an important criterion. It was applied when the U.S. considered provision of F–15’s to Saudi Arabia and also when the U.S. provided
