1070 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement government” and believes that the time is ripe for far-­reaching measures, that enough men in his Cabinet and in the ruling group in Peru share his view to make them practicable, and that they need not be of a nature to arouse excessive opposition from the wealthy. (I hope he is right and believe the outcome of his attempt will have profound consequences for Peru’s future.) He believes that the slums of Lima, Arequipa and a few other cities and the over-­populated Cuzco-Puno-Arequipa area in the South are the danger areas. (So do I.) As stated in his radio broadcast on assuming office,9 he gives top priority to housing, roads and land reform. Housing He believes that housing has the greatest single appeal for the urban and many of the rural underprivileged. He opposes government financing and construction and is insistent on private enterprise and private financing through the building and loan association method. His recently established association in Lima has reached a capital of 5 million soles. He intends to push wealthy Peruvians to increase this to 15 million soles very shortly and then to apply to the DLF for a loan (amount as yet undetermined although $4 million has been mentioned) to be invested in the association on a sol for sol basis. He then plans to establish similar associations in Arequipa, Puno, Cuzco and other cities. He believes that once these associations begin making loans, the inflow of savings from small depositors will be enormous. The building trades should also boom. Roads and Land Reform He considers these inter-­related in that much of the land to be provided those seeking it must be in newly developed areas. Road improvement will also stimulate increased production and better land utilization. He believes the opening of new lands in the jungle more economic than further irrigation on the coast. Assuming that the IBRD and DLF loans for the Aguaytía-Pucallpa road will shortly be approved, he gives top priority to penetration roads in the South. I urged that priority be given to the Bagua-Yurimaguas road in the North on the grounds that it would open up the best land, that engineering studies for it had been completed, and that the quality of the land would attract the Indians even from the far South. He granted the first two and thought the Yurimaguas area of great importance for the future but did not believe that the Southern Indians would 9 The Embassy informed the Department of State of Prime Minister Beltrán’s address of July 22 in telegram 67 from Lima, July 23. (823.10/7–2359)
