506
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
170.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Hungarian Wheat Sales to the USSR
The Department of State has implemented the approved recom-
mendation of the SCC meeting of March 20, 1980, by calling in Hungar-
ian Ambassador Esztergalyos on March 28 and informing him as
follows:2
—We attach importance to the limitations we have placed on sales
of both grain and high technology to the USSR. We have explained to
your government and to many others that diversion of such items to
the USSR would be viewed most unfavorably by us.
—On high technology exports, we have purposely continued sales
to Eastern European countries because we have wanted to recognize
their special needs and their noninvolvement in the invasion of
Afghanistan.
—On grain, we understand that the Soviet Union has asked to buy
an abnormally large amount of grain from Hungary this year, up to
several hundred thousand tons above the shipments in the most recent
years. We believe shipments of this magnitude would be somewhat
excessive. They would be viewed unfavorably by the US and taken
into account in our own future sales of grain to Hungary because such
Hungarian shipments would undercut our policy of reducing the total
of our grain shipments to the Soviet Union.
In addition, we have instructed our embassies in Canberra and
Ottawa and our mission in Brussels to inform host governments and
the Commission of our approach to the Hungarians on grain exports
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 111,
SCC 293, 3/25/80 Iran/Afghanistan. Confidential. Deal forwarded the memorandum
to Aaron on April 2, informing Brzezinski that the Department had not included hard
numbers in the discussion with the Hungarians to protect the Hungarian source who
had provided the information to the USDA. (Ibid.)
2 In telegram 83534 to Budapest, March 29, the Department informed the Embassy
of the discussion between Barry and the Hungarian Ambassador the day before. The
points outlined in the March 29 memorandum to Brzezinski were delivered to Ambassa-
dor Esztergalyos as a non-paper. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800158–0779) In telegram 1732 from Budapest, the Embassy suggested that the
Hungarians “definitely have the message and understand our position” but that “from
our viewpoint, we believe that we should not continue to hit the Hungarians on wheat
diversion until we have more evidence that we should be concerned.” (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800168–0763)
