1955  87
announcement that they were killed. Of course, nothing has been 
said about this to the next of kin or anyone else outside of a very 
restricted group.
We are awaiting your reply to our 466 of last night regarding the 
formula for parallel unilateral declarations. Your report giving the 
detailed account of the fifth meeting on Thursday has just come in and 
I have not had a chance to digest it yet. Since the pouch is closing, this 
letter cannot wait.
Your 418 on Wang’s general negotiating attitude is of special inter­
est. I believe there is a tendency here to read less significance into his 
conciliatory approach than you may be inclined to do from there. The 
semblance of reasonableness and willingness to go part way may be 
recognizable, but when his draft agreement is taken apart there is really 
nothing in the way of tangible concession at all. There is as yet no assur­
ance that the Chinese Communist position on the Americans is any dif­
ferent from what it was last year. Undoubtedly they would be willing 
to release the Americans in return for the sort of broad representation 
arrangement which they are seeking. But a concession on this from us 
is not to be expected. In the absence of a complete yielding by us on the 
representation issue, can any substantial “give” by the Communists on 
the detained Americans really be expected? Maybe so, but there is as 
yet nothing we can rely on.
There is something of a feeling here that you do not need to show a 
great measure of tolerance of Wang’s proposals when their terms reflect 
no assured advance.
The Secretary does not like the idea of a formal agreement with the 
Chinese Communists. He feels definitely that parallel unilateral decla­
rations are preferable, as indicated in our 466.
We are well aware of the tough row you have to hoe. The questions 
coming up now are in a different sense more trying than the relatively 
superficial press problem you had to wrestle with the first week.
We are naturally troubled as you are by the dilemma we may soon 
be faced with if we have an opportunity to spring only part of our peo­
ple in return for a limited representation arrangement.
Enclosed is the transcript of the Secretary’s August 10 press 
conference.
Good wishes,
Sincerely,
Walter P. McConaughy
Director for Chinese Affairs
Enclosure:
Transcript of Secretary’s press conference of August 10, 1955.
