International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1013
ternational and domestic support, for instance, from Lions Clubs. By
re-programming existing budgeted funds, this program could be im-
plemented immediately. An enhanced and expanded plan could be
prepared for next year’s budget cycle.
DECISION:
(b) Rural Water Supply—It is estimated that by making clean
drinking water readily available to all people in the world, 50 million
lives a year would be saved. The World Health Organization has set
this as a priority, and 1980 is the beginning of the U.N. “Decade of
Water”.7 Following the two U.N. Conferences this year on Water and
Desertification8 an interagency coordinating committee chaired by the
State Department has been established to develop overall U.S. policy
on global water supply.9 While less dramatic than some other initia-
tives, strong clear support by you of the goal of clean drinking water for
people everywhere would, in the long run, probably have the most sig-
nificant lasting impact on world health of anything you could do. Initi-
ating programs that make clean drinking water available also will sig-
nificantly affect, for the better, the role of women in the developing
world, who spend major parts of their lives drawing and carrying
water from distant sources. While the potential level of expenditure for
this purpose is almost unlimited, a major start can be made now
without new funds, and careful consideration can be given to ex-
panding our programs in this area in next year’s budget.
DECISION:
(c) International Health Service Corps—There is a great deal of in-
terest in the possibility of establishing a health oriented volunteer pro-
gram that would use American volunteers at all levels of health exper-
tise. Such a program, which would clearly be identified as your
concept, would be formed building on the Peace Corps in ACTION and
the National Health Service Corps in the Health Services Administra-
tion in DHEW.
ACTION currently has over 1,000 health volunteers in such serv-
ice. This number could be expanded and the proportion of health pro-
fessionals among them increased. ACTION should continue to increase
its efforts in health programming in order to ensure effective assign-
ment and performance of these volunteers.
7 See Document 332.
8 The UN Water Conference took place in Mar del Plata, Argentina, March 14–25,
1977; see Document 278. The UN Conference on Desertification took place in Nairobi,
Kenya, August 29–September 9, 1977. See Report of the United Nations Water Conference (E/
CONF. 70/29) and Report of the United Nations Conference on Desertification (A/CONF. 74/
36).
9 See Document 296.
