828 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement would also like ask whether Wang’s correspondence with him indi­ cated whether Tan communicated with Indian Embassy and if not, why not, if he felt he being obstructed in leaving? 57. Wang said it was stated clearly in list that Tan had applied with INS. From statement in his letters, could be seen that Tan made repeated applications and had not given up hope. He first indicated that he expected permission would be granted by end last year, but wrote again he expected permission in February and then his depar­ ture further delayed by two months. Although he still hopeful that he will one day be granted permission to return, he has been delayed so long. This is situation, so far as they knew, regarding Tan to which their attention has been called. It precisely because they cannot understand nature obstruction against his return that Wang has requested me make inquiry. 58. I said I was trying to get some facts on this, these statements that he gave me here were utterly inexplicable. He does not need apply to anybody for return, I had said that over and over again, neither he nor any other alien in U.S. Wang did not have to accept my word on that. Indian Embassy or anyone familiar with U.S. could confirm it. 59. Wang said this was not individual case of Tan. Tan was only one example. I had requested facts about Tan. If I required any facts about Americans in China then they had these facts. But Tan was now in U.S. and how could they give me facts about his being obstructed? 60. Wang said I had stated that it not necessary for Tan apply INS, however as he had told me Tan precisely refused permission by INS. If I myself unaware this situation, how could I expect him to understand it. 61. I said U.S. INS does not deny or grant permission any alien leave U.S. He was one who was alleging this not correct and that Tan being obstructed. I was asking for some facts—he evidently had close communication with Tan—on how he being obstructed. Statements made here made no sense whatsoever in light of what everybody knows about departure aliens from U.S. This was similar to allegations made in many these other cases. 62. I said I could not consider it as slightest evidence U.S. was obstructing departure any of these. Because I knew facts quite to con­ trary. I also asked why, if Tan did think he being obstructed, he had not communicated with Indian Embassy in accordance with procedures we had established. If he communicated with Wang and Wang’s author­ ities, it clear he able freely communicate with Indian Embassy if he desired do so. 63. Wang said he wanted clarify that Tan’s correspondence was between him and family and not between him and Wang’s authorities. It because they did not know actual facts about his being obstructed
