134
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Iran as a crisis point was predicted; we were too optimistic about the
Caribbean; and Southeast Asia has been more volatile than anticipated.
In East Asia, our normalization with the PRC faces the USSR for the
first time ever with a China-Japan-U.S. tie of good relations.
4. In Europe, PRM–10 emphasized the certainty of political uncer-
tainty in both Eastern and Western Europe. That judgment remains
valid. The emergence of a more traditional German Ostpolitik, exploited
by Moscow in the traditional manner, signals growing difficulties in
West-West relations, i.e., within the Alliance. The Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan has given unambiguous evidence of the strategic interac-
tion between the Persian Gulf region and European-Soviet relations:
Soviet power projection that affects the oil states of the Persian Gulf
tends to reinforce the accommodationist politicizing forces in Western
Europe and thereby exacerbates U.S.-European relations vis-a-vis Mos-
cow and the Persian Gulf.
The Transition from Era I to Era II in East-West Relations
Critics within the U.S. and abroad have complained that the U.S.
has not pursued a steady or consistent course in U.S.-Soviet affairs.
The President, in particular, is believed by many to be responsible for
this. It is, in their view, all his fault.
To some extent, the apparent inconsistency is real. Soviet power
projection has been used more extensively in the last few years than
even informed policy and intelligence circles believed it would be.
“Changing” U.S. policy, therefore, has been “catching up” U.S. policy.
Consistent policy outputs are impossible when the inputs differ sub-
stantially from those anticipated.
To a larger extent the inconsistency is only apparent. It looks that
way because the foreign policy and press elites themselves are split
on fundamental assumptions about U.S. foreign policy. They are awak-
ening to and becoming disturbed by the transition from the first era
in East-West relations—1945 to the mid-1970s (U.S. dominance and
Pax Americana)—to the second era—the 1980s and 1990s (the nature
of which is still being defined, as Soviet military power makes itself
felt). But they are reacting to this awakening in quite different ways.
At least three fissures divide foreign policy and media elite views, and
perhaps even the broader public, as they assess the incipient realities
of Era II.
First, there are fundamental differences over the political utility of
military force. At the strategic nuclear level, some believe “assured
destruction” is enough. Others believe force balances and capabilities
make a political and diplomatic difference. At the conventional level,
some argue that our Vietnam experience shows that conventional mili-
tary power is greatly overrated. Others say that Vietnam proves the
