1110
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
331.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple
Diplomatic and Consular Posts1
Washington, January 22, 1980, 1349Z
18499. Subject: Population in the International Development
Strategy.
1. The USG is concerned that discussions and documents re-
garding the preparation of a new International Development Strategy
(IDS) for the Third UN Development Decade2 have to date virtually ig-
nored the issue of population growth. This is of concern given broad in-
ternational understanding that excessive population growth is a
problem which affects every aspect of development, including nutri-
tion, health, environment, natural resources, urbanization, unemploy-
ment, and political and social stability. As this will be the basic devel-
opment strategy document for the 1980’s we believe an appropriate
statement on the role of population policies would provide significant
reinforcement to national leaders in initiating or upgrading population
policies and programs.
2. An international consensus exists that population issues are an
inseparable part of the overall problem of development. As stated by
World Bank President McNamara at the World Bank Annual Meeting
in Belgrade in September,3 excessive population growth is the greatest
single obstacle to the economic and social advancement of most of the
societies in the developing world. Approximately 65 different nations,
representing well over 90 percent of the population of the developing
world, currently have some form of policies and programs aimed at
limiting population growth and/or promoting family planning, al-
though the effectiveness of such programs varies considerably.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800038–0838.
Limited Official Use. Drafted by Sergeant and Theodore Nelson; cleared by Benedick,
Reimer, McNutt, Graham, Jorgenson, Cornelia Bryant, Herz, Van Dusen, IO/IEP, and
Ruth Goldberg; approved by Edgar. Sent to USUN, Accra, Addis Ababa, Algiers, Ankara,
Bangkok, Beijing, Bogota, Brasilia, Buenos Aires, Cairo, Caracas, Colombo, Dacca, Dakar,
Dar es Salaam, Jakarta, Kathmandu, Khartoum, Kigali, Kinshasa, Kuala Lumpur, Lagos,
Lima, Manila, Mexico City, Nairobi, New Delhi, Rabat, Rangoon, Santiago, San Salvador,
Singapore, Seoul, Tunis, and USINT Havana. Sent for information to the U.S. Mission in
Geneva. The Department repeated the telegram to the same addressees and sent it for in-
formation to all OECD capitals on February 2. (Ibid.) In telegram 56269 to multiple diplo-
matic and consular posts, March 1, the Department explained that telegram 18499 had
been repeated to all OECD posts for information, as the original telegram had been sent
to a “selected list of third world countries,” and requested that the OECD addressee posts
provide the same information requested in telegram 18499. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800106–1033)
2 See footnote 3, Document 328.
3 See footnote 8, Document 328.
