723.2515/1679: Telegram [Document 246] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State [Paraphrase] SANTIAGO, November 12, 1925—3 p.m. [Received November 13—9:50 a.m.] 118. Department’s No. 72, November 11, 11 a.m. I informed the Chilean Foreign Office of Peruvian complaints made to me, and the Ministry sent the Counselor to see me. He volunteered following information: Few of those maintained by the Government are from Tacna, and these will all be repatriated at expense of Government before date of plebiscite if they desire to be. Greater part of those brought here from Tarapacá were brought because of Government’s desire to protect them from popular violence arising from suspicion that Peruvians had promoted disorders. All are maintained at Government expense. Minister of Foreign Affairs was not aware of this until Peruvians made complaints. He says this was stupid use of funds and states that police and administrative authorities were permitted to do it because no other funds were available. All who wished would be sent back; but it was believed that, being well cared for, they will prefer to stay here. Conclusion of Counselor’s statement.

This version of Chilean Government’s action has since been confirmed by Minister for Foreign Affairs, who expresses willingness to have Government of the United States make inquiries, and asserts his desire to give information on any complaint that may be brought to his attention. Since first call at the Embassy, Peruvians have come here daily to say that they were not molested by neighbors in the north and needed no protection from them; that they are remaining here involuntarily; but that since first complaint was made to me they have been required to sign statements to contrary and upon refusal have been threatened with repatriation, but without indemnification or the opportunity to earn a living. These cases I have not discussed with the Foreign Office. Writer of first complaint to me said that he addressed me because numerous letters to Plebiscitary Commission had apparently been intercepted. I am convinced that practically all of these deportations were unjustified and are related to the plebiscite, and that charges of communistic activity are pretexts. …
