United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  45
the International Bank, or private capital. He agreed that the institution 
should not have the right to additional appropriations every year, and 
that the matter should be discussed with the interested Congressional 
committees.
Mr. Hooker suggested that the DLF could cooperate with the 
Inter-American institution, which could prepare soft loan projects 
for DLF consideration, but without itself making soft loans. He also 
wondered whether the Latin American delegates to the OAS Special 
Committee were the appropriate people to make decisions about the 
Inter-American Banking Institution.
The Chairman said that the main point was that the Inter-American 
Banking Institution should be regarded as a financial organization, and 
that the Latin Americans must realize that the institution would run out 
of funds unless the Latin Americans contribute more than the United 
States. If it depended only on United States contributions it would not 
be a financial institution even though it would be so regarded.
With respect to the meeting of the OAS Special Committee, the 
Secretary of the Council commented that there were still some appar-
ent differences of opinion among the Latin Americans about the nature 
of the institution. He also noted that the OAS document on financing 
Latin American economic development had been produced by its sec-
retariat, and that the attitudes of the Latin Americans toward it were 
not known.
Mr. Mann asked the advice of the Council with respect to tactics 
on the drafting group which had been set up by the Special Committee. 
The Chairman said that it was not possible to make an immediate deci-
sion on all the issues in the institution and that the best course appeared 
to be to tell the Latin Americans that we would try to produce an out-
line of the new institution by the first of the year, and that this would 
require bilateral consultation with individual countries and consulta-
tions with Congressional committees.
[Here follows discussion of agenda items 2 and 3: “International 
Monetary Fund and International Bank” and “Other Business.”]
