723.2515/1585: Telegram
[Document 216]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, August 14, 1925—6 p.m.
For Pershing: Your telegram, August 14, 11 a.m. The Department is greatly disturbed
by the conditions you report.
1. Although without opportunity for careful investigation, I am inclined to the
opinion that the decrees which you say make a free and fair election
impossible violate the decision of the Arbitrator within his authority under
the treaty and seem unnecessarily to restrict travel. Plebiscitary Commission
is given generally complete control over the plebiscite and, as found by the
Arbitrator, that power is sufficient to guarantee full protection to every
qualified voter.
2. In regard to your second and third propositions, the original award and
supplemental ruling of the Arbitrator on Peru’s petition held that the territory
was to remain in Chile’s possession, that question of evacuation of the
territory and the substitution of American authority and forces was not within
the scope of Arbitrator’s authority, but that this was without prejudice of
Commission’s power to guarantee full assurance of personal protection and a
free ballot to every voter. Provision is made in the award that it may be
implied that exercise of Chile’s legislative, executive, and judicial power
should not go to extent of frustrating provisions of the award. I incline to
opinion that it is within power of the Plebiscitary Commission to decide
whether any act of Chile’s administration of Tacna and Arica would obstruct
fair and free vote, for Chile’s administration must not be inconsistent with the
Arbitrator’s award.
3. I take it that the Plebiscitary Commission will consider these questions. Do
you wish me to take any action before matter is decided by Commission and
it comes to Arbitrator for decision on an appeal if one is made, or do you
wish me to make informal representations to the Government of Chile in
endeavor to support your representations to Chilean Commissioner?
4. I should be pleased to have opinion of Mr. Dennis50 on these questions.
