924 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI EURATOM countries, and to bring about a radical increase in the effectiveness of IAEA safeguards. C. U.S. support for candidacy of Jeniken (Canada) to replace retiring Deputy Director General for safeguards Romech. (Text of Non-Paper is given para 4 below.) 2. Turning to separate issue, Morokhov urged that U.S. and USSR exchange views and act jointly to ensure the adoption as a guideline by the next meeting of nuclear exporters of the principle of full-scope safeguards in recipient States. (Text of Morokhov’s remarks on full-scope safeguards to be supplied). 3. Action requested: Instructions regarding reply, if any, that should be given to Soviets here. 4. Following is text of Soviet Non-Paper given Feb 3: Begin text: We should like, first of all, to note with satisfaction that the meeting we held last December at which we discussed a wide range of questions related to the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to the activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency in the implementation of non-proliferation safeguards was most useful. That meeting showed that our countries act essentially in an agreed manner on questions of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, including issues pertaining to practical implementation of IAEA safeguards. The time elapsed since that meeting has shown that our Missions in Vienna have begun to cooperate more, and they have been able to influence the leadership of the Secretariat of IAEA in the proper direction. As a result of joint efforts, it has become possible to ensure that the leadership of the IAEA at present is taking what is, on the whole, a correct position. At the same time, despite the work which has been done, we have not succeeded in solving one of the principal issues of IAEA safeguard activities, namely, the issue of application of IAEA safeguards to the nuclear activities of the Non-Nuclear Member States of EURATOM. As you recall, one of the questions that we discussed was the question of application of IAEA safeguards to light water power reactors in the EURATOM countries. At that time we agreed on joint measures to properly influence resolution of this question. The Soviet Union in particular supported the US compromise proposal for carrying out inspections of this type of facility four times a year. The Delegation of EURATOM which recently held talks with the IAEA secretariat on this subject has, in principle, accepted this compromise proposal. However, according to the information available to the IAEA secretariat, some EURATOM countries, above all the FRG, are attempting to revise that agreement. It is expected that the council of ministers of the European Community will make a final decision on this question at its meeting February 7. Under these circumstances it is urgently necessary, in our
