3. In the hope that the American Government may contribute to
finding a solution for the problems of the reduction and limitation
of armaments the President has sent a full representation with
instructions to join in the work of the Preparatory Commission.
He has impressed upon his representatives his deep interest in any
sincere effort to deal with the problems of armament and his
confident belief that with mutual good will substantial progress
can be made. It will be a matter of gratification to him if the
American representation can in some measure contribute to this
progress.
4. The questions which will come before the Preliminary
Commission require patient study in order to establish the
principles which offer the most effective method of approach to
the reduction and limitation of armaments. It is hoped, therefore,
that there may be a general disposition to devote to the problems
before us the earnest and continuous attention of the Preparatory
Commission and its committees constituted for the study of
special subjects.
5. This is not the time to indicate in detail the views of the
American Government on the specific questions which may come
before the Preparatory Commission. It may, however, be of
interest to state in a general way the attitude of the American
Government on certain outstanding questions.
6. The conditions prevailing in different regions of the world are
so varied, and so many divergent factors are involved, that
constructive achievement in the matter of the limitation of land
armament appears to lie in the conclusion of regional agreements
rather than in an effort to work out a general plan for limitation
applicable to the whole world. As regards land armament the
United States occupies a fortunate situation. We have, since 1918,
been able to reduce our land forces from more than four million
men under arms at the end of the World War to a present actual
strength of 118,000—or one soldier per thousand inhabitants. It
will thus be seen that so far as land armament is concerned we
