723.2515/1686: Telegram [Document 249] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State [Paraphrase] ARICA, November 22, 1925—8 p.m. [Received November 23—11:25 a.m.] From Pershing: Yesterday morning before meeting of the Commission, Mr. Edwards sent me letter in which he stated that he had communicated agenda that day to his Government and had received instructions to state that hereafter Chile will abstain from participating in any meetings of Commission, or of its subsidiary agencies, unless directly and closely concerned with registration and election regulations and with providing for fixed dates for the registration and voting, which in judgment of Chilean Government constitutes fundamental precept of award and primary duty of Commission itself. He further stated that the Chileans have plain instructions to ignore each and every one of the decisions of the Plebiscitary Commission, or its subsidiary agencies, which may require their cooperation until the registration and election regulations shall have been enacted and the dates for registration and the holding of the plebiscite shall have been fixed. Edwards’ action is in accord with Chilean contention that plebiscite does not start to run until registration of voters begins. His opinion and mine on the matter have already been expressed. Position taken is entirely inconsistent with situation regarding law and order in province which Chileans have been urgently requested to establish on basis that would guarantee equality to both contestants. Chileans hold that somehow enactment of election regulations would transform state of fear and terror existing in minds of opposing electorate into feeling of assurance. Most of these have been violently driven from territory; before they can safely return to vote, confidence must be restored in sincerity of Government of Chile to afford them protection, and this seems improbable when we consider fact that policy of terrorism is continuing. It is my positive opinion that as long as offenses are committed against entire opposing electorate, as long as no security of life and property exists, as long as Chilean idea prevails that plebiscite must if necessary be won by force, and as long as Chilean Government remains unwilling to put an end to these conditions, then just so long will it be necessary to defer any attempt to conduct fair registration or to hold honest election.
