1980  813
	
Attachment
	
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner 
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs 
(Brzezinski)3
Washington, May 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Crisis Management
1. During the long meeting of the NSC the night the rescue mission 
aborted, vital communication with the Pentagon, State and CIA was 
carried out by Harold Brown and Cy Vance using the President’s secure 
telephone in the Oval Office and through Bob Gates passing informa-
tion to me that he had received via the secure telephone in your office. 
I think you will agree that at a time when we were so dependent on 
real time information from the Pentagon, CIA and NSA, these arrange-
ments did not serve us well. They were neither efficient nor, as it turned 
out, particularly accurate.
2. I know that you have had Bill Odom working to improve White 
House crisis management procedures, particularly with respect to 
nuclear conflict and other large scale operations. Nevertheless, in keep-
ing with our conversation the week of the rescue attempt, I believe sev-
eral inexpensive, easy to implement changes can be made to improve 
substantially communications to and from the SCC and the NSC during 
crises of a lower order of magnitude—­such as the rescue attempt. These 
might include:
—Installing a secure voice conference call capability in the Situa-
tion Room conference room. This would enable all of us to receive infor-
mation directly and simultaneously from the NMCC, CIA and NSA, 
thus saving time and improving the accuracy of information received.
—Providing for permanent direct secure voice channels from the 
Situation Room to the NMCC, the CIA Operations Center, and the State 
Department Operations Center. These would be helpful at any time, 
but I think you will agree could prove especially useful during a crisis 
situation. This would also leave available two or three or more regular 
secure voice channels for principals or staff to use.
—Installation of another direct link between NSA and the Situ-
ation Room. The existing link is used for the transmission of routine 
NSA traffic. A second channel could be used for passage of information 
in extremely close hold situations (such as the rescue), bypassing staff 
3 Secret. Brzezinski wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “WO. 
Reaction? It think it’s worthwhile. ZB. 5–7–80.”
