536  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
had a long conversation with Foreign Minister Tobar, Minister of 
Economy Intriago, Minister of Public Works Duran, Minister of Treasury 
Cordovez, Manager of the Central Bank Perez Chiriboga, Ambassador 
[illegible in the original] Ponce Enriquez and Under Secretary of State 
Espinosa. The principal topic of conversation at this meeting was the 
recent Ecuadoran decree law requiring certain imports into Ecuador to 
be transported on Ecuadoran or Grancolombiana vessels.3
Having received forceful indications of the seriousness with which 
the United States views the new shipping measure, Foreign Minister 
Tobar opened the meeting with a discussion of the decree and claimed 
that it is not discriminatory at all. He pointed out that the Ponce 
Government has been trying for a year and a half to eliminate the con-
sular fee differential, that the Flota Grancolombiana is actually an organ 
of the Colombian and Ecuadoran Governments, and that the Ecuadoran 
Government feels obligated to do all in its power to foster the growth of 
the Grancolombiana. He said that all countries try to protect their mer-
chant fleets and that many of them go much further than Ecuador in this 
respect. He mentioned particularly the Chilean Law calling for 50% of 
all cargo entering and leaving Chile to be transported in Chilean ves-
sels. He said that Ecuador must support Colombia and that Colombia 
exerted so much pressure after the consular fee differential was reduced 
to 1%4 that Ecuador felt it must take some positing acting to help the 
Grancolombiana. He pointed out that exceptions can be made to the pro-
visions of the new decree and then called on the Minister of Economy to 
continue the discussion.
The Minister of Economy reiterated the same arguments and went 
back over the history of Ecuadoran legislation on shipped preferences. 
He said that the new decree could not possibly affect more than 18% 
or 20% of all incoming cargo (and perhaps no more than 12%), and 
that the effect on United States shipping lines would therefore be very 
small. He referred to the preferential treatment given by Colombia to 
its merchant vessels including, he said, the privilege of paying in pesos 
and exemption from stamp taxes. He referred also to the United States 
laws in support of its merchant marine, stating that the United States 
has given a series of concessions to its ships including financial aid, 
loans, and subsidies. He said it would be unthinkable that a sovereign 
3 Reference is to the Ecuadoran shipping decree published in the Registro Official, 
April 23, 1958; a copy with English translation was sent to the Department of State under 
cover of despatch 711 from Quito, April 30, 1958. (922.753/4–3058)
4 Reference is to the special rate of consular duties that the Ecuadoran Government 
had conceded to those importers who transported their merchandise in Ecuadoran or 
Flota Grancolombiana ships. Effective January 1, 1958, Ecuador reduced the consular fee 
differential from 2½ to 1 percent.
