second and third of these alternatives appeal to me as offering possibly a
hope of such a solution as will avoid entailing new, grave developments.
Unquestionably the second if it were feasible would be the best, but I
consider it a very long shot. Whether other powers, Japan and Great Britain
particularly, would be willing to continue the Conference under conditions
involving the great practical difficulties obviously to be encountered in
negotiations with a representation which is so heterogeneous and doubtless
fluctuating as that of the Chinese, is doubtful. And whether the
administration at Peking would have any enthusiasm is rather more
doubtful, since of necessity it would be given by this plan only part of
whatever free money resulted from the surtaxes. And whether the Southern
group would consent to send representatives to negotiate for what they have
a disposition to claim as of right is extremely doubtful, for they are elated
now by their having conquered at least half of China and are now confirmed
in the rather arrogant attitude they have taken toward treaty powers and
their rights. Therefore the feasibility of this project is in question. Yet it
offers some chance for us to be able, in a manner fair to China as a whole,
to set ourselves free of our obligations. Even were it to fail we would be left
in the position that we went more than half way in endeavoring to discharge
the obligations we have and to satisfy the reasonable demands made by
Chinese national feeling. Certain theoretical attractions inhere in the fourth
project, but I am not able to believe that, considering the temper of the
Chinese at present, it would be effective in alleviating that sense of
grievance against the treaty powers which the Chinese are nursing.
Especially since it would follow the success of the Canton regime in
ignoring treaties by imposing illegal surtaxes and the riposte of Peking in
tearing up the Belgian treaty, I am afraid that it would only intoxicate the
Chinese further with a sense of triumph, with the result that their zeal for
the ousting of foreigners out of China altogether would be diverted merely
to other questions. For the Department’s consideration I suggest the
question whether action by us on this project might also not affect our
relations with the Japanese most seriously and, in a lesser degree, possibly
our relations with the British, in view of the creation by it of
embarrassments of a kind more vital by far to their commercial interests
than they would be to ours.
