454 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 11% growth in two years, the U.S. has had between 9 and 10%. EC growth is less than one-half of these. I can’t develop a direct numerical relationship between instability of exchange rates and rates of growth, but I believe there is some. The structure of EC trade is that one-half of our trade is within the Community. If stable exchange rates eliminate one-half of the instability, that will improve prospects for one-half of our trade. Much thought has been given as to how such stability would be achieved. We have agreed to adopt within the EC the type of mechanism which operated worldwide in the 60’s, i.e. to achieve stability of exchange rates tied to intervention and a credit facility operating in a short-term and medium-term. There will be other mechanisms to correct the problems of differential rates of growth. In the new scheme there would be an estimated 20% of currency reserves available, which would equal roughly $20 billion of reserves. The same amount would be paid in the national currencies of European countries and would thus be a total of $40 billion in reserves. This is a very large sum, but compared to the Eurodollar market it is not unduly large. We will be issued under conditions similar to that of SDR’s, i.e. against the opening of credits resulting from currency deposits. I should say, of course, that Mr. Callaghan’s government has expressed a certain measure of reservation. The results would be stable exchange rates offering the possibility of adjustment by permitting changes in parities, with agreement by participants. This would be done infrequently, as a result of substantial changes in commercial and trade relations. We would coordinate with the U.S., Japan and other countries so that among the dollar, the yen and other currencies there would be coordinated intervention on exchange markets. All European currencies would move in parallel vis-a-vis the dollar, the yen and other currencies. Coordinated intervention by central banks would be used for this. Within the EC we would then have relatively stable exchange rates which would stabilize one-half of our foreign trade and a grouped float vis-a-vis other currencies. One-half of the trade would therefore be with countries participating in this grouped float. As a result, the rate of exchange of the ECU would be lower than the deutschemark and higher than that of weaker currencies of the system. This then would be an indirect way of acting on the economic policies of some countries. The FRG would stimulate more strongly because its currency would be weighted down by others. Other countries with exchange rates which are higher than at present would be more stable. I informed President Carter of our thinking of this as did Chancellor Schmidt. I indicated that as a result of instability in the EC we decided to do this. We still have not reached a clear judgment as to what
