diplomatic status,—they have no dealings with Swiss authorities and their activities are confined entirely to private inquiries and dealings with private individuals; second, that if recognition were accorded to the Customs Attachés a precedent would be created under which it would be difficult to refuse diplomatic status to officials of other governments, no matter how far fetched their claims might be. He said that the Federal Council had in the past repeatedly refused to recognize as members of foreign legations officials engaged on special work bearing on education, agriculture, labor problems, etc.; that if our request were to be complied with the Swiss Government would be deluged with similar requests from other governments, and that although it was very distasteful to them to refuse our request it was considered wiser to do so in the hope of avoiding future difficulties. Monsieur Motta stated that he and his colleagues on the Federal Council had been much impressed by Mr. Boal’s presentation of the subject, that it was clearly understood that it was our intention to create a helpful agency to facilitate business transactions and that there had never been any intention of setting up an inquisitorial agency. He added, however, that Swiss business houses were under a definite impression that our Customs Representatives were intent on intolerable interference in their affairs and that he feared this impression could not be eradicated so long as the present procedure was maintained. He expressed the hope that some other method might be found which would maintain the advantages which we desired to grant while avoiding the objections which he had pointed out. The written reply promised by Monsieur Motta was delayed for some time because of minor changes in the text which were desired by the Federal Council, but it has now been received and is forwarded in copy and translation herewith.89 It will be observed that the reasons given in the note are not identical with those given me verbally by Monsieur Motta. They are, first, that the functions of these agents have no bearing upon the relations between our two governments; and second, that the desired recognition would vest them with powers which, under Swiss law, are not enjoyed even by Swiss officials. I have [etc.] HUGH GIBSON 87 Not printed. 88 Second secretary of legation in Switzerland. 87 Not printed. 89 Not printed.
