610  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Bartholomew: A point of clarification on your package. Your sec-
ond point said you would withdraw your proposal for functionally-­
related observable differences on non-­nuclear ALCMs and accept the 
US proposal. It would be simplest to ask whether accepting the US 
proposal means accepting these five elements of common ground. 
(He showed Akhromeyev a copy of the Moscow agreed elements of 
common ground with paragraphs 6, 7, 8, 10, and 12 marked. Nazarkin 
produced for Akhromeyev the Russian language text of the same docu-
ment and marked these paragraphs.)
Akhromeyev: On the whole we agree. There might be minor points 
that require clarification. In the main, we support your proposal.
Bartholomew: In this area the devil is in the details. Akhromeyev: I 
agree with you. But I cannot say more than I have said. There might be 
some minor devil that could spring out and need to be attended to. We 
are not signing a treaty tonight. I am responsible for the figures. As for 
language, there may be details that would have to be resolved.
Bartholomew: We can move on, but will leave question marks by 
this part of your position. Akhromeyev: Any points we discuss tonight 
might require clarification. In principle we have agreement on some of 
the figures.
Bartholomew: Can you look again at the first five tics of the 
Moscow agreed elements of common ground and tell me if you believe 
they state the counting rule as you agree to it. (Akhromeyev read the 
Russian text and made the following remarks after each tic.)
— I agree with the first point.
— I agree on Soviet bombers too.
— I agree on American bombers, B–52 and B–1.
— I agree on the 12 number for Soviet bombers. As for the future, 
the number should be 20.
— I agree on the 40% advantage.
Akhromeyev: I consider the first five paragraphs agreed upon. As 
for the remaining paragraphs in principle I support this approach, but 
they remain to be clarified.
Bartholomew: I invite you to look at the last three points in the 
Moscow agreed elements of common ground and give me your views. 
Akhromeyev: I will need Gen. Peresypkin, an expert on Air Force 
matters. (Akhromeyev sent for Peresypkin and suggested that in the 
interim they discuss SLCMs.)
Akhromeyev (taking out the Soviet position paper on SLCMs he 
had provided the previous night): In the course of our first conversation 
we reached agreement on the first three points (in the Soviet paper):
— The US and the USSR will exchange politically-­binding state-
ments on long-­range SLCMs effective for the entire duration of the 
START treaty.
