530
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
With these priorities emerging, I visited Peking in August of 1977,
and Dr. Brzezinski went there in May of 1978.8 We found a newly confi-
dent leadership emerging in Peking as a period of intense internal tur-
moil subsided. We found many points of common interest on global
matters, although on some important issues we continued to have dif-
ferences. Our discussions on normalization were of an exploratory na-
ture. These overall discussions reinforced our view that a strong, se-
cure, and peaceful China was in the interest of world peace.
In the early summer, President Carter instructed Ambassador
Leonard Woodcock, Chief of the Liaison Office in Peking, to begin a
series of presentations outlining our views on normalization. In five
meetings, Ambassador Woodcock laid out the American position.9
On September 19, President Carter met with the new head of the
Chinese Liaison Office in Washington, Ambassador Chai Zemin.10 In-
volving himself directly in the discussions for the first time, the Presi-
dent told the Chinese that we were ready to normalize relations if our
concerns about the future well-being of the people on Taiwan were
met.
In completing his presentations on November 4, Ambassador
Woodcock indicated to the Chinese that we would be willing to work
toward a January 1, 1979, target date for normalization if our concerns
were met. The Chinese began their response in early December. In
mid-December, negotiations intensified with Vice Premier Deng
Xiaoping becoming personally involved. Finally, on December 14, we
reached agreement that met our fundamental concerns,11 and the an-
nouncement of our decision to establish diplomatic relations was made
on December 15.
We have been able to establish full diplomatic relations with the
People’s Republic of China in a way that protects the well-being of the
people on Taiwan. The importance of this is fully reflected in the ar-
rangements that we have been and will be establishing.
First, the United States will not abrogate the Mutual Defense
Treaty. Rather we have given notice that we will exercise our right to
terminate the treaty with Taiwan in accordance with its provisions,
which permits termination by either party after 1 year’s notice. All
other treaties and agreements will remain in effect.
8 For information about Vance’s trip, see footnote 10, Document 68. For information
about Brzezinski’s trip, see footnote 21, Document 62.
9 For documentation on Woodcock’s meetings, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
XII, China, Documents 119–121, 127, 141, 149, and 159.
10 For the September 19 memorandum of conversation, see ibid., Document 135.
11 See ibid., Document 168.
