pursues a policy of whittling down or repudiating China’s obligations, it can be sure of sympathy even from its domestic enemies. A degeneration in the morale of the administrative organization has resulted. The permanent officials of that organization have been a steadying influence until recently, but this is the case no longer. For the most part, those officials whose salaries are in arrears and who have available no other livelihood have become mere place holders. Each, by a record of patriotic zeal in opposing foreigners, is bent upon insuring his tenure. 3. The matter of rendition of the Shanghai Mixed Court67 has forcefully illustrated this. Last December the Foreign Office repudiated all previous negotiations and a preposterous arrangement ignoring foreign rights was insisted upon. A committee representing interested Ministers sought for months to work out a compromise with a technical commission in the Foreign Office which would preserve essential foreign interests and rights. No disposition was found to accord an even openminded hearing to the foreign point of view. The chairman of our committee, Peck,68 then enlisted the personal interest of Wang Ch’ung-hui.69 The latter was impressed with the fairness of our proposals and their conciliatory spirit. He offered to use his great influence to the utmost with the officials of the Foreign Office and Ministry of Justice to persuade them, before this question became acute, to accept the proffered solution. He acknowledged his complete failure two days later … In regard to any consequences possibly ensuing in Shanghai should a breakdown of the negotiations occur, they were altogether reckless. The interested Ministers resolved at that point upon the experiment of transferring the negotiation of a preliminary agreement, along the lines they had tried in vain to get the Foreign Office to consider, to the consular body at Shanghai. An offer of a more satisfactory arrangement from the viewpoint of foreign interests than the compromise proposed by the Ministers to the Foreign Office was made within a few days to the consuls by Sun Ch’uan-fang. Presumably this was not because he is better than other Chinese militarists, but because in fact he does control the Shanghai area,
