September 1953–December 1954
891
cling Turkey, attacking the Suez Canal or seizing the Persian Gulf area.
Because of its geographical location on the periphery of the USSR and
its key position in relation to the other countries of the Middle East,
Iran can offer valuable base sites, with logistic support provided from
the Persian Gulf, for any allied attack which may be mounted against
the USSR from the Middle East.
3. Iran also constitutes a blocking position from which to oppose
any Soviet operation aimed at depriving the free world of Middle
Eastern oil resources. At the present time our allies in Western Europe
are dependent upon Middle East oil resources. Unless adequate petro-
leum products are available for its essential requirements, Western Eu-
rope is not defensible, our investment in its rehabilitation will be dissi-
pated, and it will be lost and become a liability to the free world. It has
been estimated that by 1975 Europe will be dependent upon the Middle
East for at least 90% of its peacetime crude oil—requiring imports of 3.7
million B/D. Likewise the United States, by 1975 will require peacetime
imports of 1.2 million B/D of Middle East crude oil (8.8% of total peace-
time requirement). Therefore, unless the essential and greater allied
wartime requirements, including those of the United States, can be met
from other sources, provision must be made to insure the continued
wartime availability of the petroleum resources of the Southwest Per-
sian Gulf area. It has been estimated that these requirements can be met
by continued operations in the Kuwait and Saudi Arabian fields. The
Allies must therefore deny to the Soviets those areas of Iran from which
the USSR can launch air or ground attacks designed to prevent Allied
oil production in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
4. For these reasons Iran is of great strategic importance in the for-
ward defense of the western Mideterranean and Persian Gulf areas.
5. It should be noted here that at the present time the U.S. has no
commitment to employ U.S. forces in Iran. If it is found necessary for
the U.S. to provide military forces in this area, implementation will re-
quire either an augmentation of U.S. forces or a reduction of present
military commitments elsewhere.
6. The line which would have to be defended in order to protect
Turkey and Pakistan against Soviet invasion through Iran, although
mountainous, is much too extensive to permit any effective defense by
Iranian forces alone in the foreseeable future.
7. The rugged terrain and lack of communications in this part of
the Middle East make effective support of Iran extremely difficult.
Importance to Russian Expansion
8. There is a long historical record of Russian interest in gaining
control of the Iranian plateau and its warm-water ports on the Persian
Gulf. Peter the Great’s strategy for Russian expansion foresaw a need
