770
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
times so as not to interfere with US force requirements. Yugoslav
limitations are also significant. Although we do not understand fully
their failure to purchase many items which have been offered, it is
clear that they have severe budgetary and political constraints and a
measure of unsureness as to their needs and how best to meet them.
These factors are likely to persist regardless of changes in US policy,
and they will play significant roles in governing the rate and direction
of expansion of sales. We must not outdistance the Yugoslavs in our
efforts to expand the relationship.
(S) A US policy based on Option III is appropriate for Yugoslavia’s
present domestic and international political situation. It is also the
policy likely to best serve US interests in post-Tito Yugoslavia. This
policy can be carried out in ways which avoid excessive Soviet reac-
tions. Yet it also increases the credibility of Yugoslav deterrence. This
can be accomplished by demonstrating US and general international
interest in Yugoslav independence and by providing a measure of
increased military capability, both of which will heighten Soviet reluc-
tance to risk an embarrassing, prolonged and costly military interven-
tion in Yugoslavia.
CW Duncan Jr
242.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs(Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 20, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Arms Transfers to Yugoslavia
In conversations with both the Vice President and CNO Holloway,
Yugoslav officials indicated their interest in expanding their arms pur-
chases from the United States. (U.S. sales totaled $689.5 million in the
period 1950–63, but dropped to under $500,000 per year in the mid-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for
action. Treverton forwarded this memorandum to Brzezinski on September 17 noting
that it had been delayed partly to await the outcome of the mission to Yugoslavia to
discuss the M–47 tank re-transfer and “partly because Defense liked the study so much
it nearly expired winding its way ever upward in the Pentagon.” (Ibid.)
