Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII pation in and supervision of anti-insurgent military operations. It is possible that further insurgent successes might prompt still greater Soviet involvement, which could range from still more advisors and equipment to the use of Soviet combat units. (TAB D) Cost: [amount not declassified] (for breakdown, see above) Tab F6 Option No. 2 Washington, undated Option No. 2 Provide tactical military communications equipment to the insurgents 1. Discussion: Prince Turki Ibn Faysal, Director of the Saudi Arabian General Intelligence Service, recently recommended to [2 lines not declassified]. Prince Turki expressed concern at what he perceived as U.S. failure to defend its own (and by implication, Saudi Arabia’s) interests in such areas as Zaire, Iran, Somalia and Afghanistan. At the same time, Turki recognized the difficulties which the U.S. would have encountered in intervening in these areas overtly. He implicitly recognized that U.S.- Saudi collaboration could provide a means for masking U.S. support of friendly elements in Middle East crisis areas. 2. Turki suggested a number of areas for such collaboration, including Afghanistan. He stated that his government was providing limited support to the insurgents. In addition, he mentioned that their insurgent contacts reported that lack of radio communications was seriously hampering the coordination of their military activities. 3. It is believed that approaching Turki with a proposal that CIA provide communications equipment to the insurgents, possibly through Saudi channels and attributable to the Saudis, would allow us to propose that the Saudis, in addition to our radios, provide significant funds from their own resources to support the insurgency. If the Saudis agreed to the proposal, but indicated that they would prefer—for logistical or other reasons—not to act as “middle-men,” we would give the radios directly to the Pakistanis, and advise the Saudis of our action. 4. In addition, this proposal would have the following benefits: 6 Secret; Sensitive.
