by the limitation of armaments that are continually increasing would be a dead letter without any real importance. The public declarations recently made by certain signatories of the Pact of Paris concerning the unavoidable continuation of armament even after the Pact is concluded are truly a confirmation of the foregoing. The new political international groups which have arisen in the meanwhile with especial regard to the question of naval armaments have added force to this position. That is why the present situation makes it more than ever imperative to take decided measures in the field of disarmament. 6. In considering the text of the Pact the Soviet Government deems it necessary to call attention to the lack of definiteness and clearness in Article 1 of the very formula that prohibits war, this formula being open to divergent and arbitrary interpretations. For its part, the Soviet Government believes that all international warfare must be prohibited either as an instrument of what is styled “national policy” or as a means to promote other ends (for instance, the repression of movements for the liberation of peoples, etc.). According to the Soviet Government wars must be prohibited not only in the juridical and formal construction of the word (that is to say, implying a “declaration of war”, etc.) but also such military actions as, for instance, intervention, blockade, military occupation of foreign territories, of foreign ports, etc. The history of these last few years presents quite a number of military actions of this kind which have brought upon peoples terrible calamities. The Soviet Republics themselves have been the object of such aggressions and at the present time the immense population of China is suffering from such attacks. What is more, such military actions often assume the proportions of great wars which it becomes completely impossible to stop, and yet, the Pact makes no mention of these questions that are so grave from the standpoint of peace. Next, the same Article 1 (sic) of the Pact deals with the necessity of solving all disputes and all international disputes by exclusively pacific means. Taking this position as a point of departure, the Soviet Government believes that it is also necessary to include in the number of non-pacific
