January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1329 7. We have given careful thought to various ways of responding to the Israeli moves and believe the course we have outlined would offer the fewest long term disadvantages. We recognize, however, that the Government of Egypt will be subject to serious domestic and foreign pressures as a result of the Israeli move. Only Sadat can make the judgment as to what will be politically sustainable for him in the new circumstances that we will face, and we will of course understand and respect his ultimate decision. 8. FYI: For the Ambassador. If you find in your discussion that Sadat is determined to suspend the autonomy talks, you should urge him to do this only for a specific, limited period of time as a means of demonstrating his disapproval. End FYI. 9. Following is text of statement which has been approved for issuance in the event the Israeli Cabinet approves moving Prime Minister’s office to East Jerusalem. You may share text with Sadat. Begin text: The decision announced by the Israeli Government yesterday is not in keeping with the vital international efforts flowing from the Camp David Accords to achieve a just and lasting peace settlement in the Middle East. United States policy on the issue of Jerusalem is of long standing, beginning with statements by our Permanent Representatives to the United Nations in 1967 and 1969.8 It has been restated on a number of occasions since then. Our view has been, and remains, that the final status of Jerusalem should be determined through negotiations among the parties concerned; that the settlement which is worked out should leave the city undivided; that it should provide free access for people of all faiths to the holy places; and that it should take into account the interests of all the city’s inhabitants. As President Carter stated on March 3, 1980: “we strongly believe that Jerusalem should be undivided with free access to the holy places for all faiths.” Pending such negotiations, the United States does not believe that any party should take unilateral measures which alter the status of Jerusalem. We do not regard the action taken by the Knesset as precluding those future negotiations. We made clear to the Prime Minister and other Israeli officials that we would view the move of the Prime Minister’s office to East Jerusalem to be contrary to the principles we believe will be most helpful to the current negotiations and to the broader effort to bring about a comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. The most vital objective for Israel, Egypt, and the United States is to pursue the Camp David peace process through to success. All the 8 See footnotes 11 and 12, Document 64.
