Aglen and myself to recommend it to his Government.
Yoshizawa, the Japanese Minister, was not persuaded to commit
himself beyond stating that he would consult with his
Government.
6. We were all in agreement in thinking that a definite crisis
regarding the whole system of trade with China will be brought
about by the Cantonese attempt to levy these surtaxes at the port
of Hankow. Excepting Yoshizawa, who did not commit himself,
we also agreed that to anticipate this action by the Nationalists
through a declaration by the powers—which in effect would
allow the Washington surtaxes to be levied throughout China for
the benefit of whatever authorities happened to have control at the
various ports, without a quid pro quo and without conditions
except that the levy of such surtaxes would rest with the Maritime
Customs—offered the sole possible way to make a substantial
salvage out of the wreck.
7. I undertook a further discussion of this matter yesterday
afternoon with O’Malley. We were both wholly convinced that in
the possibility of action by the powers practically at once along
these suggested lines lay our best hope of avoiding a disaster to
the trading interests of foreigners. We feel that as a practical
means to this end we should continue to discuss the matter with
Yoshizawa, during which we might phrase some concrete, simple
formula, the adoption of which might be requested of the
remaining foreign delegations to the Special Tariff Conference. In
our opinion most, if not all, of the powers less interested would
likely follow our lead comparatively readily, particularly were the
Japanese Government to give approval to the proposal. However,
we feel that the position which Japan may take presents the
greatest danger to the project, though their position is not
hopeless. In view of this we agreed that in asking his Government
for authority to proceed upon the indicated lines, each of us
would request his Government also to have its Tokyo Embassy
press upon the Foreign Office there the fact that the crisis is
imminent and that, confronted by the practical and immediate
