the League and seek to enlist its cooperation or goodwill. The Austrian Control Committee will meet in the middle of October in London and there the serious work will really begin. Minister of Finance Kienböck will be on hand. The Chancellor tells me that he is not yet decided whether he will go or not. Assuming that the Control Committee will be sympathetic, as it is hoped, the next appeal will be to the Reparation Commission and to the relief credit States. In my despatch No. 1037 of May 10th, 1926,3 I enclosed the Joint Resolution of Congress, approved April 6th, 1922,4 authorizing for a period not to exceed twenty-five years the extension of the time for the payment of the principal and interest of the debt incurred by Austria for the purchase of flour from the United States Grain Corporation. I also enclosed the notice of the action of the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the authority conferred under this Resolution and the relevant Decision of the Reparation Commission, No. 2400. In this connection the question may presently arise as to what affirmative action must be taken by the United States as one of the relief credit nations in order to facilitate a new Austrian federal loan. In the event it should be deemed advisable to take any action whatever, will a new enabling act of Congress be necessary or may the Secretary of the Treasury, under authority of the Joint Resolution hereinbefore referred to, subordinate the lien of the Austrian Relief Bond Series B of 1920, issued to and held by the United States of America on account of food purchased from the United States Grain Corporation for relief purposes, to a new Austrian federal loan providing said new loan matures within the twenty-five year period mentioned in the Joint Resolution, No. 460 of April 6th, 1922? I may say that it is proposed that the new loan shall mature within this period just mentioned. As to the amount of the new loan, assuming that the necessary permission can be obtained, I find on reference to my despatch No. 1076 of June 16th, 1926,3 that an additional loan of 200,000,000 schillings was then contemplated. The new investment program is more ambitious. It is proposed not only to continue the electrification of the railroads, which is now underway, and the further extension of underground cables for telephones, but also to reconstruct federal public highways, which are in a bad state of repair, and to extend quasi-public utility agricultural
