Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  269
position and introduce new ideas, the United States believes that the 
accomplishments thus far provide a firm foundation for the conclusion 
of an agreement.
It is imperative that we work in these negotiations to remove any 
incentive to attack first. Vulnerable systems with short time of flight 
are particularly troubling in this regard. We must also minimize the 
concentration of warheads on vulnerable systems, since they increase 
the incentives for attack.
You and I have both directed the modernization of our strategic 
forces in order to improve their survivability. But arms control gives us 
an opportunity, working together, to push the evolution of both arse-
nals toward more stable systems and to introduce predictability into 
military planning so that we can slow the pace of military competition. 
We must work to insure that the forces that remain after an agreement 
are survivable.
I am also concerned about the verification challenge before us. The 
introduction of mobile land-­based systems has improved survivability 
but, at the same time, made verification extremely difficult. Traditional 
means of monitoring are insufficient and even with intrusive inspec-
tion, confidence in monitoring may not be high. This problem is exacer-
bated when mobile systems are MIRVed, because undetected missiles 
carry so many warheads. We need to cooperate more intensively and 
creatively to address this problem.
Toward this end, I believe that the two sides should try, as a part 
of our effort in START, to agree on and begin implementing as soon as 
possible some verification and stability measures drawn from propos-
als that both sides have advanced in START or in other contexts.
The measures we are proposing do not constitute a comprehen-
sive verification regime and I understand that either side may choose 
to alter or augment them in the context of a final START agreement 
on the basis of experience gained. The objective is to reach agreement 
promptly in as many specific areas as possible so that we can set in 
place concrete verification measures and gain practical experience that 
will help the negotiations.
Specifically, the United States will propose:
(1) Immediate establishment of perimeter/portal monitoring of 
certain ICBM production facilities along the lines described in the 
U.S. START proposal.
(2) Prompt exchange of data. The U.S. and the U.S.S.R on a recip-
rocal basis would begin to exchange numbers for the agreed catego-
ries in the memorandum of understanding which are now blank. We 
can also begin to conduct familiarization visits to learn more about the 
forces, operations, practices and procedures that would be subject to 
inspections.
