650 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement Believe our strong review history negotiations on renunciation force, and form in which we introduced our amendments their draft, well anticipated their tactic and created some confusion and doubt as to strength their public position even on agenda item two. Until very close of meeting was hopeful I had succeeded in dissuading them from persisting in threat to open meetings or going to public. However, believe substantial gain accomplished in their tentative acceptance inclusion specific mention Taiwan in a statement which regardless of its exact wording would as political document commit CHICOMS in public mind to renunciation of use force in attempting upset status quo. Negotiating position with respect next meeting was left some­ what confused, this portion January 12 meeting closing on note Wang’s adamant refusal consider any mention individual and collective self-­ defense and I not giving any indication willingness consider any for­ mula which did not include this principle. Possible implication Wang’s position could be willingness carry his position at close Jan 12 meeting to point of threatening actual or vir­ tual break at next meeting unless we yield on self-­defense clause. It pos­ sible this could be done as negotiating tactic, with intention yielding at meeting after next, or that by next meeting CHICOMS will perceive weakness their position on this and shift ground. However, I should also be prepared for contingency threat would be genuine. Therefore, would appreciate my instructions for next meeting covering whether if necessary it is desired maintain my present posi­ tion on inclusion self-­defense clause up to point of actual or virtual break. Only by doing so could I completely test strength position he may adopt this regard. At same time would not want to be placed in position of appearing yield on this point in response threat of break by Wang. With respect implementation Wang showed no enthusiasm for discussion (it was almost 1 p.m. when this introduced) and his replies were perfunctory and along familiar lines. With respect first sentence para 6 Deptel 1465 believe it important, particularly in any public ­output, to note their position and particularly Wang’s posi­ tion with me since our early exchanges on subject is more subtle than just asserting that agreed announcement does not apply to impris­ oned Americans. Position is that there is “distinction” between those “who have committed crimes” and those who have not. With regard to those “who have committed crimes” PRC is taking “further meas­ ures” accordance agreed announcement and “expeditious” must be read in relation to “seriousness their crimes” etc. This also brought
