Uruguay  1175
the opportunity to improve their living conditions through the type 
of assistance which will enable them to attain this objective. At pres-
ent the U.S. is spending 45 billion dollars a year, 60 per cent of its 
budget, for military purposes to assure our protection and maintain 
the shield behind which our people may work. This year, he said, we 
are requesting our Congress to provide $4.2 billion for programs of 
technical assistance, economic aid, and defense support. The capacity 
to carry out this program depends upon the maintenance of fiscal sta-
bility and the value of our money, without resorting to inflation. The 
U.S. has many internal problems but the most important is to maintain 
a healthy economy and prove to the world that we are assuring finan-
cial responsibility. The U.S. will never refuse to aid, nor will abandon, 
a friend who is sincerely working, making an effort to secure his live-
lihood and to improve the living conditions of the people. In such 
cases, within the framework of its world responsibilities and within 
the limitations of its resources, the U.S. will do everything possible to 
assist that friend.
President Eisenhower reiterated his conviction that the free world 
will have the necessary strength to assure its own security, and con-
cluded by saying he would be pleased to try to answer any specific 
questions which the Councillors might wish to ask.
After President Nardone thanked President Eisenhower for his 
remarks, the latter said it would be useful to him, on the eve of the new 
conferences in Europe2, if he could know if the Councillors had any 
objection concerning what the United States was trying to do, if the 
U.S. is mistaken in its policies or should modify them. He said that one 
of his purposes in visiting Latin America before going to Paris was to 
obtain the opinions of these countries. He requested that such views be 
expressed to the U.S. Government through official channels.
President Nardone’s statement that the Council shared and wished 
to strengthen the policies that are being carried out by the U.S. to defend 
democratic principles was seconded by Councillors Arroyo Torres and 
Batlle Pacheco of the Opposition. Councillor Haedo commented that, 
in this case, he agreed with the Opposition. He went on to say that the 
reception given to President Eisenhower would have been duplicated 
if he had come as a private citizen. Councillor Batlle Pacheco joined in 
this sentiment, saying that the President interprets exactly the North 
American nation and its glorious past.
President Nardone then expressed Uruguayan thanks for the col-
laboration of the United States which had restored optimism to their 
2 Reference is to the forthcoming meeting of Chiefs of State and Heads of Government, 
scheduled to be held in Paris during the week of May 16, 1960. Documentation on the sub-
ject is printed in Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. IX, Berlin Crisis, 1959–1960; Germany; 
Austria, Chapter 2.
