1160  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
705.	 Letter 54 from Clough to Johnson1
Letter No. 54
Washington, August 31, 1956
Dear Alex:
Your letter of August 20 reached us after Walter McConaughy had 
departed August 24 for a week’s leave in Alabama. However copies 
have been sent to Messrs. Robertson, Phleger and Sebald. We had a 
brief meeting before Walter left to consider developments at the last 
meeting. While we recognize the problem created by Wang’s efforts to 
push you into a corner on whether or not we will discuss trade, we con­
sider it unlikely that the Chinese Communists will endeavor to bring 
about a break or a prolonged suspension of the talks over this issue. It 
seems more likely that they will go to the public again in an endeavor to 
make propaganda capital out of their proposed agreed announcement 
on trade. We are satisfied that we are still in a strong public position so 
long as Peiping still holds Americans and refuses to announce the use 
of force. We will meet on Sept. 4 after Walter’s return to prepare your 
instructions for the next meeting which we hope will give you the kind 
of guidance requested.
It is unfortunate that Time Magazine distorted your remarks. 
However the story does not appear to have been picked up by any 
other news source in the United States nor have we seen it used on 
Communist broadcasts.
The Red Cross is still engaged in the process of interviewing pris­
oners. It has taken somewhat longer than they estimated but it seems to 
be proceeding smoothly enough. We do not know how the interviews 
are resulting because it was arranged for them to report only after all 
interviews were completed. However, we know that there is at least 
one prisoner who desires to go to Mainland China, as he has written 
us direct. However he is one who we thought had claimed American 
citizenship and therefore was not included on the original list. The final 
decision has not been made here as to whether or not we will bring the 
Indian Embassy in on the return of prisoners to Communist China. We 
will discuss your views at our next meeting.
The most important recent event in our relations with Communist 
China was the shooting down of a patrol plane last week. Enclosed is 
a copy of the Note delivered to Peiping by the British at our request 
and the Chinese Communist reply. On the basis of the facts we have 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–
­Informal.
