840
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and to the development of policy guidelines on the key issues set out
there.
CIA has also prepared an annex (Tab A)7 on key LDCs and security
relationships. This material is of some interest in assessing LDC partici-
pation in North/South negotiations, but it is not critical for the PRC
meeting.
AGENDA ITEM 1
Rather than asking the PRC to tackle the key issues immediately,
the report requests guidance on the “basic policy framework for
North/South relations” (see pp. 9–11). I recommend that you endorse
the basic approach, with the caveat that the “community of interest and
objectives” should take full account of the differences between devel-
oped and developing countries; moreover, for tactical reasons, the di-
verse situations and varied positions on international economic issues
within the developing countries should also be kept in mind (see pp.
3–5 of the report).
If the basic policy framework is accepted, I recommend that you
refer to the annex (Tab B) to place the key issues in the agreed North/
South policy framework.
AGENDA ITEM 2
The PRM working group could not agree on the role which quanti-
tative targets can play in US policies. In my view, targets for the per-
formance of developing countries and international goals, such as ac-
ceptance of doubling food production or greatly reducing infant
mortality, should be a part of the US approach to overall North/South
negotiations. Carefully defined quantitative goals for development
achievements should be part of the US response to developing-country
demands for international changes. I recommend that you approve an
investigation of appropriate targets directed by the DCC. I recommend
against a PRC discussion at this time of types of targets since the neces-
sary material is not available.8
AGENDA ITEM 3
Discussion of the role of an “overview mechanism” on North/
South issues in the UN revealed significant differences of opinion
within the working group. Treasury, for example, felt that not only is
an “overview mechanism” undesirable, but it is probably avoidable. I
7 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an August 31 CIA memorandum entitled “Key
LDCs in the North/South Dialogue: Issues and Forums.”
8 Brzezinski highlighted the final two sentences of this paragraph.
