280 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV or MX missiles is one possibility (MX thus far appearing to be the better choice). The questions of which basing mode looks best, and of cost, of vulnerability, of land availability, of ecology, etc., need more study. But one thing is clear: with a land-­mobile system, it will take at least [less than 1 line not declassified] to restore the ICBM retaliatory capability, [less than 1 line not declassified] that we have today. If we feel we must restore the balance more rapidly so as not to be perceived to be in an inferior position, we could deploy MX in silos, possibly as early as 1984. If we had to depend significantly on these missiles in retaliation, we would probably be driven to a launch-­under-­attack policy. Another issue in the strategic nuclear area involves defense of the continent against Soviet bombers. Our policy in recent years has been not to invest heavily in continental air defense on grounds that it makes little sense in an era when we are defenseless against ICBMs and SLBMs.11 However, we have maintained a modest force dedicated to air defense, and we would plan to supplement it in a crisis with fighter aircraft that could be made available from the General Purpose Forces in the CONUS. That policy has been likened to a “Coast Guard of the air”—­the intention being to prevent overflight provocations and “free rides”, without really aspiring to substantially reduce US casualties in an all-­out attack. While the General Purpose Force aircraft that might be available are quite modern (F–14, F–15, and—­soon—F–16s), the dedicated aircraft are quite old (F–101s, F–106s, and some F–4s). However, the advent of the Soviet Backfire has changed the character of the possible threat. In response, the CG now directs that the equivalent of a wing (nominally 72 aircraft) of F–15s from the Tactical Air Command be made available for a crisis. There are SALT ratification implications to this issue. One final strategic issue has to do with civil defense. As you know, the Soviets have shown great interest and considerable activity in this field. While I do not believe that that effort significantly enhances the prospects for Soviet society as a whole following any full-­scale nuclear exchange, it has obviously had an effect on international perceptions, particularly in contrast to our small and static civil defense program. For that reason alone, I believe at least modest efforts on our part could have a high payoff.12 But beyond perceptions, our studies this past summer have shown that a relatively modest program, centering on evacuation and some fallout protection, could increase US survivors from roughly a fifth of the population to at least half, given a week’s warning of impending 11 Carter underlined “continental air defense” in this sentence, and drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to it. 12 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this sentence.
