1040 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II tion around the world”.3 Such an initiative, which should be an important component of the recent U.S. commitment to major increases in foreign aid through 1982, requires decisions now to develop the foundation for specific actions and programs later. We have initiated a process to devise and implement a world health strategy. Our approach will be two-fold: first, to identify and highlight the many activities already in process and, second, to focus current U.S. Government activities in international health within a coordinated framework of priorities and goals so as to work more effectively with related U.S. Government activities, with private organizations, with other nations, and with the several international and multilateral organizations. With regard to international health programs in the developing countries, the strategy developed should be fully coordinated with the studies of foreign aid organization and program reform currently underway. Building on the considerable amount of work already done by the agencies in developing the strategy, the first step has been taken by Peter Bourne’s staff in preparing a report on international health. The next step is to develop a broad policy statement encompassing the humanitarian goals and identifying specific areas of Presidential interest. To this end, enclosed is a draft statement of strategy including general objectives and several proposed initiatives which were developed during the initial review of U.S. international health programs. This draft will be the basis for developing the broad policy statement. Before proceeding further, however, we need each agency’s views of the overall initiative and how it feels it can best contribute to the effort. Comments should address both the merits and problems associated with the proposed initiatives. While detailed analysis will be addressed later in the process, we seek your initial assessments as to the programmatic and budgetary implications of the proposals. Your preliminary analysis will help us to assess the likely cost-effectiveness of the several possibilities and determine which merit priority attention. The development of the broad policy statement should be completed by April 1, 1978, in the form of a decision memorandum to the President. We have established the following schedule: 3 The President’s January 19 address on the State of the Union, delivered before a
