1040
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tion around the world”.3 Such an initiative, which should be an impor-
tant component of the recent U.S. commitment to major increases in
foreign aid through 1982, requires decisions now to develop the foun-
dation for specific actions and programs later.
We have initiated a process to devise and implement a world
health strategy. Our approach will be two-fold: first, to identify and
highlight the many activities already in process and, second, to focus
current U.S. Government activities in international health within a
coordinated framework of priorities and goals so as to work more effec-
tively with related U.S. Government activities, with private organiza-
tions, with other nations, and with the several international and multi-
lateral organizations.
With regard to international health programs in the developing
countries, the strategy developed should be fully coordinated with the
studies of foreign aid organization and program reform currently
underway.
Building on the considerable amount of work already done by the
agencies in developing the strategy, the first step has been taken by
Peter Bourne’s staff in preparing a report on international health. The
next step is to develop a broad policy statement encompassing the hu-
manitarian goals and identifying specific areas of Presidential interest.
To this end, enclosed is a draft statement of strategy including general
objectives and several proposed initiatives which were developed
during the initial review of U.S. international health programs. This
draft will be the basis for developing the broad policy statement. Before
proceeding further, however, we need each agency’s views of the
overall initiative and how it feels it can best contribute to the effort.
Comments should address both the merits and problems associated
with the proposed initiatives. While detailed analysis will be addressed
later in the process, we seek your initial assessments as to the program-
matic and budgetary implications of the proposals. Your preliminary
analysis will help us to assess the likely cost-effectiveness of the several
possibilities and determine which merit priority attention.
The development of the broad policy statement should be com-
pleted by April 1, 1978, in the form of a decision memorandum to the
President. We have established the following schedule:
3 The President’s January 19 address on the State of the Union, delivered before a
joint session of Congress, is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 90–98. The
longer, printed version of the State of the Union message is ibid., pp. 98–123. Carter pre-
sented his international health proposal in conjunction with several domestic health ini-
tiatives, including a reorganization of HEW, a child immunization campaign, and a na-
tional health insurance program. An excerpt of Carter’s State of the Union address is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of For-
eign Policy.
