856  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
agreement.2 The General stated that his country desired no trouble 
with Honduras and expressed the hope that the new agreement3 would 
put an end to the recent difficulties his country had experienced with 
Honduras over the activities of the Honduran refugees. He said that 
such friction gave the wrong impression of Nicaragua’s desire to main-
tain friendly relations with Honduras and indicated that Nicaragua did 
not want anything to occur which would affect the adjudication of the 
Nicaraguan-Honduran border dispute now before the International 
Court of Justice. He remarked, however, that it was almost a traditional 
feeling on the part of the Hondurans to be against Nicaragua. He said 
that Honduran President Villeda Morales had misrepresented the facts 
concerning the difficulties between the two countries and had not kept 
good faith with his premises to the GON. General Somoza then men-
tioned he had received reports that Villeda had been sounded out on 
the possibility of 60 Nicaraguan revolutionaries coming to Honduras 
from Cuba. He said that reportedly Villeda’s reaction was that if they 
come to Honduras he didn’t want to know about it.
Mr. Rubottom expressed the hope that the recent refugee agree-
ment between the two countries would materially help in easing the 
tension. He pointed out that there were undoubtedly two sides to the 
Honduran-Nicaraguan situation. He said that often times the U.S. pol-
icy is misunderstood in that some critics fail to realize that our policy 
in Latin America is not supporting one country against another. In this 
respect he said that we deal with all countries on an equal basis. In 
return, he said, we do not look for any of these countries to act against 
us when our back is turned.
President’s Health
Mr. Rubottom then asked about President Somoza’s health. The 
General said that recent electrocardiogram tests showed that the 
President was coming along alright. He said that the President was car-
rying on his duties in a normal manner, but that he had been placed on 
a rigorous diet.
Observations Central America
Mr. Rubottom then asked if the General had any comments to make 
about conditions in Central America. The General said he was concerned 
over the activities and attitude of Castro, which were keeping things 
2 General Somoza was in New York City visiting his wife who had been in the 
United States since February.
3 On February 26, the Governments of Nicaragua and Honduras signed an agree-
ment in Washington on territorial asylum covering the treatment of asylees and the pre-
vention of subversive activities. Additional documentation on the agreement is in the 
compilation on Honduras.
