Human Rights Rights; move back to United Nations Headquarters the UN Secretariat component, the Human Rights Division; and the establishment of a United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Particularly with respect to the High Commissioner proposal, in consultation with other supporters, we must develop tactics to assure that its essential elements remain unchanged so that the proposal can again be considered by the General Assembly, if possible at its 1979 session. We must also assure that the United States sponsored item at the 33rd UN General Assembly on review and coordination is adequately highlighted in any proposals for strengthening United Nations human rights machinery.3 Finally, under this item or under a related item on the agenda which deals with the Advisory Services in the Field of Human Rights, we will be seeking to encourage greater utilization of and expansion of the United Nations Advisory Services Program. (2) Question of the Human Rights of All Persons Subjected to Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, in particular: Draft Convention on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. We expect to participate actively in the working group which will be set up to draft the Convention on Torture and we will seek to achieve as much progress as possible in completing the drafting exercise at the 35th session. We will carry on consultations already pursued under the aegis of the Council of Europe with a view to assuring the inclusion in the Convention of effective implementation provisions. (3) Question of the Violation of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in Any Part of the World, With Particular Reference to Colonial and Other Dependent Areas and Territories, Including: Study of Situations Which Reveal a Consistent Pattern of Gross Violations of Human Rights. This item presents the greatest challenge of any item on the agenda since here will be discussed the cases referred to the Commission under ECOSOC Resolution 1503. Our support for the 1503 procedures has been strong since they were approved in 1970 because we have seen in these procedures the principal means whereby the focus of the Commission could be turned away from the traditional three cases (occupied Arab territories, Chile and South Africa) which have received repeated attention toward the examination of other instances of gross violations of human rights. Experience has shown that the Commission approaches its responsibilities under the 1503 procedures with exaggerated caution and concern for the sensitivities of the governments involved. Our goal will be to encourage decisions for study or investigation of all those cases in
