Human Rights
569
Rights; move back to United Nations Headquarters the UN Secretariat
component, the Human Rights Division; and the establishment of a
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Particularly
with respect to the High Commissioner proposal, in consultation with
other supporters, we must develop tactics to assure that its essential el-
ements remain unchanged so that the proposal can again be considered
by the General Assembly, if possible at its 1979 session. We must also
assure that the United States sponsored item at the 33rd UN General
Assembly on review and coordination is adequately highlighted in any
proposals for strengthening United Nations human rights machinery.3
Finally, under this item or under a related item on the agenda which
deals with the Advisory Services in the Field of Human Rights, we will
be seeking to encourage greater utilization of and expansion of the
United Nations Advisory Services Program.
(2) Question of the Human Rights of All Persons Subjected to Any Form
of Detention or Imprisonment, in particular: Draft Convention on Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. We ex-
pect to participate actively in the working group which will be set up to
draft the Convention on Torture and we will seek to achieve as much
progress as possible in completing the drafting exercise at the 35th ses-
sion. We will carry on consultations already pursued under the aegis of
the Council of Europe with a view to assuring the inclusion in the Con-
vention of effective implementation provisions.
(3) Question of the Violation of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms in Any Part of the World, With Particular Reference to Colonial and
Other Dependent Areas and Territories, Including: Study of Situations Which
Reveal a Consistent Pattern of Gross Violations of Human Rights. This item
presents the greatest challenge of any item on the agenda since here
will be discussed the cases referred to the Commission under ECOSOC
Resolution 1503. Our support for the 1503 procedures has been strong
since they were approved in 1970 because we have seen in these proce-
dures the principal means whereby the focus of the Commission could
be turned away from the traditional three cases (occupied Arab terri-
tories, Chile and South Africa) which have received repeated attention
toward the examination of other instances of gross violations of human
rights. Experience has shown that the Commission approaches its re-
sponsibilities under the 1503 procedures with exaggerated caution and
concern for the sensitivities of the governments involved. Our goal will
be to encourage decisions for study or investigation of all those cases in
3 Presumable reference to A/RES/33/54, “Review and Coordination of Human
Rights Programmes of Organizations in the United Nations System and Cooperation
With Other International Programmes in the Field of Human Rights,” adopted by the UN
General Assembly on December 14, 1978.
