758
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
V.P.: We have commenced efforts to move forward on detente with
the Soviet Union. The talks in Geneva are going very well. We would
like to see progress on MBFR. We would like to see a broadening
of people-to-people contact. The Russians haven’t included wars of
liberation in their definition of detente. I would hope, incidentally, that
we could get to the subject of the Belgrade meeting before these talks
are over.
Kardelj: It is not a good position to consider wars of national libera-
tion outside the framework of detente.
V.P.: We want to get along with the Russians, but we found they
are not perfect. Mr. President, your interpreter is great. She never takes
a note. I think if we put her in charge we could solve all our problems;
she is always perfect.
Mr. President, would you please give me your views on CSCE?
Tito: If I have a suggestion to give, it is that you don’t introduce
matters that lead to confrontation—one is human rights. It is a question
that is discussed too much. If the debate on human rights were to be
confined to the US and USSR that would be okay, but other countries
are being drawn in.
Yugoslavia is an open country. Millions of our people work outside
of Yugoslavia; there are many tourists. We have a few people in jail;
this is held as a human rights violation. There are just a few people
who work against us. We have our laws and we must apply them. We
don’t want this held against us in Belgrade. We want to go forward,
not backward, after Helsinki. Yugoslavia has signed an agreement with
Italy and we have solved other problems with our neighbors. I know
there are injustices, but what is injustice? We should try to move along
the lines set in Helsinki. I would hope you will convey these views to
President Carter.
V.P.: I will do so, we want to consider all three baskets to the fullest
extent possible and in a non-confrontational manner. We want to keep
the dialogue on a firm track, a non-confrontation track.
Turning to another issue, because of your leadership in the non-
aligned movement, I wanted you to know we will try to get North-
South dialogue going through CIEC7 on a constructive, hopeful basis.
At the London Summit, we pressed for a hopeful dialogue permitting
progress by the poorer countries of the world. We are proposing case-
by-case commodity agreements; a common fund to keep commodities
in a normal market range. We have proposed increasing contributions
to the World Bank. Our hope is that the CIEC Conference in Paris will
provide the basis for a much more constructive discussion.
7 The Conference on International Economic Cooperation, also known as the North-
South Conference, met in Paris from December 1975 until June 3, 1977.
