Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Haitian authorities procedures were set up with cooperation from the Haitian Red Cross for review of persons deported to Haiti to insure they are not subjected to persecution. We are also drawing on the experience of the Canadians, who have had a similar Haitian problem, and have instituted a procedure whereby representatives of the UNHCR will review all Haitian asylum requests we receive and give us advisory but non-binding opinions. Southern African Refugees—One million dollars in refugee emergency funds was approved on December 28 for help to southern African refugees through the UNHCR. We are consulting with our mission in Geneva and concerned posts regarding the adequacy of the overall UNHCR program. Parole for Refugees from Latin America’s Southern Cone—A parole program for 400 Chilean detainees and their families is finally near completion, with 365 cases (more than 1,100 persons) now in the U.S. and a sufficient pool to fill the remaining spaces. The parole program for 200 refugees from Chile, Uruguay, and Bolivia and their families, approved in October, now has 106 active cases being processed by the UNHCR and our Embassy in Buenos Aires. Most of the 200 cases will be from the ranks of refugees in Argentina; a few will come from detainee cases in Chile. Representatives of U.S. voluntary agencies and the INS will be in place very shortly to provide assistance. Both programs constitute the U.S. contribution to international appeals made by the UNHCR. Pressure is mounting in Congress to establish a program for admitting Argentine political detainees and for Argentine refugees in other countries who seek resettlement. MIA’s—Deputy Coordinator for POW/MIA’s Frank Sieverts represented the President and the Secretary at a meeting of the National League of MIA Families Jan. 27–28, marking the fourth anniversary of the Paris agreement on Vietnam. The families were reassured by the President’s and the Secretary’s statements giving priority to the MIA problem in any contacts with the Vietnamese, and they hope for a meeting soon with the President. The President met January 31 with Rep. G. V. Montgomery, Chairman of the House Select Committee on Missing Persons in Southeast Asia, which filed its final report December 15.2 According to Montgomery and the NSC staff, the President said he considered the MIA question to be a primary aspect of our relations with the Vietnamese. Montgomery advised the President against appointing a new Presidential Commission on MIA’s and recommended that he act soon to resume contacts with the Vietnamese. 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Montgomery and other
