March–August 1953
711
294.
Memorandum Prepared by the Deputy Director for Plans,
Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner)1
Washington, August 20, 1953.
The following are additional points and thoughts which should be
considered in connection with the idea that the company might be in
the position to play a most useful and constructive role in connection
with the recent development in “x” country. The following informa-
tion is based upon statements of extremely well-placed and reliable
informants.
The new Boss has very definitely in mind a series of programs of
economic and social betterment for his country. As a matter of fact, this
is rather definitely confirmed by the fact that the very first words he ut-
tered upon getting to the loudspeaker on the eventful day were
promises to the people of such programs. Unfortunately, his ideas are
ill-formed and to some extent quite impractical and he is definitely be-
lieved to be standing in the need of advice. Specifically, he needs
someone, whom he would regard as disinterested and friendly, to
point out to him what kind of programs would be useful and construc-
tive and which are, at the same time, feasible. It would be of equal im-
portance for him to be advised as to what kind of programs, including
some ideas which he has in mind, are not feasible either in the imme-
diate future or, for that matter, at all. The time is ripe at this very mo-
ment for such advice and assistance because, if this is not forthcoming
and if there is no one who can provide this, he may commit himself fur-
ther along lines that he will not be able to deliver on to the people. This
in turn will have an adverse effect and will play directly into the hands
of the very worst elements of the opposition. (There is no doubt that
any overstatements or unkept promises will be exploited by the Party
and Soviet propaganda to the utmost.) It is even possible that the com-
pany might wish to send one of its knowledgeable representatives out
for a quick trip to look over the situation and to contribute his recom-
mendations. It is also believed to be a practical certainty that the Am-
bassador would recommend such a visit and would be only too glad to
arrange for appropriate introductions and the presentation of the most
favorable and impressive credentials.
Even though it is understood that there will presumably be contin-
uing governmental programs under the administration of Mr. Stassen’s
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 80–01701R, Box 3, Folder 10,
TPAJAX. Eyes Only. A typed note on the memorandum reads: “The following was dic-
tated by FGW in presence of [name not declassified] and [name not declassified] took the orig-
inal with him. 9/20/53.”
