c) any trade or commercial association recognized for the purpose
by the diplomatic representative of the Contracting Party
requiring such certificates.
ARTICLE XII. There shall be complete freedom of transit through the territories
including territorial waters of each High Contracting Party on the routes
most convenient for international transit, by rail, navigable waterway, and
canal, other than the Panama Canal and waterways and canals which
constitute international boundaries of the United States, to persons and
goods coming from or going through the territories of the other High
Contracting Party, except such persons as may be forbidden admission into
its territories or goods of which the importation may be prohibited by law.
Persons and goods in transit shall not be subjected to any transit duty, or to
any unnecessary delays or restrictions, and shall be given national treatment
as regards charges, facilities, and all other matters.
Goods in transit must be entered at the proper customhouse, but they shall
be exempt from all customs or other similar duties.
All charges imposed on transport in transit shall be reasonable, having
regard to the conditions of the traffic.
ARTICLE XIII. Each of the High Contracting Parties agrees to receive from the
other, consular officers in those of its ports, places and cities, where it may
be convenient and which are open to consular representatives of any foreign
country.
Consular officers of each of the High Contracting Parties shall, after
entering upon their duties, enjoy reciprocally in the territories of the other
all the rights, privileges, exemptions and immunities which are enjoyed by
officers of the same grade of the most favored nation. As official agents,
such officers shall be entitled to the high consideration of all officials,
national or local, with whom they have official intercourse in the state
which receives them.
The Government of each of the High Contracting Parties shall furnish free
of charge the necessary exequatur of such consular officers of the other as
present a regular commission signed by the chief executive of the
