International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
15
5.
Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to
President Carter1
Washington, February 4, 1977
SUBJECT
Results of Visit to Europe and Japan
I. Introduction
The leaders of Western Europe and Japan responded most posi-
tively to your initiative in launching high-level and substantive consul-
tations in the first week of your Administration.2
As a result of my conversations in the various capitals:
—each leader has received a clear and firm statement of your com-
mitment to the collective defense;
—each understands your determination to tackle successfully the
economic and political problems confronting the industrialized de-
mocracies—and your determination to make progress on such issues as
non-proliferation and reduction of international arms sales, which have
thus far been neglected;
—each is looking forward to participating with you in the summit
this spring;
—Prime Ministers Callaghan and Fukuda were extremely pleased
to receive your invitations to visit the United States; and
—the visit to Japan, based on my warm reception there, has served
to highlight the importance your Administration attaches to Japan’s
role in the front ranks of world leadership and responsibility.
As a result of the visit your Administration has confirmed the
United States’ commitment to the North Atlantic Alliance. My talks
with the members of the European Commission and with Secretary-
General van Lennep of the OECD have already extended, beyond the
actions of past Administrations, your commitment to working more
closely with a unifying Europe and with the principal multilateral insti-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 31, Vice President, Europe and Japan, 1/23/77–2/1/77: 1/14–28/77. Top Secret.
Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page and wrote: “Comments given on previous
memos. J.” On February 2, Mondale sent Carter two memoranda: the first was on
“Europe/Japan Visit—Personal Appraisal of Leaders;” the second was on “Recom-
mended Actions Stemming from My Visit to Europe and Japan.” Both memoranda are
ibid.
2 Daily reports on Mondale’s trip are in the Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Staff Material, Special Projects, Henry Owen, Box 29, Summit: London: (VP Trip):
1–3/77; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 31,
Vice President, Europe and Japan, 1/23/77–2/1/77: 1/14–28/77; and Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 8, Japan: Prime Minister
Fukuda, 3/21–22/77: Briefing Book [II].
