1979  649
Trident submarine, we might end up building only ten of these sub-
marines and thus these boats might be only a minor part of our SLBM 
force. He remarked that he was reluctant for that matter to depend too 
much on SLBMs. He also noted that if we did not pursue a surviv-
able land-­based missile system, this almost implies an invitation to the 
Soviets to concentrate on reducing the survivability of the other two 
strategic force components. He noted the diversity of problems that the 
Soviets would face in trying to find counters to some sort of a multiple 
aimpoint scheme as well as to our SLBM force. Finally, he remarked 
that given the large R&D efforts the Soviets were making, there was 
always the possibility of a technological breakthrough against one of 
our strategic force components. (S)
Stan Turner remarked that yesterday the President had criticized 
the principals for not presenting more information on the SALT impacts 
of the schemes they were discussing.2 He noted that, in his view, stay-
ing in the land-­based missile business may work to the disadvantage 
of our long term SALT interests. He remarked that if we got out of the 
land-­based missile business, and then deployed the Trident II missile, 
which would be good enough to put Soviet land-­based ICBMs at risk, 
this might push the Soviets toward adopting mobile survivable sys-
tems as well, and thus we would have created a very good situation in 
which neither side’s forces would be vulnerable. (S)
The President asked how many missiles the Soviets had deployed in 
silos. [1 line not declassified] (S)
Secretary Brown disputed Admiral Turner’s arguments by argu-
ing that if the Soviets can concentrate on anti-­submarine warfare, they 
might actually succeed in threatening the survivability of our SSBNs. 
He argued that maintaining a variety of survivable basing modes 
may pose such a challenge to Soviet interests in gaining counterforce 
capabilities as to encourage their acceptance of arms control. He also 
noted that by pursuing survivable basing modes for all our systems, 
we would be in a posture in which it would be easier for us to accept 
arms control reductions. He noted that with a fully survivable Triad we 
could probably reduce our forces by a factor of two or more. (S)
The President remarked that the main point of all these arguments 
seems to be that there is no flexibility if we proceed with 190,000 lb. 
missile. (C)
David Aaron asked if [less than one line not declassified] the Soviets 
can really outrace us [less than one line not declassified] Secretary Brown 
responded that calculations the Defense Department had done indi-
cated that fractionation would be a losing proposition for the Soviets. 
He remarked that under current plans, a large margin of extra shelters 
2 See Document 141.
