802
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
and even the Prime Minister’s office. When everyone is responsible, it
is certain no one is responsible.
The centralized agency should maintain a centralized file con-
taining all pertinent information. If necessary, technical assistance
might be given in this regard. A security clearance program could be
instituted in connection with present employees and workers, as well
as applicants. This program need not be complex, given the lack of ef-
fective administrative control in the government bureaucracy, but the
minimum of a check against this file would produce adequate results.
Until the central file has been set up, the individual Ministers and
chiefs of other organizations may have to be prodded into taking action
on whatever information is now in the possession of the various secu-
rity agencies. This information is sufficient to hunt out the most fla-
grant offenders. In this connection select committees in each gov-
ernment agency might be formed to draw up lists and see to it that
action is taken on them.
Labor
This is a very sensitive field and should be given the highest con-
sideration. In view of communist penetration of most labor organiza-
tions suppression of such organizations might for the moment be the
only solution, but steps should be taken without delay to employ other
means. An attempt might be made to establish a national union,
perhaps encouraged by pro-Western elements, but definitely not
government-sponsored. It would seem in the early stages that the
union leadership will require financial support, and arrangements
could be made to obtain a success or two in the union’s demands in
order to gain the confidence of the rank-and-file, and to gain adherents.
The union could carry the fight into the communist camp without,
however, neglecting true union objectives.
Given communist methods in the field of labor and the head start
the communists now have among organized labor in Iran, there seems
to be no other way of diverting the small existing labor movement
away from the communist groove except through some “encouraged”
organization. There is no guaranty of success in such a delicate opera-
tion. It would seem dangerous, however, to let labor continue to drift in
a northerly direction.6
6 Embassy Despatch No. 145, dated August 19, 1952, entitled, “Case for Interference
in Labor Affairs in Iran.” [Footnote is in the original. Despatch 145 is in National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 888.062/8–1952.]
