International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 323 and the climate in the Congress for trade agreements we hope to bring back from the MTN would be more favorable. (Note: The Chairmen of both the House and Senate Trade Subcommittees have substantial fastener production in their areas.) State and Treasury have indicated that they believe this approach would minimize the adverse domestic economic and foreign policy costs of relief, although it would weaken our general commitment to reject protectionism. I recommend that you proclaim the tariff rate quota proposed by Interior, Commerce, Labor, and STR.6 Option 2; No Import Relief State, Treasury, and Defense recommend that you determine import relief is not in the national economic interest. They argue that there is insufficient economic justification for import relief. The industry has remained quite profitable despite depressed production and employment. The costs of relief to consumers would be substantial. It is estimated that relief would result in a net job loss to the overall economy due to the drain on consumer expenditures for other goods and services. A significant portion of the industry does not face serious import competition and might receive windfall profits if relief is given. The 20 percent appreciation of the yen during 1977 is expected to alleviate competitive pressures from Japan. (Note: Import prices for a small sample of items were found by the USITC to range from 43 to 93 percent of U.S. producers’ prices in the first half of 1977.) Finally, it is not clear that the industry would undertake major adjustments during a period of import relief to improve its competitiveness. The foreign policy consequences of granting relief are judged by these agencies as adverse. The U.S. Government would be seen abroad as moving away from its general commitment to reject protectionism. Benefits to developing countries under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) would be removed if relief is given (though these benefits are nominal due to low tariffs on the products involved). The Governments of Japan, Canada, Australia, India, and the EC are opposed to relief and the Canadians have threatened retaliation if action is taken. These agencies support a national security investigation under section 232 as the appropriate way to determine our national security interests and feel the industry will not deteriorate so rapidly that we cannot wait on the results of that investigation. 6 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to the recommendation.
