International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
323
and the climate in the Congress for trade agreements we hope to bring
back from the MTN would be more favorable. (Note: The Chairmen of
both the House and Senate Trade Subcommittees have substantial fas-
tener production in their areas.)
State and Treasury have indicated that they believe this approach
would minimize the adverse domestic economic and foreign policy
costs of relief, although it would weaken our general commitment to
reject protectionism.
I recommend that you proclaim the tariff rate quota proposed by
Interior, Commerce, Labor, and STR.6
Option 2; No Import Relief
State, Treasury, and Defense recommend that you determine im-
port relief is not in the national economic interest. They argue that there
is insufficient economic justification for import relief. The industry has
remained quite profitable despite depressed production and employ-
ment. The costs of relief to consumers would be substantial. It is esti-
mated that relief would result in a net job loss to the overall economy
due to the drain on consumer expenditures for other goods and serv-
ices. A significant portion of the industry does not face serious import
competition and might receive windfall profits if relief is given. The 20
percent appreciation of the yen during 1977 is expected to alleviate
competitive pressures from Japan. (Note: Import prices for a small
sample of items were found by the USITC to range from 43 to 93 per-
cent of U.S. producers’ prices in the first half of 1977.) Finally, it is not
clear that the industry would undertake major adjustments during a
period of import relief to improve its competitiveness.
The foreign policy consequences of granting relief are judged by
these agencies as adverse. The U.S. Government would be seen abroad
as moving away from its general commitment to reject protectionism.
Benefits to developing countries under the Generalized System of Pref-
erences (GSP) would be removed if relief is given (though these ben-
efits are nominal due to low tariffs on the products involved). The Gov-
ernments of Japan, Canada, Australia, India, and the EC are opposed to
relief and the Canadians have threatened retaliation if action is taken.
These agencies support a national security investigation under sec-
tion 232 as the appropriate way to determine our national security in-
terests and feel the industry will not deteriorate so rapidly that we
cannot wait on the results of that investigation.
6 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to the recommendation.
