1979  539
the detriment of the West, and from the seeming US reluctance to use 
military force to counter the expansion of Soviet and Cuban presence 
in the Third World.
5. Soviet military involvement in Third World conflicts has evolved 
from military assistance programs, to occasional use of Soviet forces 
in defensive roles, to the extensive use of Cuban combat forces. The 
Cuban intervention in Angola and especially Ethiopia has probably 
strengthened Soviet confidence in the feasibility and effectiveness of 
this strategy, enhanced its appeal among political and military lead-
ers in both Moscow and Havana, and encouraged them to press this 
strategy. Soviet and Cuban leaders probably will believe that, as long 
as such actions do not portray them as invaders and do not threaten 
the West’s allies or its sources of vital raw materials, the risk of Western 
military involvement and escalation to a wider conflict will be slight.
6. The interdependent relationship between the USSR and Cuba 
is complex, and both sides would probably find it difficult to deter-
mine at this stage who has gained more from their joint military ven-
tures. The Cubans have worked closely with the Soviets, and Cuban 
involvement in the Third World has served Soviet policy. The foremost 
advantage in using Cubans or other friendly forces is the reduction in 
visibility of Soviet involvement in Third World conflicts. It also allows 
Moscow to exert influence in circumstances where Soviet forces would 
be unwelcome.
7. Calculation of the risks in applying military force remains a 
central feature of Soviet policy. The Angolan and Ethiopian ventures, 
though dramatic in scale and noteworthy in their use of Cuban forces, 
did not entail major risks for the Kremlin, but reflected Moscow’s 
assessment of African reactions, of political restraints on the United 
States, and the availability of Cuban forces. Though the initial role of 
the Soviets in Cuban military operations in Angola is not known, we 
assume that the strategy and tactics employed were coordinated with 
them. In Ethiopia, Moscow’s role was clearly more dominant from the 
outset.
8. In the few instances where the Soviets have introduced their 
own military forces into conflicts in the Third World, they did so to 
assist friendly countries and to inhibit possible Western military ini-
tiatives. In these cases, however, they have exercised a policy which 
strictly limits the role of Soviet forces while at the same time accepting 
measured risks of escalation.
—Their pilots and air defense units have engaged in combat, but to 
date have not operated outside friendly territory.
—Soviet naval forces have established or augmented a presence in 
the regions of conflict but have not engaged in combat.
