664 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 192. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, March 4, 1979, 2–3 p.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Begin PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Vice President Walter Mondale Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large Samuel W. Lewis, U.S. Ambassador to Israel Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Herbert Hansell, Legal Adviser, State Dept. William Quandt, NSC Staff Ed Sanders, Senior Advisor to the President and the Secretary of State Prime Minister Menachem Begin Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to U.S. Meir Rosenne, Legal Adviser, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Yehuda Blum, Ambassador to United Nations Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister Yehuda Avner, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister Hanan Bar-On, Minister, Israeli Embassy to the United States Dan Pattir, Press Spokesman Yehial Kadishai, Director of the Prime Minister’s Bureau President Carter: Last night we spent two hours together.2 This is the most stubborn problem that I have ever dealt with. We made little progress. There is a need for flexibility on both sides. There has been no proposal put forward by Israel that would be easier for Egypt to accept than those that are now on the table. I want to ask Secretary Vance to address three basic issues: Article 6, paragraphs 2 and 5, and the question of the target date. 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 36, Serial Xs—(3/79). Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter held a second, private meeting with Begin in the Oval Office from 2:58 p.m. to 3:27 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No memorandum of conversation for this second meeting has been found. 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, the President and Mrs. Carter hosted Begin and Mrs. Begin at the White House from 6:59 p.m. to 10:08 p.m., March 3. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
