National Security Policy 543 the goals laid down in the new Seven-Year Plan, which begins in 1959, are in the main feasible, except for those in agriculture, and that the USSR’s gross national product (GNP) will grow at an average annual rate of about six percent during the plan period. Assuming that the US maintains an average rate of growth of about 3.5 percent per year, Soviet GNP in 1965 will be, in dollar terms, about half that of the US, as compared with about 40 percent at present. Despite the smaller size of its economy, the dollar value of the USSR’s defense expenditure is about equal to that of the US. Our estimates of the probable trend of military expenditures indicate that by 1963 these will be 45–50 percent greater than in 1957. Since growth of GNP in this period is estimated at 45 percent, the defense burden may thus be slightly heavier in 1963 than at present. Despite this, we estimate that Soviet industrial produc­ tion will grow over the new plan period at an average annual rate of about nine percent, and that per capita consumption will be about one-­ third higher in 1965 than it was in 1957. 19. Beyond what they contribute to Soviet military power, the achievements of the Soviet economy have become a vitally important element in the impact which Soviet policy has on the world situation. First is the direct politico-­economic impact, arising from the ability of the USSR to initiate and support programs of economic aid or credit to foreign countries, to import goods from countries which would other­ wise be hard-­pressed to find markets, and to export various materials in quantities which (if the Soviet leaders so desired) could disrupt pre­ viously existing patterns of world trade. In this connection, manipula­ tion of prices is a key weapon of the USSR. Second is the political and psychological effect on underdeveloped countries of the successful and rapid economic development achieved by Soviet and Chinese methods. The Soviet and Chinese Communist leaders attach great importance to the possibility of convincing these countries that only by adopting Communist methods and accepting Communist assistance can they too achieve rapid economic growth. Third is the economic impact in a narrower sense, arising inevitably from the appearance in the world of a great new producing and trading unit, the influence of which could not fail to be great even if it were not deliberately used for political pur­ poses by the Soviet leaders. In all three ways the Soviet economy will present a growing challenge to the Western world. Developments Affecting the Soviet Military Posture 20. The Soviets will almost certainly continue to believe that they must have a large and diversified military establishment, designed to meet contingencies up to and including general war. Thus they will at all times maintain substantial forces-­in-­being. Meanwhile, they will press ahead with research and development programs in order to
