3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
504
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
My initial reactions are as follows:
1) If we accommodate the Soviets, both we and NATO will have
bowed—for the first time—to Soviet pressure.
2) We would be engaging in a blockade of China to the benefit of
the Soviet Union, and this would destroy the chances of any collabora-
tive US-Chinese relationship.
3) It is noteworthy that the Soviet Union armed China when China
was hostile to the US, and it has ignored all your expressions of concern
regarding Cuban and Soviet arms in Africa as well as elsewhere.
4) The Soviet Union also rejected any linkage between its conduct
in Africa and SALT, but it is hinting at linkage between our relations
with China and SALT.
5) In the light of the above, I recommend that you ask Cy, Harold,
and me to draft an ambiguous response, suggesting that this matter, as
well as others, is something that can be discussed at the Summit, in the
context of reciprocal efforts to improve US-Soviet relations, and without
prejudice to the right of every state to acquire purely defensive
weaponry.
Attachment
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter3
December 27, 1978
Dear Mr. President,
Availing myself of our established practice of confidential ex-
change of views on urgent problems of international life and bilateral
relations, I would like to touch upon one important question related to
China. We have already had an opportunity to express our viewpoint
concerning the forthcoming establishment of diplomatic relations be-
tween the US and the PRC. This time I shall speak of a different thing,
namely, of the plans of some Western states to supply China with
weapons, military equipment and technology which is intended for
military purposes or can be used for those purposes.
This question is not a new one. Recently it has been a subject of dis-
cussion in various NATO bodies, at other forums of Western countries
3 Secret; Eyes Only. Printed from an unofficial translation.
