Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
211
—We will identify certain programs/interviews which might be
recast as video programs. Such video tapes would be made available
to selected posts for local use with specific audiences.
—On a longer range basis, the material will also be adapted for
use in the Agency’s publication Al Majal, a monthly Arabic-language
magazine published for Near East and North Africa countries.
—Problems of Communism, in addition to an early 1980 article by
University of Chicago Professor Alexandre Benningsen on how Soviet
Muslims see the Muslim world outside the Soviet Union, will incorpo-
rate continued coverage of the Islamic peoples of the Soviet Union
and China.
As we develop these concepts, we will continue to look for addi-
tional ways to communicate effectively to our audiences the state of
the Muslim minority in the Soviet Union.
69.
Editorial Note
On December 5, 1979, Representative Elizabeth Holtzman (D-New
York), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees, and
International Law, called for National Security Council Staff member
Paul Henze to resign in a letter to President Jimmy Carter. The letter
was released to newspapers and drew attention to comments made by
Henze during the August 15 meeting of the Board of International
Broadcasting (BIB) in Washington. At the meeting, while discussing
the future of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty (RFE/RL), Henze
referenced the May 1 interview broadcast on the Romanian service of
Radio Free Europe with Valerian Trifa, a Bishop of the Romanian
Orthodox Church in the United States and Canada. Trifa had been
accused of being a member of the Romanian Fascist Party Iron Guard
during World War II and responsible for instigating the Jewish pogrom
in Bucharest in 1941 and was under investigation by the Justice Depart-
ment. Holtzman asserted that Henze had characterized concern about
the Trifa interview as “silly” and that it “certainly isn’t serious from
the point of view of the White House.” Holtzman also directed the
Subcommittee staff to investigate the matter. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special, Box 4, Chron File: 12/79)
In his August 17 report to Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski on the meeting, Henze made no
mention of the incident regarding Trifa. He detailed his impressions
of the contrast between the Board for International Broadcasting and
the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Corporate Board, his impression
that the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty relocation “has been blown
