1955  69
62.	
Telegram 402 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 11, 1955, 1 p.m.
402. From Johnson.
Following is text of draft agreement proposed today by Wang:
QUOTE
Agreement on the question of the return of civilians of both sides 
to their respective countries adopted by the Ambassadorial representa­
tives of the People’s Republic of China and the United States of Amer­
ica in their talks held in Geneva.
1. Both sides declare that the nationals of each side residing in the 
other who desire to return to their respective countries are entitled to 
depart for their respective countries. Civilians of the above description 
who are involved in unfinished civil or criminal cases under the laws 
of the country of their residence shall be entitled to the same right upon 
the settlement of their civil or criminal cases.
2. In order to guarantee the implementation of the above principle, 
the People’s Republic of China and the United States of America will 
each entrust the Republic of India and the United Kingdom respectively 
with the charge of the affairs of the return of civilians of the respective 
countries residing in the other. The countries thus entrusted shall per­
form the following duties:
A. Upon the request of a civilian of one side residing in the other 
who desires to return or upon the request of his government made in 
his behalf the entrusted country shall make representations with the 
government of the country in which this civilian is residing with a view 
to settling his difficulty in departure;
B. In the event of a civilian of one side residing in the other who 
desires to return and who is being prevented from doing so, the 
entrusted country shall, upon his personal request or the request in his 
behalf by his government, conduct investigations and make represen­
tations with the government of the country in which the civilian con­
cerned is residing in accordance with the findings of the investigation 
with a view to arriving at a settlement;
C. In the event of a civilian of one side residing in the other who 
desires to return and who finds difficulty in paying off the return jour­
ney the entrusted country shall render him assistance on behalf of his 
government.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1155. Official Use Only; 
Priority.
