Chapter 2, January–June 1989 91 (S) While some Allies—­especially littoral states—­would support a ban on nuclear-­armed SLCMs, others would be concerned about shifting NATO nuclear emphasis more to land-­based systems, thus intensifying the controversy surrounding modernization of NATO theater nuclear forces. (S) In conclusion, nuclear-­armed SLCMs make an important contribution to U.S. security. Their deployment on a large number of relatively survivable platforms also helps to enhance strategic stability. There are differences of view on the verifiability and effect on U.S. security of a ban on nuclear-­armed SLCMs. Most believe that an effectively verifiable ban or limits on nuclear-­armed SLCMs do not appear possible, and that—­even if effective verification were possible—­it would not be in the U.S. interest to ban or limit such systems. Another view is that it is premature to exclude a ban or limits on nuclear-­armed SLCMs. In this view, it is held that continued study of SLCM verification may eventually produce a regime that meets our most serious concerns, and elimination or constraint of the Soviet nuclear SLCM threat may be in the U.S. net benefit. Conclusion (S) The SLCM issue does not have to be resolved at the present time. Verification issues relating to SLCMs will be addressed in due course. Question #3: START Verification Given present uncertainties about the verifiability of our current START position, would an agreement along its lines be acceptable? What would we be willing to pay to improve verifiability in terms of: additional resources for NTM; negotiating leverage for additional cooperative verification measures; intrusiveness, as the measures will be applied to us; increased risk of no START agreement? Objectives (S) The U.S. has stated consistently that effective verification must be the cornerstone of any future arms control agreement. The objectives of an effective verification regime for START must be: to ensure confidence in the agreement; to help deter Soviet violation of the Treaty by increasing both the likelihood of U.S. detection and the difficulty to the Soviets of committing an undetected violation; and to permit timely detection of violations of military or political significance so that appropriate steps can be taken to protect U.S. and Allied security. An assessment of the acceptability of a START verification regime is a function of treaty provisions and definitions, monitoring judgments, the record of past Soviet compliance, our assessment of Soviet incentives and disposition to cheat, assessments of military and political risks, and the availability of safeguards and countermeasures.
