3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
295
considered at a meeting to be held shortly. In response to a further
question about current newspaper stories on differences within the Ad-
ministration on the subject of linkage, the Secretary reaffirmed the
President’s intention to move ahead without delay in the SALT negoti-
ations. Dobrynin was cautioned not to put undue emphasis on news-
paper reports.
Attachment
Oral Message From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter4
undated
We would like to draw your attention once again to the question
on which we already had a frank and useful exchange of opinions last
August,5 namely, to the question of preventing the realization by the
authorities of South Africa of their plans to develop nuclear weapons.
We met with satisfaction your communication concerning steps
taken by the United States to exert restraining influence on the gov-
ernment of South Africa. As you have informed us, South African au-
thorities gave assurances to the US government that South Africa
would not conduct any nuclear test explosions. It is also known that
South African authorities made public statements to that effect. How-
ever, competent Soviet organizations have data that work is continued
in South Africa to develop nuclear weapons and prepare test explo-
sions. Equipping is being completed of one test site, and construction of
another is under way. Information is also available that an industrial
reactor is being built in South Africa for producing weapon-type pluto-
nium and, in addition to a small facility already in operation, a new
large factory for the production of enriched uranium is planned. Its
construction will enhance to a considerable extent the potential of that
country to produce nuclear weapons.
In view of the above, a question arises regarding further actions to
prevent conducting nuclear tests and developing nuclear weapons by
South Africa.
As we understand, possibilities of the United States to exert direct
restraining influence upon that country are far from being exhausted.
Naturally, the possibilities of the UN Security Council should also be
used in this regard. We, of course, would be prepared to consider also
4 No classification marking.
5 See Document 41.
