Panama  963
The President stated that anything that binds Mexico closer to the 
United States is in itself worth a billion. The Vice President added that 
the matter of stability of local government is a question with which 
State would have to be concerned and is of very great importance.
Sec. Benson asked if it was planned to discontinue the present 
canal. Mr. Roderick replied that this also is a question for determination 
through State Department.
Mr. Brucker inquired about informing Congressional Committees 
of this proposal and of publicizing it. Mr. Henderson asked that the 
question of publicity be deferred until Mr. Herter’s return on May 6th.3
Mr. Brucker felt some urgency with regard to Congressional hear-
ings. The President thought that no great problem was involved in the 
basic report submitted by the Panama Canal Company, rather it was 
in the things the State Department needed to consider. He directed Mr. 
Henderson to take it under study and discuss it with Mr. Dillon in the 
absence of Mr. Herter.
3 Secretary of State Herter departed Washington on April 26, 1960, on a trip that 
took him to London, to Tehran for the CENTO Council meeting, to Istanbul for the NATO 
Council meeting, and to Athens. He returned to Washington on May 6, 1960. For the texts 
of the Department of State press releases concerning his trip, see Department of State 
Bulletin, April 4, 1960, p. 517, and May 23, 1960.
PM–44.	
Memorandum from John H. Stutesman, Jr., to the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs 
(Rubottom)1

Washington, May 2, 1960.
Isthmian Canal Plans—1960, A Report of the Panama Canal Company 
Board of Directors
Attached for your information and appropriate action is an excerpt 
from a draft record of action of the cabinet meeting of April 29, 1960. 
This record of action has not yet been approved by the President.2
1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Cabinet Meetings, Lot 68 D 350, CP-9. 
Cabinet Paper-Privileged. Stutesman was the Special Assistant to the Deputy Under 
Secretary of State for Administration. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2. According to a memorandum dated May 6 from John A. Calhoun, the Director of 
the Executive Secretariat, to Secretary of State Herter, the President on May 5 approved 
the referenced draft record of action. (Presidential Cabinet Meetings, Lot 68 D 350, CP–9)
