each case by the submission of satisfactory evidence to the Department of
State.
It would be a further source of gratification to me to be able to draw to the
attention of my government the fact that similar assurances had been given
by the Government of Albania that favored-nation treatment also would be
accorded American interests in Albania, coincident with an initiation of
formal diplomatic relations between the Government of Albania and that of
the United States of America; and that the Albanian Government will include
this provision as a treaty clause in any future commercial convention that
may be drawn up between Albania and the American Government.
In connection with the above, for the completion of the archives of this
Commission, I venture to suggest the propriety of our confirming these
understandings by an exchange of written communications.
Please accept, Mr. Prime Minister, the assurances of my highest
consideration.”
To the above, the Prime Minister replied as follows, under date of June 25, 1922:
“Mr. Commissioner: In response to your letter of June 23, 1922, I beg to state
that the Albanian Government feels the utmost satisfaction to enter into
correspondence with the unofficial representative of the United States
Government, which more than once has saved Albania from partition and
utter destruction, by pleading her cause during most critical periods of her
history.
In connection with the two points you bring forth in your letter as needing
settlement, before you could take any steps in favor of the official recognition
of the Government of Albania by that of the United States, allow me to
communicate to you that:
1. The Albanian Government will recognize the passports given by
the authorities of the United States of America, to persons of
Albanian origin, who are naturalized Americans in conformity with
the American laws concerning nationalities.
2. In case a commercial treaty is concluded between the
Government of the United States of America and that of Albania,
the latter promises to insert in the said treaty, the most favored
nation clause. Meanwhile, following the official recognition of the
Government of Albania by that of the United States, and pending
