airworthiness of aircraft intended to engage in international commerce. “Each contracting State shall deposit with every other State party to this Convention and with the Pan American Union three months prior to the date proposed for their enforcement any additions to or amendments of the regulations referred to in the last preceding paragraph.” 10. It is suggested that it would be beneficial if a provision could be included in the Convention giving the states, dominions and colonies of this hemisphere, not members of the Pan American Union, the privilege of adhering to this Convention if they should so desire. 11. It will be found that Articles 32, 33, 35 and 36, providing that the Pan American Union shall cooperate with the Governments of the contracting States, shall receive the ratifications and retain them in its archives, and shall give notice of the adherence or denunciation by one State to the other signatory States, grant to the Pan American Union a political character which it is not thought that such an organization should enjoy. This is especially true of Article XXXII. In this connection you are referred to your instructions in connection with the Project of Convention on the Pan American Union. The question of the participation of the Pan American Union provided for in this Convention will be determined by the manner in which the Convention organizing the Pan American Union is finally approved by the Sixth International Conference. Should no changes be made in the Convention organizing the Pan American Union none will be needed with respect to this feature of the Convention on Commercial Aviation, but should the sections of the former Convention authorizing the Pan American Union to act as custodian of the originals of diplomatic instruments not be approved, changes in Articles 33, 35, and 36 of the Convention on Commercial Aviation will be necessary. Inasmuch as the resolutions and conclusions of the Inter-American Commercial Aviation Commission were not reached without some controversy between the delegates of the different nations represented, it is highly probable that the Convention will not be adopted at Habana without
