International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
397
I was gratified a few months ago with the Ushiba–Strauss Agree-
ment5 that was reached with your help. I might ask Bob Strauss to com-
ment so that the two of us would be informed if we should discuss any-
thing between us.
Ambassador Robert Strauss: I will be brief. Under the leadership of
President Carter, this Administration is committed to free trade at a
time when protectionist sentiment is as strong as I have ever seen it.
Last week the issue was fasteners. The clock is running out on this.
Rather than adversaries across the bargaining table, we should
consider ourselves members of the same team working together. Japan
simply must upgrade the quality of its offer. We must have help there
so that together we can beat back the protectionist sentiment. Optical
measures are frequently helpful. But they must also be substantive.
You should find room for a bit more beef and citrus. This will have an
impact on the Congress to give us and you time to move forward.
When you send a mission, be specific with plane purchases and timber.
Look for specific things. Even if the dollar value is not large, it will have
an impact.
Prime Minister Fukuda: The Bonn Summit must be a success.
Some say it will be a place to agree to disagree, but we must agree there.
We must reaffirm our commitment to free trade.
The Multilateral Trade Negotiations will have reached a conclu-
sion by then. Last year at the London Summit I said that strong coun-
tries must pursue as high a growth rate as possible. We will cooperate
in order to stabilize international monetary currencies.
On another subject, the purchase of Alaskan oil, I understand that
one-third of this oil now goes to the West Coast and two-thirds to the
East Coast. Would it be possible for Japan to either buy some of this oil
or swap for it? I know you have some problems with this, but we have
thought about it for a long time.
President Carter: I know. I know you discussed this with Vice
President Mondale just a few hours after I had become President and
we had talked about it last year. We will certainly keep this suggestion
in mind.
I apologize for keeping you overtime. Our discussions have been
important and fruitful. There have been no toasts because this has been
an informal luncheon. But I wish to express my gratitude to you. We
have shared the past, we share the present, and we will share the future
together.
5 See Documents 97 and 99.
