714
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
from that fate? If 100,000 Russian troops, and the barbaric use of lethal
gas, and the specter of nightly assassinations—if these fail to alarm us,
what will? If the Soviet lunge toward the most strategic oil-rich spot on
Earth fails to unite us, what will? And if we and our allies and friends
fail to use every single peaceful means available to preserve the peace,
what hope is there that peace will long be preserved?
While history holds its breath, America has moved decisively. To
show the Soviet Union that it cannot invade another nation and still
conduct business as usual with the United States, our country has em-
bargoed 17 million tons of grain, tightened controls on high technology
trade, limited Soviet fishing in our waters, raised our defense budget to
upgrade all aspects of our forces, strengthened our naval presence in
the Indian Ocean, intensified development of our rapid deployment
forces, and offered to help other sovereign states in the region to main-
tain their security.
In the U.N. General Assembly, the United States joined more than
100 other nations in an unprecedented majority calling for the imme-
diate, unconditional, and total withdrawal of Soviet troops from Af-
ghanistan.4 But the President, the Congress, and the American people
understand that a world which travels to the Moscow games devalues
its condemnation and offers its complicity to Soviet propaganda.
I am convinced that the American people do not want their ath-
letes cast as pawns in that tawdry propaganda charade. And I urge you
to respect that undeniable consensus. Your decision today is not a ques-
tion of denying our Olympic team the honor they deserve; for the
American people, as you know, deeply respect the sacrifice we are
asking our athletes to make. It is no longer a question of whether partic-
ipation in the Moscow Olympics confers legitimacy on Soviet aggres-
sion. When the Communist Party prints a million handbooks to tell its
top activists that the Summer Games mean world respect for Soviet for-
eign policy, surely that issue is behind us.
Nor is it a question of drawing a line between sports and politics.
That line the Soviets long ago erased. When billions of rubles are di-
verted to the games from Soviet domestic needs; when Moscow and
other Olympic cities are purged of dissidents who might speak out;
when Soviet children who might meet Western people and ideas on the
streets are packed off to internal exile; when Soviet emissaries roam the
globe offering athletes expense-paid trips to Moscow; when Soviet
sports officials distort the number of teams committed to partici-
pating—surely the issue of Soviet politics in Soviet sports is also behind
us.
Above all, the decision you will make today is not a choice be-
tween a sports issue and a national security issue; for the President and
Congress have made it clear that the Olympic boycott is a genuine ele-
