March–August 1953
597
suggestion to Dr. Mosadeq of a figure which would be a basis for a
lump sum settlement of the compensation question in the oil dispute?4
It is GTI’s recommendation that the U.S. Government avoid any
unwanted interference in the oil dispute, while at the same time per-
mitting Mr. Levy, as a private citizen, to request by letter Dr. Mosadeq’s
reaction to his suggestion for an equitable lump sum settlement.5
(C) What reply should TCA make to the National Iranian Oil Com-
pany’s request to have 100 employees trained in the United States?6
It is GTI’s recommendation that TCA be informed that there is no
policy objection to acceptance of the Iranian request.7
(D) What reply should President Eisenhower make to Dr. Mo-
sadeq’s letter of May 28 requesting increased U.S. aid to Iran?8
It is GTI’s recommendation that the President inform Dr. Mosadeq
that the present level of economic aid to Iran will be increased in FY
1954.9
(E) What reply will be made to Mr. Stassen who has instructed
DMS to open conversations with the Department on the basis of his un-
derstanding that U.S. economic aid to Iran is to be increased by approx-
imately $15,000,000 in FY 1954?
It is GTI’s recommendation that DMS be informed that we con-
sider U.S. policy objectives would be furthered through an increase in
4 Walter Levy made the proposal in early May. (Memorandum from Richards to
Byroade, June 9, which is tab B to another copy of the memorandum in National Ar-
chives, RG 59, GTI Files, Lot 57 D 155, Box 41)
5 To the left of paragraph B in the margin is the handwritten word, “delay.”
6 According to a memorandum from Richards to Byroade, June 8, TCI had been re-
quested by the NIOC to accept 100 NIOC employees into the United States for “advance
training in mechanical, electrical, and chemical engineering, and in petroleum tech-
nology and accountancy.” Henderson recommended that the request be met because it
accorded with the overall objectives of technical assistance to Iran. Ambassador Aldrich
in London, on the other hand, warned that “any move by the United States to facilitate
training of individuals on behalf of the NIOC would be interpreted in London as United
States Government approval of, or at least acquiescence in, Iran’s oil policy.” (National
Archives, RG 59, GTI Files, Lot 57 D 155, Box 41)
7 To the left of this sentence in the margin is the handwritten word “Delay.”
8 The text of Mosadeq’s letter, May 28, is in Eisenhower Library, Ann Whitman File,
Box 32, Iran 1953–59(9). In a memorandum to Dulles on June 5, Byroade described the
three principal points of the letter as: “(1) A recitation of the difficulties experienced by
Iran, allegedly as a result of British attitudes and activities. (2) An expression of grave
concern over the probable consequences of a further deterioration of the financial and
economic situation in Iran, which deterioration can be reversed only by (a) the removal of
obstacles to the sale of oil or (b) increased economic aid from the United States. (3) An ur-
gent appeal to the U.S. for increased aid ‘if the American Government is not able to effect
a removal’ of the obstacles to the sale of Iranian oil.” The full text of Byroade’s memo-
randum is in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954, p. 732 (Document 330).
9 To the left of this sentence in the margin is the handwritten word “no.”
