Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks 13 [less than 1 line not declassified] (TS) [1 paragraph (18 lines) not declassified]13 3. Current Treaty Limits Upon ASAT Use (U) A number of agreements currently limit ASAT activities to some degree during peacetime. (U) The International Telecommunications Convention prohibits harmful interference with radio services or communications. (U) The 1967 Outer Space Treaty14 bans placing nuclear weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction in orbit and establishes satellites as under the jurisdiction of states which register them with the UN. This treaty further requires international consultations before proceeding with any activity which would cause potentially harmful interference with the activities of other parties in the peaceful use of outer space. (U) The Limited Test Ban Treaty prohibits detonating a nuclear weapon in space. (U) The 1971 “Measures Agreement to Reduce the Outbreak of Nuclear War” requires the U.S. and USSR to notify each other in the event of interference with strategic warning systems or their related communication systems. (U) The 1972 ABM Treaty and the Interim SALT Agreement ban interference with National Technical Means (NTM) of Verification, operated in accordance with international law. III. GENERAL CONCERNS AND ISSUES A. The Threat of an ASAT Arms Competition (TS) A number of recent events have raised public concerns about a possible arms competition in space, e.g., [2 lines not declassified] exaggerated statements in the U.S. press about lasers and charged particle beams, and misinformed leaks to the press about “laser blinding” of U.S. satellites. (TS) Concern about Soviet resumption of orbital ASAT tests [less than 1 line not declassified] led to two NSC directives. Last year, NSDM 333 directed a major review of satellite vulnerability and survivability. Also, NSDM 345 (signed January 18, 1977) directed the DoD to build an ASAT system on an expedited basis to selectively nullify certain mili- 13 [2 footnotes in the original not declassified] 14 The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and other Celestial Bodies was signed at Washington, London, and Moscow, January 27, 1967, and entered into force October 10, 1967.
