September 18–December 16, 1978 433 for sanctions against Egypt if it proceeds to sign a peace treaty. We cannot rule out the possibility that this time Sadat is more determined to get what he is asking for, even at risk of delaying the Treaty. Israeli backtracking on a commitment now to an accelerated schedule for withdrawal to the interim line could further stiffen the Egyptian position. If Sadat is more determined on this occasion, the issue for us will be whether we wish to support him, or to bring pressure to dissuade him because we decide it is not in our interest to see the Treaty delayed. Israel’s Objectives The mood in Israel is one of growing querulousness and suspicion about the course the negotiations are taking. Weizman reports the Cabinet gave him a rough time, but summing up he told us Wednesday9 that if we can wrap up the Treaty package as it presently stands, Begin will be able to sell it to the Cabinet and Knesset. Even allowing for Weizman’s propensity to optimism, we share that assessment. But Weizman warns that if Egypt now attempts to achieve additional linkage it will bring the whole Treaty seriously into question because of the present mood in Israel. We do not have to accept this literally: the question clearly is how much additional baggage can be placed on the Treaty package before a serious risk of rejection of the whole package is entailed.10 The Israelis are unquestionably in a very tender mood about having their hand forced any further on the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. Begin is coming in for heavy criticism that he gave away too much at Camp David. He clearly sees as a highly important objective maintaining freedom to approach West Bank/Gaza negotiations, if at all, in a manner and at a pace that will not cause political problems for him. The Israelis have been brought to accept a great deal in the last twelve months, and in terms of Israeli public opinion, it is possible that not too much more can be forced on Israel too fast. The Options for the U.S. In these circumstances the options for the U.S. in our judgment boil down to two: —We can determine that we are best off getting the Treaty done with as soon as possible—that the momentum created by this event, together with the realization on the part of the other Arabs that they are being left out in the cold, is the process best suited to get negotiations going on the West Bank/Gaza. If we choose this course we will need to 9 November 8. 10 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, Carter wrote: “hold to present language.”
