Paraguay  1013
came to power in 1954 by a coup and was elected in a plebiscite and 
was re-­elected without opposition in 1958, for a five-­year term to expire 
on August 15, 1963.
The GOP’s political weaknesses and instability in the inter-­
American system are of vital concern. All U.S. economic assistance and 
counseling has the basic objective of promoting its economic devel-
opment and thereby political stability which will provide a favorable 
­climate for the establishment of a more democratic government so that 
it may be a greater force for strength in the Western hemisphere.
Stroessner, a so-­called “strong man” governing under the 1940 
constitution has indicated that he would like to move towards democ-
racy. The Ambassador in various speeches has encouraged Paraguay 
to take steps towards democratic reforms particularly in his April 13, 
1959 speech in which he forcefully stated the U.S. position concerning 
democracy in the Western hemisphere and made clear that the U.S. 
position towards Paraguay is not in support of dictatorship as against 
democracy. In many private conversations the Ambassador has urged 
Stroessner to move toward democracy and has even made sugges-
tions as to laws for free elections, free press, etc. In early 1958 President 
Stroessner promised Municipal elections and allowed the two oppo-
sition parties, Liberal and Febrerista, to hold conventions. Due to a 
political disturbance, these were nullified. Later, on May 29, 1959, the 
uni-­cameral Congress was dissolved due to a serious open split in the 
Colorado Party. The Colorado Party and the Army have been the base 
of Stroessner’s political strength. However, Stroessner’s waxing and 
waning of democratic moves now include the convocation of congres-
sional elections in February 1960 in which the two opposition parties 
may participate.
[text not declassified] The Embassy has concentrated on “the people 
of the U.S. to the people of Paraguay” theme in order not to appear that 
the U.S. is supporting “dictatorship” in Paraguay as against democ-
racy and also to continue to lay a basis of friendship and cooperation 
between the two peoples in case of future changes in governments 
which may occur. In this regard, Embassy officials have kept contact 
not only with the Colorado Party and government officials but also 
with opposition party leaders whose members have been received and 
welcomed in the Embassy.
The Embassy has continued to encourage free labor movement in 
labor circles in its personal contacts [text not declassified]
The Communist Party (PCP) is small, disorganized, and illegal. Its 
principal threat lies in its penetrations into the various political parties, 
including the ruling Colorado Party, through which it contributes to 
political instability. The PCP has been active in the student and labor 
movements but has not gained a dominant position. Most of the PCP
