763.72113 Mills Bill/4
[Document 100]
The Under Secretary of the Treasury (Winston) to the Assistant
Secretary of State (Olds)
WASHINGTON, March 17, 1926.
DEAR MR. OLDS: I have your letter of March 16th21 with reference to the
conversation of Mr. Prochnik, the Austrian Minister, with your Department.
In preparing comprehensive legislation for settling the questions existing
between Germany, its nationals, the United States and the American mixed
claimants, I found it impracticable to cover in the same bill the return of the
Austrian and Hungarian property. It is the desire of the Treasury that one
bill settle all war questions between the two countries and their nationals.
We could do this in the case of Germany because the Mixed Claims
Commission for the determination of American claims has been set up, the
claims have been filed, the limitation for filing of claims has passed, most
of the claims have been adjudicated, and it is possible to obtain an accurate
estimate of the total amount of awards and thus fix the probable immediate
liabilities of the Treasury with respect to advancing the cash to pay the
awards. In the Austrian and Hungarian cases a Commission, I understand,
has been set up quite recently and claims are being filed, but the period of
limitation for the filing of claims has not run, and it is impossible to
estimate, therefore, the total amount of claims which will be presented. It
follows necessarily that no satisfactory estimate can be made of the
probable amount of awards. Germany has made an arrangement for
providing cash to be applied towards the payment of awards. No such
arrangement has been set up by, the Austrian or Hungarian Governments.
The Treasury felt that it could not very well ask Congress to commit the
Treasury to liabilities the amount of which could not now be estimated and
the means of meeting which were not provided.
It seems to me that the considerations I have mentioned above clearly
differentiate the German from the Austrian and Hungarian situations. If
