1955 295 6. It occurs to me that we may raise problems by attempting to arrive at any formal agenda agreement on item two. For example, our rejection of a higher level meeting as a suitable agenda item but our acceptance of trade embargo may carry with it implication that we are prepared to do something, however conditional, with respect to latter. This implication might be avoided if no [omission in the origi­ nal—attempt?] was made to establish formal agenda. They in turn will probably reject our item on persons missing from Korean War, or accept it if we accept their item on higher level meeting. With respect to miss­ ing personnel from Korean War I find it difficult to formulate it as an agenda item but am very clear that I could easily present simply as a list of names and asking for a categorical yes or no as whether any are alive in territory under their control. 7. With reference para 6 Deptel 766 I am doubtful desirability let­ ter from myself to Wang. I would prefer make presentation on missing servicemen entirely informal and oral. With respect renunciation force believe oral statement in meeting best form but could accordance our standing arrangement give him copy my remarks this regard. 8. Depending upon nature my instructions for next meeting we should be prepared for possibility Wang may implement his threat issue public statement on our “stalling” on discussion item two. I will submit draft for Department’s approval. Shillock 227. Telegram 772 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 23, 1955, 10 p.m. 772. From Johnson. 1. At 1715 meeting, lasting one hour forty-­five minutes, today I opened with prepared statement. 2. I informed Wang that Dr. Tsien Shue-shen had departed Los Angeles September 18, and 56 other Chinese had departed on same ship. 151 others had departed by other means, so that cumulative total of those who had left for Far East between July 11 and September 21 was 380. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2355. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution.
