226 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 81. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Planning (Slocombe) to the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (Murphy)1 Washington, November 21, 1979 SUBJECT Afghanistan I appreciate your asking my views on this issue. I don’t share Bob Komer’s reservations: 1. It is, I think, very much in our interest that we keep the Afghanistan insurgency going. It would be a major blow if heavier Soviet involvement led to a clear Kabul victory and the petering out of the resistance. Indeed, it would mean that the Soviets had been able to do for Amin what no one had ever been able to do for a Kabul government. On the plus side, if the insurgency keeps going, the various rebel factions may be persuaded to get together. Clearly they won’t if things go badly. Even if they don’t, they may be able to make life difficult for Moscow’s Kabul clients even disunited if they have reasonable outside support.2 2. It is the Soviet backyard, but it is also an area where the status quo ante is not having a puppet regime. Our objective is certainly not the unattainable one of installing people in Kabul we can control, but of continuing a situation in which the Soviets, having installed (or more likely connived at installing) a friendly regime find it’s not much more than the Kabul garrison instead of a strong central government. 3. I’m all for saving assets for promising opportunities, and that would be decisive against larger scale actions, but I think a modest US investment of funds (and some arms) would be more likely to pay off here than elsewhere (see para 4 below). (Having written that, it occurs to me that Bob may mean the SecDef should save his assets for more 1 Source: Library of Congress, Donated Material of Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, Box 82, Afghanistan. Secret; Sensitive. A copy was sent to Komer. Attached but not printed is a November 20 memorandum from Sullivan to Murphy that contained comments on a Department of Defense paper characterized by Sullivan as “calling for a more aggressive covert action policy on Afghanistan.” Sullivan defended the paper, in response to Komer’s comments, noting that the paper’s objective was not to “win” in Afghanistan by attempting to “install a pro-U.S. western style democracy,” but to “ensure that the Soviets do not win and to ensure the fall of the Amin regime” by increasing monetary aid to the insurgents to $5 million. Sullivan recommended that the paper go forward “even if we do not succeed in overcoming opposition at the SCC level.” The DOD paper with Komer’s comments was not found. 2 In the left margin beside this paragraph, an unknown hand, likely Murphy’s, wrote: “All true but . . . question is whether [illegible].”
