Costa Rica 441 something generally known in the Honduran community, so I would not have been revealing “secret” information. (B) The Cuban attack on the impartiality of the United States press. An American friend in Costa Rica close to the press points out that the responsible press (liberal and conservative) in a dozen Latin American countries has been at least as strong in attacking events in Cuba as the United States press has been. He suggests that all this material should be gathered and under appropriate auspices put out in “block-­buster” form. (C) Coverage of Latin American seminars: The fact that Herb Matthews11 was able to get away with his defense of Castro in the top billing spot of the Stanford University October seminar pains me. Because of then existing Department of State policy I had to remain silent at Stanford, and could not answer him officially. In this connection I make the following suggestions: (1) That it should be arranged that persons (preferably known liberals) who know the score about communism should refute that type of talk. (2) That the agendas and subjects to be discussed at these influential meetings should carefully reviewed in advance by the Department. [text not declassified] In any event, these influential meetings should not be allowed to “go by default.” There are too many Latin Americans who feel that what is said in these meetings somehow expresses U.S. opinion. In this recommendation I am not unmindful of the excellent job that Dick Rubottom, Dr. Eisenhower and others do at these meetings. But what we need is a “task force” to cover these conferences. And the “task force” must also do a “follow-­up” job after the meetings are finished. For instance whether or not we agree with Professor Tannenbaum12 on Mexico and Cardenas,13 he made a speech at Stanford which basically refuted Matthews’ thesis. The “follow-­up” would in this case involve an attempt to get Tannenbaum to write a “critique” on the Matthews speech. (D) There are some indications that, either by design or by accident, the Roman Catholic Church in Latin America has had its attention diverted from communism into a program of resisting the inroads of Protestantism. Unfortunately, a propaganda link has been constructed between “Yanquismo,” U.S. Government representation and Protestant 11 Herbert L. Matthews, editorial staff, New York Times. 12 Frank Tannenbaum, Professor of History, Columbia University.
