March 1952–February 1953
325
selves about that legendary “principle”, which we always drag out
when we want something to hide behind.)
Generally speaking, and certainly in all important cases, there is a
responsible segment of the governing class in each of these countries
that wants the same things that we do. From time to time these respon-
sible and progressive groups actually take the leadership, though
perhaps only for a short time. Our statesmanship should be capable of
placing and supporting them in permanent tenure.
Coming from the general to the particular, everything said up to
this point applies to Persia, equally with the others.
In Persia, which is the most critical case facing us now, the unrea-
soning reaction of the “masses” against past oppressions and misery
has been whipped up by (a) Mossedegh’s Nationalists, (b) Kashani’s re-
ligious fanatics, and (c) Tudeh Party Communists—each leader with a
different ultimate objective in mind—to a state of virtual anarchy.
Both the Right (Kashani) and the Left (Tudeh) “support” Mos-
sedegh only in his chest beating and rabble rousing antics.
Mossedegh himself is powerless to convert the prevailing condi-
tion from one ruled by unreason to one ruled by reason. Hence the fu-
tility of Averell’s New York business man approach to the oil contro-
versy, even assuming Mossedegh’s personal approval.
The most promising figure around whom a responsible gov-
ernment can be built in Persia today is the Shah himself. He has at least
the potential advantages of traditional position (powerful in that
country), loyalty of the army (if he calls for it), broad constitutional
powers, and the desire on his own part for the kinds of reforms which
we believe are needed in his country. He lacks personal strength and
resolution, which, fortunately, is the one deficiency which we can help
make up.
Twice we have refused to support the Shah, once with Razmara
(despite the Shah’s urgent appeal to Washington) and once with
Qavam. We will have one more chance, presumably, when Mossedegh
goes, if we can make up our minds in time and reach the necessary un-
derstandings with the British (essential) and with the Shah.
If we do this, we can then begin the program outlined earlier in this
discussion, toward our psychological objective.
Then, also, we may be able to save the rest of the Middle East from
going the same route as Persia. We are doing nothing to stop it now.
