990  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
236.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, January 21, 1960
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretary Herter, Secretary Douglas, Mr. Farley, General White, General Loper, 
Mr. Gordon Gray, General Goodpaster
Mr. Herter said the group wanted to take up with the President 
the question the President had raised about giving [text not declassified]. 
There was agreement not to raise the matter, and to drop the requested 
authorization.
Mr. Gray next took up the question of the transfer of the [text 
not declassified] weapon [text not declassified] in event of emergency. 
He recalled that the President’s action on this proposal had included 
an authorization for Defense and State to inform Congress as they 
deemed appropriate. There was concern that, in the discussion of 
this matter with the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, the latter 
might move over into questions of a general character about [text not 
declassified].
General Loper recalled that, in 1957, the Joint Committee raised 
with him the question of advance authorization, and he told them that 
a policy decision had been made, which would not, however, become 
effective until implementing instructions had been approved by the 
President and issued. After some further discussion I reviewed in 
chronological detail the history of the development of advance autho­
rizations to date. I recalled to the President the very tight controls he 
had established on giving any of this information to anyone, and the 
view he had expressed that arrangements he makes for the [text not 
declassified].
Mr. Gray suggested that Secretary Douglas might get Senator 
Anderson, Chairman of the JCAE, not to permit this question to be 
raised or pursued. Mr. Douglas was unenthusiastic that the suggested 
action would have any useful result. The President thought it might be 
possible simply to say that the whole emergency [text not declassified] in 
addition, for extremely critical situations, the President has taken such 
measures as he deems necessary to enable our major forces to defend 
themselves.
Secretary Herter stayed a few minutes after the others had gone. 
He showed the President a memorandum proposing that we tell the 
1 Source: Use of nuclear weapons; lend-­lease negotiations with the Soviet Union. 
Top Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on January 25.
