August 8–September 17, 1978
63
—Flexibility on the remaining issues of settlements and air bases in
Sinai.
9. Begin and Sadat are likely to try to shift the discussions to new pro-
posals of their own. Begin may concentrate on details as a diversion from
the larger issues. Sadat may try to enlist your support for a bold move
on his part which will put Begin in the corner. The risk is that you could
lose control of the talks and be diverted from the central issues either by
Begin’s legalisms or Sadat’s imprecision. You should keep the focus on
the large picture, and strategic choices, and refer new proposals or sug-
gestions for textual language to the Foreign Ministers and Secretary
Vance. With Sadat, you will have to hear him out on his new strategy
without appearing to collude with him against Begin.
10. Both leaders will constantly be trying to get you to side with them on
specific points. They will not hesitate to remind you of what we have
said to them in the past. Begin will remember that we called his “self-
rule” plan a “fair basis for negotiations,” and Sadat will have very
much in mind the promises made at Camp David. Your best defense
against these efforts to manipulate you will be to concentrate on the fu-
ture choices, on the strategic consequences of success or failure, and on the
need for each side to transcend past positions.
11. Sadat is very likely to want to explore the possibility of reaching secret
understandings with you and Begin on some elements of a settlement. This is
apparently more important to him than a declaration of principles.
There are clearly risks in relying on secret agreements, but Sadat’s will-
ingness to be forthcoming on some issues may well depend upon our
ability, as well as Begin’s, to assure him that he will not be embarrassed
by leaks.
12. If Sadat shows more flexibility than Begin, we may be per-
ceived by the Israelis and their supporters as colluding with the Egyp-
tians. This could be politically awkward, and you may want to suggest
discreetly to Sadat that he not rush to accept any suggestions we put
forward publicly. It will help our credibility if we are seen to be
pressing both sides for concessions. While we do want Sadat to accept our
ideas, the timing and circumstances in which he does so should be very care-
fully coordinated.
13. (The number may be symbolic.) If the meetings end in disagree-
ment, we should not attempt to paper over the differences. The reasons
and consequences of a failure will be publicly explained by you, and
Sadat and Begin should understand from the outset that this will be the
case, including the specifics in #7 above.
Finally, I summarize below what I consider to be the acceptable
minimum that we must aim for on the central issues:
