893.00/6461: Telegram [Document 595] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State PEKING, July 31, 1925—1 p.m. [Received July 31—10:40 a.m.] 303. Following from Amoy: “Madras [sic] situation, while comparatively quiet, is very uncertain and looks portentous. Boycott against the British and the Japanese is being rigidly enforced, practically all Americans have come from the interior to Amoy. Conditions in the interior reported to be fairly quiet although an intense anti- British propaganda and boycott is being carried on with the acquiescence and assistance of the Chinese military authorities. It is believed acts of intimidation and terrorism are being carried out in Amoy by the agitators for the strike. Monday last, an attempt was made in the International Settlement to assassinate Mr. Wong, Chinese Secretary, Kulangsu Municipal Council. Wong is now in local hospital, condition uncertain. Tuesday evening 6 o’clock Lim, prominent educationalist and the leader of the antistrike movement, shot and killed in the street Amoy, assailants of both escaped, no arrests. According to the voting of local bodies yesterday radical elements which are led and governed by the Kuomintang Party have prevailed; and strike against the British and the Japanese will be carried out here August 1st. I am of the opinion that in view of the acts of violence which have taken place, the conservative elements will be frightened [afraid?] to take measures against the radicals and extremist Chinese laborers hereabouts, claiming have the situation in hand; but nevertheless they are adopting a vacillating policy and appear to hesitate taking action against radicals. British consul informed me that he has requested naval protection and that the British warship Foxglove arrives here Saturday morning. I am of the opinion that the presence of naval vessel here will have a restraining influence on the extremist elements. While apparently Americans and American interests are for the present in no danger yet in view of this being an international settlement and also the possibilities of the situation I recommend cooperation with the British in the matter of naval protection of life and property. Further developments will be telegraphed immediately.”
