818  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
b. What categories of targets should be included in the national 
strategic target system?
c. What agency should apply our strategic targeting policy, develop 
the national strategic target system, and keep it up-­to-­date?
d. What agency should review the national strategic target sys­
tem for consistency with policy and approve it as a basis for further 
analysis?
2. Integrated Operational Plan:
a. Do we need a single integrated operational plan for attack of the 
national strategic target system?
b. If we do need a single integrated operational plan for strategic 
attack, what agency should develop this plan? What agencies should 
review it and approve it?
c. Should any force without an all-­weather capability be allocated 
strategic targets? If so, under what conditions?
d. Should our aircraft carrier forces be relieved of responsibility for 
H-­hour coverage of targets on the national strategic target list?
e. If the attack carrier forces were to be relieved of this responsibil­
ity, how should their nuclear attack mission be stated?
f. Is there an immediate need for the establishment of a Unified 
Strategic Command?
g. If the answer to the above question is negative, is a Unified 
Strategic Command viewed as desirable for the more distant future?
h. If a Unified Strategic Command is not established in the prox­
imate future, is there a requirement for the integration of operational 
plans for the employment of POLARIS submarines with CINCSAC’s 
operational plan?
i. If so, how should this be accomplished?
j. Dose the Joint Chiefs of Staff organization need policy control of 
an agency capable of operational analysis and war gaming of opera­
tional plans?
k. If so, what agency should perform this function for the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff?
3. Operational Control of Atomic Strike Forces:
a. As a general policy, should unified commanders having an area 
responsibility be responsible for H-­hour attack of targets on the national 
strategic target list?
b. Should the operation of the Joint War Room Annexes and the 
Joint Coordination Centers be continued?
c. Should any additional measures be taken to improve the coordi­
nation of forces operating under the operational control of the various 
commanders?
