594 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II so the subject should be covered as appropriate under all headings, and particularly under section 3.C. (see checklist below). G) Labor rights. Greater attention should be paid to labor, including freedom of association and protection of the right to organize, the right to bargain collectively, abolition of forced labor, and the right to equal employment opportunities. This information also should be included under section 3.C. H) Posts should consult reports on each country by responsible non-governmental organizations, such as Amnesty International, the International Commission of Jurists, and the International League of Human Rights; and by appropriate organs of official international organizations such as the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the UN Human Rights Commission, the European Human Rights Commission, the International Labor Organization, and UNESCO. These reports should be quoted when that is a good way to make a point. Where there are significant charges in such reports, the charges should be reported, with comments supporting or not supporting the charges as the case may be. Country reports will be compared with NGO and other reports, and we need to be sure our reports take adequate account of what has been said in the other reports. (Country desks will have the reports and will assure posts have them if needed for drafting.) I) Length. Reports should be concise but long enough to provide thorough coverage of the human rights situation. Final 1978 reports generally were appropriate in length and degree of specificity. 6. In preparation of the 1978 reports, the Deputy Secretary asked posts and regional bureaus to ensure that the reports were “objective, specific and responsive to the headings in the format.” (see ref (B)). Reporting for the 1979 country reports should also display these qualities. Reports must be objective and accurate, even where this may conflict with host government sensitivities. Specificity calls for serious efforts to provide specific factual information. The checklist below is designed to assist drafters in assuring that reports are responsive to the format. 7. The remainder of this telegram is a checklist developed in connection with last year’s reports, which is intended to serve as an aid for the preparation of the 1979 reports. The questions in the checklist vary in their degree of applicability and significance in different countries, but our experience with previous annual reports indicates they are relevant in most cases. In general, the complete report should be responsive to the points in the checklist, either by generalizations or by specific information. Begin text checklist: Introduction:
