in the interest of Peru; and establishment of equal opportunity and equal protection for the display, in the plebiscitary territory, by private persons and by legitimate organizations, of the flag of either of the two candidates for ultimate sovereignty. This shall not be construed so as to preclude reasonable supervision and limitation by the Chilean Government in a manner and for a purpose not deemed, by the Commission, inconsistent with a fair plebiscite. ITEM 10. Removal of censorship from the cables and of any existing censorship from the press, radio, telegraph, telephone and mails, within, to or from the plebiscitary territory. ITEM 11. Return to the plebiscitary territory60 by Chile at her expense of every man within Chilean jurisdiction who either directly61 or through the Peruvian Commissioner claims the right to vote in the plebiscite, alleges that he left the plebiscitary territory involuntarily on or after April 13, 1924, and makes a prima facie case, satisfactory to the Commission, of electoral right and involuntary departure. SECTION 2. That the President of the Commission be and he is hereby instructed to cause an authenticated copy of this resolution to be presented to the Chilean Member of the Commission, and that the Chilean Member of the Commission be and he is hereby instructed to cause this resolution to be brought to the attention of the proper Chilean authorities.62 The foregoing resolution was adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica Arbitration, on the second day of November, 1925. JORDAN HERBERT STABLER Secretary General Tacna-Arica Arbitration Plebiscitary Commission JOHN J. PERSHING President 55 Copy transmitted to the Department by General Pershing under covering letter of November 7; received November 25. Footnotes have been used to indicate where the text as adopted differs from the draft submitted by General Pershing. 56 The original draft provided that the carabineers then in the territory should be replaced by others who had not served therein.
