December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 643 The President: This was a common agreement at Camp David. I heard no objection there. Prime Minister Begin: We made our concession to show that we are serious about autonomy. So we will negotiate with Egypt alone. Mr. Rosenne: Five letters were signed on September 27th. President Sadat never signed a letter dealing with the language on Judea and Samaria. Some of the letters were unilateral, as was Sadat’s on the Arab role. The President: I know. But there was no disagreement that Egypt would negotiate on behalf of the other Arabs. Israel raised no objection at the time. Prime Minister Begin: You got my letter15 on the Palestinian Arabs, and I got your acknowledgment.16 Egypt is now asking for liaison officers. This is a third deviation from Camp David. In those accords it only speaks of liaison with the local police forces, once those have been formed. This means that there should be one liaison officer from each state, not only an Egyptian liaison officer, but also an Israeli liaison officer. We are not talking about Egyptian liaison officers in the Gaza Strip. The fourth problem concerns the target date. There is no mention in Camp David of a one-year target date. Let me explain the problem. We talked about this at Kennedy Airport.17 At that time, Foreign Minister Dayan said that he favored a target date; but I opposed it on the spot. I took it to the Cabinet, and there a unanimous decision was made, including Foreign Minister Dayan, that we will not accept a target date. Let me give my reason. To have autonomy, you need to have electors, candidates, and you need to insure that no Palestinian state will arise. People go to Judea and Samaria and say to the Arabs that they should take autonomy as a first step, and that then they will have a Palestinian state later. We know this from reliable sources. If we thought a Palestinian state could arise from autonomy, we would never have agreed. At Camp David, you proposed the word self-governing authority. We accepted, but we added “administrative council”, not a legislative council. A legislative council can declare independence, but an administrative council cannot. If the administrative council one day proclaims a Palestinian state, we will arrest them. But we don’t want to arrest a legislative council. That is what the Bolsheviks did and we are not Bolsheviks. The administrative council will have 11 members, but it is not to declare independence. After five years, as I told you, Mr. Presi- 15 Ibid. 16 Ibid. 17 See Document 134.
