Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
441
92.
Remarks by President Carter1
Bonn, July 17, 1978
Having been fortunate enough to make an official state visit to the
Federal Republic of Germany immediately prior to the summit confer-
ence, I would like to express the thanks, on behalf of all the American
delegation, to President Scheel, to Chancellor Schmidt, and to the
people of the Federal Republic, for their hospitality.
I have been very pleased at the results of this summit conference.
The results have exceeded the expectation of all of us. The discussions
and the conclusions have been carefully prepared. Each one of us has
been cautious at this summit not to promise things which we could not
subsequently deliver.
The assessments have been long, sometimes tedious, but compre-
hensive in nature. They are substantive and specific. I think each leader
has gone the limit, within the bounds of political actualities, to con-
tribute everything possible from our own individual nations to the
common well-being of the world.
Our contributions have been mutually supportive. They have been
different, one from another, because our capabilities and our needs are
different.
We have dealt with the very serious problem of protectionism and
mutually committed ourselves to successfully concluding the multilat-
eral trade negotiations to permit free markets to keep our people em-
ployed at home.
The Federal Republic of Germany, the Government of Japan, have
generously committed themselves to increased economic growth.
Other nations have joined in this commitment. The United States, rec-
ognizing our own responsibilities, and at the request of others, have
committed ourselves to a comprehensive energy policy and its imple-
mentation—to cut down the importation of oil by 2½ million barrels a
day by the year 1985, to raise the price of oil, which is too cheap in our
own country, to the world market level to discourage waste.
1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 1309–1310. The President spoke at
7:12 p.m. at the conclusion of the Bonn Economic Summit in the Bonn Stadt Theater fol-
lowing statements made by Schmidt, Trudeau, Giscard, Andreotti, Fukuda, and Cal-
laghan. The President departed Washington on July 13 and made a State visit to the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany July 14–15, prior to attending the economic summit, which
took place at the Palais Schaumburg July 16–17. Documentation on the State visit is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
For the minutes of the economic summit meetings, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
III, Foreign Economic Policy, Documents 142–145. For the text of the declaration issued at
the conclusion of the summit meeting and a joint statement on international terrorism,
see Department of State Bulletin, September 1978, pp. 2–5.
