984  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
234.	 Briefing Note for the January 21 NSC Meeting1
Washington, January 20, 1960
THE ROLE OF MATS IN PEACE AND WAR
Our first item, Mr. President, concerns the role of MATS. The 
Council just two weeks ago looked at NSC 5919, a draft policy state­
ment on cargo airlift, and heard a summary of the recommendations in 
the Defense report to you on “The Role of MATS in Peace and War”. The 
Council did not adopt NSC 5919, but referred it back to the Planning 
Board for urgent review in the light of the Defense report.
In the past two weeks I have worked with the agencies primarily 
interested in an effort to reach agreement on the recommendations in 
the Defense report, feeling that in that way progress could be made 
most speedily. The paper before you is the product of a three-­hour 
meeting with the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Acting Secretary 
of Commerce, the Director, Bureau of the Budget, the Chairman, Civil 
Aeronautics Board, and the Administrator, Federal Aviation Agency. It 
is contemplated that the President’s decision following our discussion 
today will be subsequently transmitted to the Secretary of Defense and 
will not be circulated as an NSC paper.
Turning to the paper itself, paragraph 1 and 2 are agreed revisions 
of the earlier recommendations of the Department of Defense.
READ PARAGRAPHS 1 AND 2
In paragraph 3, we come to the first split in the paper, at the bot­
tom of page 1. Defense, in its original recommendations, would have 
provided that the reduction of MATS operations apply only to routine 
channel traffic, that is, regularly scheduled traffic over fixed routes. The 
JCS support Defense. Budget, Commerce, FAA and CAB would have 
the reduction apply to all MATS operations.
CALL ON  DEPUTY SECRETARY DOUGLAS
GENERAL WHITE
MR. STANS
SECRETARY MUELLER
MR. QUESADA
Looking now at the first line on page 2, Defense and JSC oppose 
the inclusion of the first footnote on page 2. Their concurrence was 
based on a misunderstanding.
The next split is also in paragraph 3, at the top of page 2. There 
is a difference between those who want economical use of remaining 
1 Source: The role of MATS in peace and war. Official Use Only. 4 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
