September 1953–December 1954
933
3. Significance of Results:
While the current program is meeting its general objectives, the
grave problems created by Iranian political instability have continued
to mount. Public antagonism to Zahedi is generally constrained due to
government security measures; however, within the Majlis and the cab-
inet outright opposition to Zahedi is evident. Direct Station pressure
upon the Shah has been successful in that the Shah is now giving full
support to Zahedi. The Shah has urged, through the Speaker of the
Majlis, support of an oil settlement. The Station has reported that ratifi-
cation of an oil agreement by the Parliament will require concerted ef-
fort to overcome present Majlis opposition. In view of the above, and
considering the serious consequences to Iranian stability were Zahedi
to be removed at this time, a stepped up program in support of the
present government is being prepared.
[name not declassified]
Acting Chief, NEA/4
372.
Editorial Note
In a memorandum to Secretary of State Dulles, July 30, 1954,
Acting Special Assistant for Intelligence Fisher Howe discussed the po-
litical prospects for Iran. He wrote that political power in Iran was exer-
cised by the Shah and the landowning classes. If the Shah were assassi-
nated or removed, the possibility existed that the army would
intervene. Iran’s power structure was maintained by the continuance of
martial law, the enforcement of strict press censorship, the work of the
security forces, the provision of U.S. emergency aid, and the expecta-
tion of an oil settlement favorable to Iran. Howe wrote that “this bal-
ance is likely to be broken by the persistence of fundamental political
and social trends which neither the Shah nor the landowning groups
will be able to alter. The new urban groups, for example—especially in-
tellectuals, professional men, merchants, and workers—will probably
grow in importance as the force of traditional social relationships and
beliefs diminishes in the continuing encounter with Western mod-
ernism.” For the full text of this memorandum, see Foreign Relations,
1952–1954, volume X, Iran, 1951–1954, pages 1041–1042 (Document
485).
