130 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI for that meeting is at Tab III.4 The discussion should provide the basis for reviewing the basic numerical limits in START and our proposal in Defense & Space. We understand that Secretary Cheney met in the tank with the Chiefs on this broad subject last Friday,5 but reached no conclusions. Organization of the Meeting The agenda for the meeting (Tab I, Tab B) generally follows the subjects in the discussion papers and addressed by the Deputies last Wednesday.6 Although the discussion paper on START only addresses specific issues on numerical limits, the participants will be prepared to continue the more general discussion at the May 25 NSC meeting of our overall direction on START. We recommend that you begin with Defense & Space. Background on Defense and Space Our approach in the Defense and Space Talks has sought an agreement with the Soviets that would protect our ability to deploy SDI when it is ready, constrain their ability to deploy defenses in the interim, and build domestic support for SDI. The two sides have agreed in principle to a two-­part structure. First, there would be a period of a yet to be specified duration during which neither side could withdraw from the ABM Treaty. During this period, the U.S. could test, but could not deploy, SDI. Second, following the period of non-­withdrawal, each side would be free to deploy defenses, the ABM Treaty notwithstanding. The U.S. believes that it could do most, if not all, of the necessary SDI testing during the non-­withdrawal period under the broad interpretation of the ABM Treaty (assuming that the relevant SDI components are based on “other physical principles”). By definition, the Soviets could not deploy nationwide ABM defenses during the non-­ withdrawal period. And, since their ABM systems are based on technologies that fall within the boundaries of the ABM Treaty, their ability to test mobile upgrades of their systems would be sharply limited. This approach assumes (a) that the most promising SDI technologies (including Brilliant Pebbles) are deemed to be based on “other physical principles,” and (b) that the Soviets can be persuaded to accept and abide by our broad interpretation of the ABM Treaty. Unless both assumptions prove valid, the current approach is unlikely to achieve our objectives in D&S or with respect to SDI. However, all agree that we 4 Attached but not printed. See Document 23. 5 June 2. No minutes were found. 6 See footnote 2, Document 24.
