3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
392
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
tions. Looking at the situation today, they could not help but come to
the conclusion that someone evidently needed to lay down an artificial
smokescreen that would make it more difficult for people to see
through and would thereby conceal unjustified activities by those who
laid down the smokescreen. A good illustration of that was the carnage
that had been arranged in Zaire; as for who was its author, the Secre-
tary would know that better than he. Neither the Soviet Union nor
Cuba had anything to do with that carnage. This was an emphatic state-
ment Gromyko could make to President Carter and to the Secretary. If
he did not have a completely accurate knowledge of the Cuban views
in this matter, he would not be making such a categorical statement.
The Soviet Union, too, had stated its indignation at the slaughter that
took place in Zaire. Summing up, Gromyko said that not a single Soviet
representative had set foot in Rhodesia or Namibia. The only Soviets in
Zaire were the diplomatic representatives of the Soviet Union. He
would ask the Secretary to convey to President Carter that all these ac-
cusations and charges had dismayed the Soviet leadership, that they
were nothing but inventions, chemically pure inventions. Someone had
thrown out these accusations and like ball lightning they were now cir-
cling around. The Soviet Union did not intend to take responsibility for
someone else’s sins, and would categorically reject any attempt to place
such responsibility on it.
Gromyko took up another point mentioned by the Secretary—
human rights. The Secretary had mentioned Orlov. Gromyko was not
going to discuss Orlov or any other Soviet citizen because these matters
were solely within the competence of the Soviet Union.
Gromyko said it was true that occasionally the two sides had a dif-
ference between them or a different perception of a set of facts. Such
differences should be the subject of discussion and negotiation. The
trouble was that all too often the other side refused to discuss proposals
made by the Soviet Union. Sometimes, without even having the full
text of a Soviet proposal, the other side would reject it out of hand. A
good illustration of that was what had happened at the CSCE, when the
socialist countries had advanced a proposal to renounce first use of nu-
clear weapons. Literally just a few hours later, and before anyone had
received the full text of the Soviet proposal, it had been rejected out of
hand. And yet, the Soviet Union had proposed to hold a preparatory
session precisely for the purpose of discussing that proposal, where
questions could be asked about it and replies provided. The Western
countries had not wanted to do so and had rejected the proposal
without even seeing its full text. Suppose the Soviet Union were to act
in that manner, to reject a proposal out of hand right after it had been
tabled by the other side, and without careful study? Even elementary
correctness of behavior would have required an examination of that
proposal, but this had not happened.
