National Security Policy 1051 Arbitrary Reference Designation Initial Operational Capability Dateb Maximum Operational Range (NM) Operational Accuracy (CEP)c Configura­ tion Maximum Warhead (Lbs. and Type)d Guidance Remarks SS–­13 1958 e60–80 150 ft. against ships. Cruise 1,000 lb. Nuclear or HE. Inertial with radar override during mid-­course phase. Active radar terminal homing. Speed low supersonic with very low altitude operation. Launched from destroyers and cruisers and used against ship targets. OTHER: The Soviets now have operational a large motorboat which may be equipped with guided missiles of about 30 nm range, or with free rockets. Feasibility studies indicate that a submarine-­launched 100 nm ballistic missile could be developed for antishipping use. a We evaluate this program as “probable” with varying degrees of confidence concerning detailed characteristics. Each missile listed will probably go through various stages of development which are not necessarily reflected in this table. [All footnotes are in the original.] b Date at which one or more series produced missiles could have been placed in the hands of trained personnel in one operational unit. c CEP is the radius of a circle in which, statistically, one-­half of the impacts will occur. Inherent missile accuracies are somewhat better than the accuracies specified in the table which take into consideration average degradation factors. d Warhead includes the explosive device and its associated fusing and firing mechanism. The weight of the structure and the heat protection of the nosecone are not included in “payload.” e These ranges can be obtained against ship targets only if the launching ship has forward seaborne or airborne observers. Otherwise a maximum range of 30 nm can be attained. f The Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of the Navy, and the Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, believe it probable that a 350 nm missile is used with both the “Z” and “G” class submarines.
