912
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
eral discussion on this issue with Desai who had indicated that the In-
dians would not conduct further nuclear tests. The Secretary said that
Desai personally had been clear on this, and that he rejected testing. De
Guiringaud noted, however, that not all of Desai’s subordinates were
in agreement with his position, nor was Desai necessarily capable of
controlling these people.
De Guiringaud said that Aga Shahi had asked, during the period
before the Pakistani elections, that the French government not do any-
thing to give the impression that the contract was not going forward
without change. De Guiringaud had agreed to this request. He agreed
that if it became known that pressure was being applied on Pakistan
this would become an election issue which Bhutto might well make use
of. (De Guiringaud also said that Aga Shahi had conveyed a clear im-
pression that he felt that some of the charges against Bhutto, including
one of murder, were not without substance.)
De Guiringaud asked that the contents of this conversation with
Aga Shahi be kept absolutely confidential. The Secretary promised to
do so.
De Guiringaud recalled that Ambassador Hartman had asked
whether there had been any transfers from France of equipment for the
Pakistani reprocessing plant after August 4. He said that the French
government had last authorized transfers of such equipment on July
16. Such authorizations were valid for six months, and there was no
way of determining within that period when items authorized were
shipped.
The Secretary expressed the hope that the French government
would continue to consider agreeing to full-scope safeguards at the
London Suppliers Meeting. De Guiringaud replied that this issue had
come before France’s Foreign Nuclear Policy Council, but no decision
had been made to date. There would, he said, be another meeting of the
Council at the end of September. He assured the Secretary that the
French government was aware of US concerns in this matter.
De Guiringaud inquired about the status of the Brazil/German re-
processing contract. The Secretary replied that the US position had not
changed. The US had indicated to Brazil that it wished to continue to
discuss this matter. President Carter would be sending a letter to Bra-
zilian President Geisel in the near future. In his letter he would suggest
follow-up discussions. The Secretary said he would be going to Brazil
the end of October to meet the Foreign Minister.
De Guiringaud asked whether the US was also working with Ar-
gentina. Vance said it was. He had spoken to the Argentine Foreign
Minister and would be visiting there when he visited Brazil. The Ar-
gentines had explained their need for nuclear power but seemed quite
cooperative.
