458  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
332.	 Letter 16 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 16
Geneva, November 1, 1955
Dear Walter:
Herman Phleger and I had dinner with the Secretary Friday eve­
ning during which we discussed the Chinese draft in a general and 
preliminary way but without coming to any conclusions. The Secretary 
has apparently not made up his mind on how he wants to handle it, 
and clearly wanted to have time to think about it, which was difficult 
with the extreme pressure on him of other events here. Therefore, in 
the telegram of suggestions for the next meeting, which I sent you on 
Saturday, I suggested that we not get into any detailed discussion.
The Secretary was also obviously very anxious that I get started on 
the trade embargo item, and, hence, my suggestion in that regard. I also 
want you to know that it was the Secretary’s thought that I should query 
Wang with regard to specific items on the CHINCOM list, set forth in 
the last sentence of my 999. I told him that I had serious doubts about 
the desirability of this, but put it up in my telegram as my own query 
so that the Department would not feel any inhibitions in commenting 
on it. I have talked to Goodkind about it but he was understandably 
very reluctant to commit himself on the policy considerations involved. 
He saw no objection from the purely technical CHINCOM standpoint.
It has been a big help to have Goodkind and Doherty here to get 
myself thoroughly briefed on all aspects of CHINCOM controls, as it 
is a subject with which I was not familiar in detail. I want to let both 
you and Walter know that, except for the foregoing background against 
which I sent my 999, it represented only my own thoughts and I deliber­
ately avoided showing it to or discussing it with the Secretary, because 
I feel that he should have the advantage of thoughts and recommen­
dations of you and Walter in each case before making up his mind. I 
do not feel it right that my temporary proximity to him here should 
operate so as to cause him to give any undue weight to my opinions 
and without having FE opinions in front of him. This gets to be a little 
difficult, but I want you to know that I have it very much in mind, as I 
know he does. I am sorry that my 999 crossed with your 1053. I sent it 
priority quite early Saturday morning and do not understand why you 
did not have it prior to sending your 1053. However, I believe it worked 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The postscript is handwritten. A handwrit­
ten note on the letter indicates it was received on November 2.
