Chapter 4, February–April 1990  591
100.	 Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 5, 1990, 3:40–5:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
START
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Under Secretary for Arms Control, 
International Security Affairs, Lot 01D127, 1969–1990 Subject Record of James P. Timbie, 
START Meetings (Bartholomew) April 1990. Drafted on April 11. The meeting took place 
in the T Conference Room.
Bartholomew
Burt
Kanter
Timbie (notetaker)
Arensburger (interpreter)
Akhromeyev
Nazarkin
Peresypkin
Koltunov
Masterkov
Popov (interpreter)
Bartholomew: We also have our transcript of the discussion in 
Moscow. It includes the reading into the Baker-Shevardnadze record 
of the agreed elements of common ground on ALCMs by Mr. Kanter. 
After that your Minister took a short break to consult with your dele-
gation. He returned to say “He believed we could say that the entire 
package had been agreed with the exception of range.”
Akhromeyev: I have the record of the same sentence. “Yes in prin-
ciple we reached agreement on the other questions. Only one question 
remains, the range.” We agreed on all in principle. However we do 
have differences. (Referring to the Soviet position paper on ALCMs that 
he had provided the previous evening) We have yet to settle whether 
the maximum for Soviet ALCM heavy bombers should be 12 or 16, 
whether 20 applies to future Soviet bombers, the floating levels, etc. We 
should report them to ministers.
Bartholomew: Paragraph 1 (of the Soviet paper) concerns ALCM 
range. We disagree on 600 km range. We agree that there we disagree. 
But in paragraph 2 the number 12 was agreed in Moscow, and should 
remain. Akhromeyev: Is that your final say?
Bartholomew: This was resolved in Moscow. It is difficult for us to 
see a compelling argument to reopen this. If we start to reopen agreed 
issues, instead of knitting together this agreement we will unravel it. 
Akhromeyev: OK. Then we are agreed on 10 and 20 for future Soviet 
bombers, and 8 and 12 for current Soviet bombers, and 40% more 
bombers for the USSR.
