560 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 112. Address by Vice President Mondale1 Minneapolis, Minnesota, February 22, 1979 Preserving Freedom and Peace in a Nuclear Age Today I want to talk with you about how our nation can preserve its freedom, its beauty, and its peace in a nuclear age. Our own Hubert Humphrey once said that: “In this world, disaster is but a step away. There is no margin for error.”2 Returning to a dark age of unrestrained nuclear arms competition would reduce that margin. Allowing any nation to gain military advantage over the United States would be equally dangerous. We must not—and we will not—let either happen. This is the determination of the Carter Administration. This is the view of the vast majority of the American people—who overwhelmingly support both an arms control agreement and a strong national defense. And I am confident that Congress shares this view as it prepares to consider both the strategic arms limitation treaty and our proposed defense programs. There are some Americans, however, who fear that we are not strong enough as a nation to move ahead with SALT. That view—of the current military balance and of SALT—is wrong, and it can lead us in the wrong direction. It not only underestimates America’s overwhelming nonmilitary advantages, it seriously misjudges both our relative military strength and the effect of a SALT agreement. Our military position today is secure, and we are taking steps to assure that it remains secure. And a sound SALT agreement will make us stronger as a nation because it will contribute to that security. 1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, April 1979, pp. 14–16. Mondale delivered his address at a conference organized by the Department of State, the Greater Minneapolis Chamber of Commerce, and a consortium of other Minnesota organizations. Additional information about the address is in the Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale Papers, Vice Presidential Papers, Special Assistant for Speech Writing, Speech Text Files, Remarks, SALT Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota, February 22, 1979. 2 The quotation is from Humphrey’s Vice Presidential acceptance speech, made before the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City, New Jersey, on August 27, 1964. Humphrey, in extolling Johnson’s leadership qualities, highlighted Johnson’s November 27, 1963, address before a joint session of Congress: “I’m sure you remember these words—‘Let us continue.’ Those simple and direct words of President Johnson reached the hearts of our people. Those words rallied them, lifted them, and unified them. In this world disaster is ever but a step away. There is no margin for error. The leader of the free world, the leader of American democracy, holds in his hands the destinies not only of his own people but holds in his hands the destinies of all mankind.” (“Transcript of Acceptance Speeches by Johnson and Humphrey at Atlantic City,” The New York Times, August 28, 1964, p. 12)
