712 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 158. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter1 Washington, September 10, 1979 SUBJECT The Defense Budget The two of us, together with Cy, Zbig and Lloyd Cutler, believe it important for you to resolve the Administration’s position on the defense budget issue immediately, before the Second Budget Resolution reaches the floor. Even before the Cuba situation,2 many of those whose support is essential to Senate approval had joined the growing chorus calling on you to affirm your intention to propose and support real growth in defense spending. Recent events have now underscored that position. They have also emboldened SALT critics to believe that they can defeat SALT II ratification by claiming defense spending and the Soviet combat brigade in Cuba as demonstrations of an unacceptable lack of will and willingness on the part of the Administration in defense matters. Sam Nunn has proposed as much as a 5% real annual increase,3 though his conversations with us suggest that he has some flexibility on the numbers, especially for 1980. Others have aligned themselves with 5% or even more. We believe that you can—­and at least for now, should—­hold the line at the amount to which your Administration and our NATO Allies have publicly committed in the past. Your civilian advisers feel comfortable in arguing that a real 3% growth will probably do what is needed, and we think that, depending on how this is interpreted in the out years, there is a good chance that the JCS can be 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 6, Defense Department: 8–9/79. No classification marking. Jayne initialed the memorandum on McIntyre’s behalf. 2 On August 31, the Department of State issued a statement indicating that the United States had “recently confirmed the presence in Cuba of what appears to be a Soviet combat unit. This is the first time we have been able to confirm the presence of a Soviet ground forces unit on the island.” (Department of State Bulletin, October 1979, p. 63) Vance discussed the troops in a press conference held September 5, as well as before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee later that day; Carter addressed the issue in September 7 remarks before reporters in the White House Briefing Room. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance Tells Soviet Its Troops in Cuba Could Imperil Ties,” New York Times, September 6, 1979, p. A1; Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 1602–1603) 3 In July, Nunn suggested that his vote on SALT II was contingent on the Carter administration’s willingness to undertake “‘effective’ military competition with the Soviet Union” through “increasing defense spending by 4 to 5 percent in constant dollars.” (Charles Mohr, “Arms-Pact Debate: A New Script Has Both Sides Winning,” New York Times, July 30, 1979, p. A3)
