958  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
601.	 Telegram 1870 from Geneva1
Geneva, May 11, 1956, 2 p.m.
1870. From Johnson.
1. Wang opened this morning’s meeting by presentation draft pre­
viously transmitted Dept together with relatively brief statement which 
did nothing to clarify its obvious ambiguities.
2. I avoided any specific comment and asked series of questions 
designed to clarify its ambiguities. I specifically asked in what way 
draft avoided prejudicing U.S. position; whether second para. inten­
tionally excluded disputes other than those Taiwan area; whether “two 
months” in last para. was intended limit validity declaration to that 
period; whether last para. as whole meant that FonMin conference was 
“only practical and feasible means”; and whether “to make specific 
arrangements” referred to “practical and feasible means” or to FonMin 
conference.
3. He avoided any direct response my first question, saying that 
mutual respect clause was not only “common sense” but—“also” to 
be found in UN Charter. In reply to second question he indicated that 
limiting to Taiwan area dispute was deliberate because my emphasis 
on Taiwan area and since if settlement that most critical dispute could 
be effected without war other disputes would present no problem. His 
replies to my questions on last para. were completely evasive. However 
“very willing hear any ideas or suggestions” I may have.
4. At close of this phase referring to his statements on “procrastina­
tion” and our seeking “freeze” situation in Taiwan area, I pointed out 
talks had not made further progress because of their ambiguous position 
thus far on renouncing force.
5. I made statement on implementation along lines para. 3 Deptel 
1943 to which I replied along usual lines stressing that last December 
they had asked for accounting Chinese in U.S. prisons, who, I could not 
deny, desired return China, and we had no right inquire concerning 
Americans in Chinese prisons until we made such accounting.
6. Next meeting Thursday May 17.
7. Proceeding Prague Saturday returning Geneva Tuesday.
Gowen
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/5–1156. Confidential; Priority; 
Limit Distribution.
