fact. It was impossible for him to see how Arbitrator could say that present
conditions prevented fair plebiscite; Chile would regret keenly decision by
Arbitrator’s representative that fraud and violence rendered the plebiscite
impracticable; the Chilean Congress realized injury that such a decision
would cause, but was disposed, nevertheless, to appeal to judgment of the
world. He astonished me by adding that Chile would not abandon the
province if plebiscite were held impracticable. In that event, he said, let the
Peruvians come and try to evict the Chileans. If plebiscite be held, Chile
will accept result in good faith, whatever it may be.
He read me closing paragraph of telegram he had sent to Chilean
Ambassador at Washington on March 18,28a in which he instructed
Ambassador Cruchaga to ascertain specifically from you what further
guarantees or conditions consistent with award the Arbitrator would
consider necessary to hold an honest plebiscite. He declared that he had
accepted post of Minister for Foreign Affairs in order to cooperate with you
in carrying out award; and he said that he was completely discouraged, for,
although he had complied with every demand Arbitrator had made and had
offered to do everything else consistent with the award, there was on
General Lassiter’s part an ill-concealed intention never to permit the
plebiscite.
Mathieu showed me a telegram he had sent a few days ago to Ambassador
Cruchaga stating that he thought his own 7 years of work in Washington
endeavoring to bring Chile and the United States into close friendly
relations were now being undone and that his age and failing vigor were not
sufficient to cope with the task he was facing; he felt a break with the
United States would soon come and that he would resign first. He repeated
this statement during the conversation and said that he might resign after
addressing Congress on Thursday.
I told him that now was the time to stick to his post and to render his
country a real service. He asked what, placed in his position, I should do. I
said that I had no authority to speak for the Secretary of State but that it was
my personal belief that I should offer to leave entire matter to Arbitrator
without limitations.
