December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 649 council have to be established. When you say the self-governing authority should have full autonomy, this makes it appear as if the selfgoverning authority can make major decisions. There is no reference to a self-governing authority with full autonomy. We should stick to the language of Camp David. President Carter: (Reading from the Camp David agreements on the self-governing authority.) There is no reason not to use this language. Secretary Vance: “In order to provide full autonomy” . . . Prime Minister Begin: “To the inhabitants.” Mr. Rosenne: The idea of autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza is a different concept. Prime Minister Begin: This is completely different. President Carter: No one is trying to trick Israel by slipping in a word here or there. We are not scheming against Israel; we are not trying to hurt you; and neither is Sadat. Prime Minister Begin: I never suspected such a thing. President Carter: When there are doubts, let’s stick to the Camp David language. Prime Minister Begin: I speak for a brave nation surrounded by enemies. I cannot commit the sin of dereliction of duties. Secretary Vance: Concerning the question of the target date, this has been discussed before. We never suggested that the self-governing authority could declare its independence. The idea of setting a goal or target was to give an impetus to the negotiations to encourage the Palestinians to participate. It is only a goal, not a fixed state. This seemed to be a positive idea, not a source of danger. We previously said that the end of 1979 should be the goal, but you objected, so we have now tried new language on completing the negotiations in one year. President Carter: We originally talked of three or six months. Secretary Vance: Then we talked of six or nine months, then the end of 1979. You turned all of that down. Prime Minister Begin: Even if you suggest one year or three years, I cannot accept. This would be most detrimental to the idea of autonomy. Secretary Vance: We also changed the language so that we are talking of making preparations so that the elections can be held. We are trying to meet your concerns. You talked about the transitional period starting in Gaza first. President Carter: At Camp David, there was an agreement that we proceed on the Sinai and on the other Camp David agreements. Egypt’s concern is that all of the negotiation has been on Sinai, and nothing on the other agreement. At Camp David, we set a three-month goal for
