August 8–September 17, 1978
107
29.
Message From Secretary of State Vance to the Embassy in
Syria1
Camp David, September 6, 1978, 1431Z
Subject: Presidential Message for President Assad.
1. Please deliver2 the following message from President Carter to
President Assad as soon as possible.
2. Begin text.
Dear Mr. President:
Over recent weeks, I have been following closely with Secretary
Vance the situation in Lebanon and would like to share my concerns
with you.
I understand the interest in stability on Syria’s borders and in the
Middle East which led to your initial decision to introduce Syrian
forces into Lebanon. I believe the United States and Syria have shared
this interest in a unified Lebanon which could once again make a con-
structive contribution to peace and progress in the area. Syria along
with its Arab partners has assumed responsibilities which have been
difficult to carry out but important in bringing peace to the Middle
East.
What concerns me now is the possibility of the fragmentation of
Lebanon if the authority of the Lebanese Government cannot soon be
restored. To allow time for this, I would strongly urge that you give ur-
gent consideration to the idea of a ceasefire and standfast which Secre-
tary Vance mentioned in his recent letter.3
I am writing to ask whether you feel there is any other step that
might be taken that could bring an end to the fighting once and for all
and provide a context within which the important factions in Lebanon
could turn their attention to the work of rebuilding Lebanon as a nation
under the authority of the legitimate government. Secretary Vance has
earlier shared some of his thoughts with you, but I would be most ap-
preciative to have your views.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 88, Syria: 4/78–5/79. Secret; Nodis. Sent for information to the Department
of State. The telegram is not numbered. Printed from a copy that indicates the original
was received in the White House Situation Room. The Department repeated the text of
Carter’s message to Assad in telegram 227283 to Beirut, September 7. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, N780007–0483)
2 On September 8, Seelye delivered Carter’s message to Dabboul, who said he
would “have it delivered promptly” to Assad. (Telegram 5285 from Damascus, Sep-
tember 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850061–2095)
3 See Document 20.
