Yugoslavia 294. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT European Trip: Belgrade (U) With Tito’s death, Yugoslavia is entering the most critical period of its postwar history. For three decades Tito’s name was synonymous with Yugoslavia. He was the architect of Yugoslavia’s unique domestic system with its emphasis on self-management and the driving force behind its independent foreign policy. And in times of crisis he was the ultimate guarantor of the country’s unity. (C) His passing leaves a political and psychological void which will be hard to fill. While we are relatively confident of the ability of the new leadership to handle the problems posed by the transition—at least in the short run—many of the centrifugal forces that have plagued Yugoslavia in the past are likely to reemerge and in the long run they could pose serious threats to the country’s political stability and nonaligned position. Moreover, the transition comes at a time of heightened international tension, prompted in particular by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, which the Yugoslavs see as an indication of the Soviets increased willingness to use force to solve international problems. Thus beneath the tranquil facade projected over the last six weeks the new Yugoslav leadership is uneasy and they will be looking for indications of our continued willingness to provide support in this difficult period Against this background, your trip to Yugoslavia takes on particular significance. It will be the first visit to Yugoslavia by a head of state, and I recommend you use it to achieve a number of basic objectives: —To underscore our support for the new Yugoslav leadership and our confidence in their ability to handle the transition. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 12, Europe: 1980. Secret. Sent for information. Printed from an uninitialed copy. On June 6, Rentschler sent the memorandum to Brzezinski along with memoranda for Carter preparing for the stops in Rome, the Vatican, Madrid, and Lisbon. (Ibid.) On June 12, Larrabee sent a memorandum to Brzezinski recommending that he sign the overview memorandum to Carter for inclusion in the briefing book, which he did on June 13. (Ibid.) Eagleburger provided his own background memorandum to the President on June 23. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Lawrence S. Eagleburger Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Ambassador to
