60
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
21.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 31, 1978
SUBJECT
Strategy for Camp David
For the talks at Camp David to succeed, you will have to control the
proceedings from the outset and thereafter pursue a deliberate political
strategy designed to bring about significant changes in both the Egyp-
tian and Israeli substantive positions.2 I strongly suggest that you bear
the following points in mind:
1. Sadat cannot afford a failure and he knows it; both Sadat and Begin
think that you cannot afford failure; but Begin probably believes that a
failure at Camp David will hurt you and Sadat, but not him. He may even
want to see Sadat discredited and you weakened, thus leaving him
with the tolerable status quo instead of pressures to change his life-long
beliefs concerning “Judea and Samaria.”
2. You will have to convince both leaders, but especially Begin, that
failure3 at Camp David will have directly adverse consequences for our
bilateral relations and in terms of Soviet influence in the region.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 52, Middle East: Camp David Cables and Memos, 8/16–31/78. Secret; Sensitive;
Eyes Only. Outside System. Sent for action. Printed from an uninitialed copy. The date is
handwritten at the top of the first page of the memorandum.
2 The Department of State produced its own Camp David briefing book for Carter.
The book, sent from Vance to Carter under an undated covering memorandum, pre-
sented a series of papers designed to supplement those produced by the Department for
Carter on August 18. (See footnote 2, Document 12) In addition to an overview of the up-
coming summit, the book includes strategy papers for the meetings with Begin, the
meetings with Sadat, and the initial trilateral meeting among Begin, Sadat, and Carter as
well as a copy of the Department of State paper on the Sinai/West Bank relationship (see
Document 7), a paper on possible outcomes and options for the summit, and biographical
sketches of the Israeli and Egyptian delegations. (Department of State, Office of the Secre-
tariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 11, The Secre-
tary Camp David [Briefing Book])
3 As part of its briefing book for the summit, sent to Carter under an August 31 cov-
ering memorandum from Turner, the Central Intelligence Agency produced a paper ana-
lyzing the possible consequences if Camp David failed. According to the paper, the
summit will have failed if the United States was “unable to persuade both Sadat and
Begin to continue the present negotiating process after the Camp David sessions have
ended” or a “breakdown at Camp David does not at least set in motion forces in Israel
that could either cause Begin to moderate his position or lead to the collapse of his gov-
ernment and thus present the prospect of different negotiations.” The briefing book also
contained papers analyzing the positions of both Begin and Sadat on the eve of the
summit, the military backdrop to the negotiations, Arab and Soviet reactions to a possible
U.S. military presence in the Middle East, and the economic benefits of Egyptian-Israeli
