520 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 169. Message From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to West German Chancellor Schmidt1 Washington, October 13, 1978, 0434Z WH81325. Dear Mr. Chancellor, You may remember that when in Bonn I mentioned the President’s hope that you would be able to encourage the French and British to adopt more forthcoming positions in MTN, in fulfillment of their Summit commitments—even as the US and Germany strive to fulfill their Summit commitments.2 You asked for information about the items on which we were having most trouble with the French and British. Here is this information, which has been provided me by Bob Strauss. It is a candid statement and should be held closely. I am sending this off immediately since I gather from your staff that it would be helpful for you to have this information before you meet with Prime Minister Callaghan. Begin text October 12, 1978 MTN—UK and France 1. Agriculture. The most serious problems with respect to France arise in the field of agriculture: —In order to conclude MTN negotiations, we must reach agreement on an effective discipline regarding the use of agricultural export subsidies. If we do not have agreed rules about the extent to which the use of subsidies is appropriate, there will be frequent sharp conflicts between the Community and the US in the future. —Successful conclusion of negotiations also requires improved market access for a number of US agricultural export items including such Mediterranean products as citrus and tobacco. France is reluctant to see the Community give concessions in this area, even though the products are not competitive with French products. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 13, Germany F R: 7–10/78. Confidential; Via Annex Charlie Channels. Sent with the instruction to deliver at opening of business. 2 During their October 3 meeting in Bonn, Schmidt promised Brzezinski that he would “be helpful in seeking French and British cooperation but stated he needs more detail and that Strauss tends to ‘cry wolf’ too often.” (Memorandum of conversation, October 4; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 51, Chron: 10/1–7/78)
