National Security Policy  429
the Soviets. This advantage becomes especially great with ballistic mis­
siles and supersonic aircraft.
The President recalled that he took initiative in 1955 (at Geneva) in 
proposing aerial inspection against the “means of delivery” of highly 
destructive weapons; at that time such means of delivery were aircraft. 
Except for that proposal, he said he had never been wedded to the con­
cept of inspection against surprise attack. In particular, he questioned the 
significance of the far north, which to him is simply an area of passage.
Dr. Kistiakowsky added that, as against missile launching subma­
rines, no way to monitor was seen. He added that both the scientists 
and the military men of the group came to feel that the only fruitful 
approach to this is to couple inspection with arms limitation. Through 
such a means, a reduction in the threat would be accomplished, with­
out it being dependent for us upon obtainer split-­second warning. 
There would be ample time to observe whether forces had in fact been 
reduced to and held at agreed levels. Such a limitation, in the case of 
aircraft, might provide that only so many could be in the air at once. 
Total numbers of missiles might be limited. As to submarines, not more 
than a certain number might be allowed to be on station.
The President recognized the difficulties but pointed out that, if 
we do not follow this line, we must face the question what line do we 
follow. He did not see much hope for a world engaged in all-­out effort 
on military build-­up, military technology, and tremendous attempts at 
secrecy. One reason for seeking an inspection system in connection with 
the atomic testing is that if we get one such system we may then be able 
to go on to another. He recognized that this matter is very difficult, but 
added that, with aerial inspection, we can find out where great military 
concentrations are located, and what is their state of readiness. Even if 
the Soviets should be contemplating a massive surprise attack, if they 
wish to secure the results of such an attack they must prepare forces to 
move into the devastated areas, and these we could see. He concluded 
by saying that, in the long run, no country can advance intellectually 
and in terms of its culture and well-­being if it has to devote everything 
to military build-­up.
Dr. Killian said that in view of the gravity of this matter there is a 
need to have a more sustained study under way. He suggested setting 
up study groups, and a standing group of top governmental officials 
concerned who would follow the matter. They would go deeply into 
the problems involved in monitoring surprise attack. Dr. Kistiakowsky 
commented at this point that the Soviets have had a high-­powered 
group at work since the end of World War II on disarmament. They 
were very well up on this subject, as evidenced by the fact that when 
our delegation made proposals at Geneva, the Soviets instantly showed 
knowledge of the weak points and the implications of such proposals. 
The President agreed with the suggestion. He thought that someone
