872
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
along these lines with some urgency. I am prepared to task my staff
and the JCS to support this planning effort if you agree.3
R.W. Komer4
3 In a memorandum to Komer, November 4, Carlucci replied that, in the view of
the intelligence community, Soviet efforts had not weakened the insurgency; on the
contrary, the rebels’ efforts were “alive and well.” Carlucci agreed with Komer’s sugges-
tion on the advisability of developing contingencies should the insurgency take a turn
for the worse. To that end, Carlucci reported, the CIA was involved in its “first experiment
in providing special training to independent Afghan units” involving “the SA–7.” Car-
lucci further noted that he wanted to assess this experiment before considering a broad-
ened effort as Komer suggested. (Ibid.)
4 Komer initialed “RWK” above his typed signature.
328.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Possible European Assistance to the Afghan Resistance
1. At the outset of our program of covert assistance to the Afghan
freedom fighters, we judged it best that, to maintain secrecy, we should
not involve other Western powers. We were constantly warned by both
the Pakistanis and the Saudis that leaks about this assistance were very
harmful and could prove fatal to the program. The Pakistan intelligence
chief, Gen. Akhtar, said he wanted no other parties involved.
2. During the course of discussions with [1 line not declassified] in
the first half of 1980, we discussed our Afghan assistance program
with them, and they offered to be of help. They assisted in the matter
of sending journalists to Pakistan and Afghanistan and, using press
outlets, were able significantly to augment, in articles and photographs,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For
President or Brzezinski Only File, Box 88, PA—Very Sensitive: 10–12/80. Secret; [handling
restriction not declassified]. In the top right corner, Carter wrote: “Zbig” and initialed “C.”
Although the memorandum is undated, attached but not printed is a memorandum from
Brzezinski to Turner, October 15, in which Brzezinski reported that Carter “approved
a positive response to Zia’s request for U.S. help in arranging European assistance to
the Afghan freedom fighters.”
