792  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
intellectuals, Castroism has had little impact on the Haitian peasantry. 
Moreover, Castro’s efforts at reconciliation with Haiti—­in contrast to 
his earlier activity against Duvalier—­and his virtual abandonment of 
Haitian exiles make trouble from that quarter not likely. A filibustering 
expedition would probably meet with no more success than that of a 
year ago, which received no local support and was eventually annihi-
lated by Duvalier’s men.
17. A matter of immediate concern is that, since early this year, 
Duvalier has become extremely antagonistic in his dealings with U.S. 
agencies in Haiti and severely critical of the terms and scale of U.S. 
economic assistance. He has opened the joint economic development 
projects to the Haitian spoils system, thereby provoking a cut-­back in 
the disbursement of U.S. funds for such projects and a slowdown in 
operations. In an attempt to induce massive U.S. aid, Duvalier has both 
threatened to seek Communist Bloc assistance and warned of the local 
Communist threat in his underdeveloped country.4 One effect of the 
President’s complaints has been to evoke considerable public criticism 
of the U.S.
18. Duvalier’s anti-U.S. behavior is probably rooted in his frustra-
tions: his own inability to improve the miserable living conditions of 
the bulk of his people and the inadequacy of U.S. aid to bring about 
any early or substantial change in their hopeless situation. He probably 
realizes that the U.S.-­sponsored long-­term development projects will 
be of eventual benefit to Haiti, but he is also impressed by the fact that 
they have had little or no effect on the miserable lot of most Haitians 
and are therefore of little political benefit to him.
19. Duvalier will persist in his demands for U.S. aid on a massive 
scale and in his expressions of resentment at its denial, employing such 
threats as seem to him necessary to gain consideration, but his object is 
to obtain more aid and he would not intentionally go so far as to forfeit 
that which he now receives. Because of his difficulties with the U.S., he 
may feel some sympathy for Fidel Castro. More importantly, Castro’s 
recent approaches toward a reconciliation are attractive to Duvalier as 
insurance against further Cuban support for the Haitian opposition and 
as reinsurance against interference by Trujillo. Nevertheless, Duvalier’s 
interests are basically different from Castro’s and he is unlikely to risk 
losing the Haitian Army’s support by too close an identification with 
the Cuban regime.
20. The situation is complicated by the apparent decline in 
Duvalier’s physical and mental health since his severe illness in May 
1959 and by his apparent reliance on a small group of leftist advisors, 
4 Haiti maintains diplomatic relations with no Bloc country expect Poland. Its trade 
with the Bloc is negligible.
