El Salvador 631 ES–33. Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant) to the Secretary of State1  Washington, November 8, 1960. SUBJECT El Salvador Attached as Tab A is telegram to our Chargé a.i. in San Salvador approved by Tom Mann instructing him to inform the Foreign Minister immediately that the United States has decided to recognize the new government.2 Although drafted for my signature, Mr. Mann feels that this should be approved before dispatch by you and the President. Attached as Tab B is a memorandum from Ambassador Kalijarvi opposing this course of action.3 At the NSC meeting yesterday morning raised this subject with the President and outlined the pros and cons of recognition with an indication that the Department expected to have a recommendation for his consideration within a day or two. Although the discussion was brief, the main points were covered. Tom Gates expressed himself forcefully as opposed to recognition at this time. The others were silent, and the President gave no visible indication of judgment in the matter. It is unnecessary to say that this is a very difficult decision with the factors pro and con closed balanced. I have in my own mind reached the conclusion that we should continue to delay according the junta recognition. The controlling reasons for this are: (1) Having delayed this long, it is difficult to represent that recognition now would be automatic and containing no element of moral judgment. The passage of time itself will be construed as our having weighed all the factors and finally having come down on the side of recognition. (2) Recognition now with a counter-­coup still in the air would inevitably be a discouragement to those contemplating such action. Certainly a counter-­coup by moderate and anti-Communist army officers would be in our interest. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.02/11–860. Secret. The source text bears the notation: “Overtaken By Events. 11/10/60.” 2 Not filed with source text. The telegram was evidently not sent. 3 Not filed with the source text. The reference is presumably to Kalijarvi’s memorandum of November 6, 1960, which concluded with the statement that “immediate recognition of the junta government in El Salvador would encourage and strengthen forces hostile to the United States without any . . . prospect of our being able to control the situation in El Salvador and to effect the course of its government.” (ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63 D 127, “El Salvador, 1960”)
