Chapter 4, February–April 1990 617 Burt: Why not, and limit them all to 115? Akhromeyev: The other aircraft you mentioned are no longer bombers, and should not be counted. Burt: How many of these aircraft will you need? Peresypkin: It is difficult to say. Akhromeyev: Let us keep this difference. Bartholomew: Think about it overnight. Bartholomew (returning to the Moscow ALCM elements of common ground): Before we leave this page, do you want to keep the ban on ALCMs with multiple nuclear warheads? Akhromeyev: We are agreed on that. Bartholomew (referring to the ban on conversion of aircraft other than bombers into ALCM heavy bombers): I am prepared to drop the first of the last three points. Akhromeyev: I accept all three of the last three points. Bartholomew: Let us take stock. Akhromeyev: I would like to return to the question of equipping future types of heavy bombers with nuclear ALCMs, now that I can consult with my colleague. Peresypkin: Marshall Akhromeyev agreed that future Soviet types of heavy bombers would be attributed 10 ALCMs and could be equipped with 20, the same as the US. For the American side this is tantamount to a realistic circumvention of the treaty. For the Soviet side this is a formal right. We have no plans or intentions to do this. So our proposal, and we want this right recorded, is that future Soviet ALCM heavy bombers, not just the TU–95 and TU–160, still enjoy the right to 40% more. Burt: I don’t see the basis for doing that, since future Soviet ALCM heavy bombers are subject to the same 10 and 20 numbers as US ALCM heavy bombers. Peresypkin: If the Soviet Union does not use this right, they would enjoy the 40% formula. Bartholomew: You say you don’t have any such plans now, but the time scale here is 15 years. There are other formal rights that we have—­for example heavy missiles. We have the formal right, a right we cannot exercise. Bartholomew: I ask if you could give us your agreement to this provision a third time. Peresypkin: I presented my idea clearly. Nothing actually changes, it represents a continuation into the future of the situation today. Bartholomew: We agreed to the 40% rule in Moscow to reflect concerns related to today’s aircraft. I cannot agree with the general. Peresypkin: Let us have your experts talk to our experts. Bartholomew: Let us try again to take stock. The agreed Moscow elements of common ground are now the agreed Washington elements of common ground except for the 40% rule and the 115 number. With these two exceptions, the agreed Moscow elements are now the agreed Washington elements. There are three additional issues on which we
