814  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
U.S. Bottom Line
The U.S. faces three options for the Minuteman force under START:
— retain about 400 older MM II at a cost of $700 million-$4 billion;
— permit downloading, of MM IIIs from 3 to 1 RV at a cost of about 
$190 million; or
— retain 3-RV MM IIIs and deploy 30–50% as many silos as under 
either of the above approaches.
Given the emphasis we have placed on strengthening stability, 
keeping the number of silos as high as possible under START is an 
important objective. Under current and prospective fiscal constraints, 
and especially given the uncertain prospects for deployment of mobile 
ICBMs, downloading is the most attractive, and may be the only realis-
tic, option to achieve this objective.
Nevertheless, there is little in the proposed U.S. position to interest 
Moscow. Even the U.S. fallback position cannot be utilized as effectively 
by the Soviets and is thus unlikely to be accepted without modifica-
tion. It is likely that Washington will soon face the following options in 
response to a Soviet counterproposal:
— Loosen the restrictions on downloading to permit a greater 
number of RVs per missile to be downloaded (which would worsen the 
potential breakout problem);
— Alter the restrictions on downloading to make explicit the 
total number of RVs that could be downloaded (which could exacer-
bate the ratification issue by specifically identifying the number of 
RVs that could be removed from accountability without any launcher 
destruction);
— Propose a ban on downloading (which would be inconsistent 
with our commitment at the 1987 Washington Summit);
— Stay with our proposed restrictions on downloading, which the 
Soviets would likely see as one-­sided, and offer an offsetting concession 
in order to gain Soviet agreement.
We do not need to make a decision now about which option to 
choose, but we may want to rule out one or more of them at the outset. 
In addition, an evaluation of our bottom line will affect the way the 
Negotiator approaches the issue with the Soviets. Our course of action 
in the future will depend in large measure on the Soviet response.
