January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1195 ington. They were planning to go directly from Washington to home at noon on Thursday.8 Minister Kubersky said it is in the afternoon. Prime Minister Begin said that if the President wants a 24-hour postponement . . . The President said that the U.S. would respond tomorrow, or later if need be. He has some questions for tomorrow. Prime Minister Begin said: yes sir. The President said that one concerns Sadat’s being for Gaza-first, if we need an alternative to a Self-Governing Authority for all the territories. Sadat wants it for Gaza and the West Bank, but Gaza-first as a fall back. Prime Minister Begin said that Israel’s position has been misunderstood. At Aswan,9 Sadat mentioned Gaza-first. In their third talk he (Prime Minister Begin) had asked Sadat whether he meant first dealing with and implementing an agreement there first. Sadat had replied: no, that he wanted agreement on both the West Bank and Gaza and then to apply it in Gaza-first. So there was no such proposal as Gaza-first. He had asked Sadat. Sadat said that first there must be a genuine agreement. Thus there is no Gaza-first in this sense. The President suggested that they go on, since there are difficult issues to face, and he would like to have alternatives under consideration. He prefers—and Prime Minister Begin and Sadat do, too—that the Self-Governing Authority be freely elected on the West Bank and Gaza simultaneously. If not, then we should keep open our options on Gaza-first. There is a problem, important to Prime Minister Begin, of Jordanian citizens in East Jerusalem, regarding the vote. This is crucial for Egypt. How can they vote in Jordan and not on the West Bank? If there is no agreement on this issue, then it could be left open with implementation in Gaza-first. They don’t need to vote, since Gazans are not Jordanian citizens. Prime Minister Begin said that no, we should not leave this question open. He told Sadat at Aswan about a traditional story from the Middle Ages. A learned man served a prince. The prince asked the learned man to convert to Christianity, and he would make the man very great. The man refused. The prince pressed him. Finally, he said that he would give the man three days to think about it. The man went home and thought: what did I say? I need time to think? I have denied my faith in God. And he cursed himself. The prince cut off his legs. This is fact, not legend. Before he died, the man wrote the most famous prayer for Yom 8 April 17. 9 See Document 327.
