962  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
responding promptly—­so as to get START back on track for a summit 
package.
8. Additionally, Bartholomew noted that Ambassador Matlock 
had gone in to speak to Shevardnadze that morning.5 (Shevardnadze’s 
letter proposed that Obukhov and Bartholomew meet. This morning 
Shevardnadze had proposed that they meet in Geneva the 10th and 
11th, next week, to try to finish things up. Bartholomew had received 
word from Ambassador Burt that Nazarkin et al. were planning to go 
back to Moscow next week to prepare for such a meeting.
9. Bartholomew emphasized that the first order of business 
should be responding to Baker’s letter and getting Houston START 
package back on track. He said that the U.S. did not see how—­in 
these ­circumstances—­we could have a meeting on the 10th and 
11th. Additionally Bartholomew said that his own sense, and that of 
Secretary Baker, was that we do better when these meetings are held 
in conjunction with a ministerial. He also emphasized that it was very 
important that Moscow not pull Nazarkin and the other key people 
out of Geneva—­they have work to do. At the same time, he stressed 
that he personally recognized the value of the productive work he 
had done with Obukhov.
10. Bessmertnykh said that they would be waiting for the letter. 
He suggested that Bartholomew nonetheless consider a meeting with 
Obukhov, which could be considered independent or as connected with 
the past ministerial or a future one. Since the timeframe is compressed 
it could be looked at either way. He pointed out that the issues involved 
are technical and specific. And when a meeting is planned it energizes 
the bureaucracy. If these dates were not acceptable they could think of 
others—­maybe later in January. He very strongly recommended such a 
meeting, saying it would help.
11. Bartholomew responded that he understood what Bessmertnykh 
was saying and in his own view could see the potential value. It was not 
for him to say whether there would be another ministerial. He was not 
taking the position that no such meeting could take place unless there 
was a ministerial, but with START in pieces on the ground, the U.S. did 
not see how it could be useful. The issue must be looked at at a politically 
authoritative level in Moscow.
12. Bartholomew said his hope was that the Soviets would receive 
Baker’s letter and reply positively and quickly, opening the way to 
think about how to proceed. An Obukhov–Bartholomew meeting was 
5 In telegram 323 from Moscow, January 4, the Embassy reported on Matlock’s meet-
ing with Shevardnadze, in which the ambassador conveyed “how much both Secretary 
Baker and the President valued and respected his work, and that contributions to the 
U.S.-Soviet relationship were unique.” (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, 
Electronic Telegrams, N910001–0032)
