916 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI would be eligible to participate. The purpose of such an arrangement would be that the bank acts as an insurance policy, protecting customers from arbitrary political actions by suppliers. There is a great deal of Congressional interest in this idea, and our preliminary investigation concludes that it has significant merit. All agencies except OMB and the NRC recommend that you authorize consultations with other countries and international agencies on the desirability and feasibility of such a fuel bank, including an indication of our willingness to make a contribution of enriched fuel from the US stockpile (subject to a determination that DOD’s stockpile requirements will not be adversely affected). We would indicate that, if satisfactory arrangements were made, the US would be prepared to make an initial contribution sufficient for ten large reactors for five years (or 5 million SWU), and that we would work with other uranium producers to provide uranium supplies for the bank.11 OMB and NRC on the other hand, believe that more analysis is needed before any specific indication is made of the size of the potential US contribution.12 There is virtue in both positions. Further analysis of the idea is clearly needed, but I believe that we would learn a great deal from consultations with others that would contribute to such an analysis. I see no harm in proceeding with consultations in which we would indicate that we are prepared to make a “substantial” contribution—without mentioning any number which could be taken as an implied commitment. I therefore recommend that you authorize talks along these lines, and a subsequent analysis to be submitted for your decision.13 Alternatively that 5 million SWUs be mentioned as the possible contribution. Alternatively that no mention be made of the size of a possible US contribution. 11 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “100,000/reactor.” 12 OMB explanation of their position is at Tab C. [Footnote is in the original. Tab C is attached but not printed.] 13 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “J.”
