German Democratic Republic
365
1. On basis of broad agreement reached on separate repeat separate
exchange of letters on nationality issue (ref A) Department is prepared
and SCA/SCS; approved by Goodby. Sent for information to West Berlin, East Berlin,
London, Moscow, Paris, and USNATO.
2 The negotiations on the Consular Convention between the United States and the
German Democratic Republic reached an impasse on the handling of consular access to
German nationals and the definition of German nationals. Dubbed the “nationality ques-
tion,” it sought to preserve West German access on consular matters in the United States to
all German nationals, including those from East Germany. The West German Government
maintained that there was one German citizenship—not East and West German citizens—
and that Bonn’s representatives retained the right to represent German nationals abroad.
In an oral message delivered to Vest on October 31, Von Staden stated “We have never had
any doubts that the United States will support us in the questions pertaining to German
citizenship” given that “the continuation of German citizenship is one of the elements of
the unsolved German question.” The Federal Republic of Germany’s concern, Van Staden
continued, was that Washington not commit, during Consular Convention negotiations,
to the thesis of two German nations. (Telegram 261674 to Bonn, November 2; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770402–0620)
3 See Document 119.
4 In telegram 211371 to East Berlin, September 2, the Department instructed Polansky
to approach Klobes and discuss draft language for separate statements on the question
of German nationality as well as possible dates to begin negotiations on other issues
concerning the Consular Convention. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770320–0268) The nationality question revolved around East German attempts to
define, within the Consular Convention, a separate East German nationality. In his
inaugural address to the Bundestag, West German Chancellor Brandt coined the “two
states, one nation” policy to deal with the nationality question. The U.S. Government
adopted the same policy after it recognized the German Democratic Republic on Septem-
ber 4, 1974, and supported the Federal Republic of Germany as the sole legitimate
successor of the German state.
5 In telegram 16114 from Bonn, September 29, the Embassy reported the reaction
of the West German Government to the proposed unilateral declarations on nationality
to be delivered at the signing of the Consular Convention between the United States
and the German Democratic Republic. Von Braunmuehl, the West German representative
in the Bonn Group, stressed that the U.S. position on the nationality question was critical
to the West German Government, and asked that the U.S. Government find a way to
stress that the Consular Convention did not represent U.S. acquiescence to the East
German position (i.e. two German nations). The declaration, Von Braunmuehl stressed,
should be drafted in such a way as to prevent its use by the German Democratic Republic
in arguing that the United States had accepted its position and, consequently, facilitate
its use by the Federal Republic of Germany to argue the contrary. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770355–0541)
6 In telegram 227612 to East Berlin, September 21, the Department provided the
Embassy with draft language on the nationality question. The proposed language, which
was for “background purposes only and is not repeat not authorized for release to GDR”
stressed that nationality cannot be defined in a Consular Convention, that it is a matter
for each state to decide who are its nationals, and that any such definition would have
no binding effect on a third state which may hold different views. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770344–0105)
