Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
609
efforts with SALT would still be needed without it. But many more
would be needed as well.
“I see the treaty as a valuable method of helping, along with our
own moderately increased programs, to meet our nation’s strategic
needs, and, if the Soviet Union will emphasize cooperation rather than
competition, SALT will also allow a healthier state of U.S.-Soviet rela-
tions.” (Department of State Bulletin, June 1979, pages 23–24)
On May 11, President Jimmy Carter took part in an interview and
question-and-answer session with editors and news directors. The in-
terview began at 1:15 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House.
The President discussed the beginning of the ratification process in his
opening remarks:
“Perhaps more important than anything that I will address while
I’m President and perhaps the most important vote that the incumbent
Members of the Senate will ever cast is concerning the ratification of
SALT II.
“It’s a fair treaty, enforceable treaty, verifiable treaty, and rejection
of this treaty would have a devastating, adverse effect on our Nation’s
relationship with the Soviet Union, on our ability to deal effectively
with our allies, with uncommitted nations, and with the control of nu-
clear weaponry or explosives in the future throughout the world.
That’s one issue.”
The President noted that the Middle East peace treaties, signed by
Egyptian and Israeli officials, constituted the second crucial interna-
tional issue facing the United States. He continued:
“We hope that the other nations in that region will soon realize the
importance of these treaties. We’ll do all we can to implement them
fully and to demonstrate to all those who are interested that we believe
in and are committed to a comprehensive peace settlement.”
During the question-and-answer portion of the interview, a re-
porter asked the President for his assessment of the SALT treaty and
whether or not he could guide the treaty through the Senate in the same
form in which he intended to sign it. The President responded:
“Well, you know, we’ve negotiated this SALT treaty now for going
on 7 years, under three Presidents, and it’s been negotiated in the most
extreme specificity, much greater specific, detailed negotiation than
ever existed with the limited test ban or SALT I or the ABM treaty.
“There’s been a hard negotiation, a tough negotiation on both
sides, and the Soviets, I think, as have we, have been not only tough but
fair. We have gotten the best deal we can. It’s not perfect. I could have
written a unilateral treaty if I didn’t have to consult with the Soviets,
that it would have been more attractive to us and less attractive to
them. But for the Senate to expect the Soviets substantially to change
