250 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement the DLF if Chile would achieve two-­thirds or even possibly 75 percent of the program which the Fund representatives outlined. He though it would be possible to go most of the way but left no doubt in his feeling that Chile could not meet all the requirements. Later on, Figueroa indicated that he thought it would be possible to negotiate out the differences with the Fund on all points except two. These relate to housing and to credit. While he and Vergara did not consider the announcement of a flat 10 percent cut in government expenditures practicable, they were sure this objective could be achieved or perhaps even more. Figueroa expressed the view that the desirable way to put part of the people back to work was in a housing program. The Fund representatives apparently left the definite impression that this was one thing to which they could not agree. With respect to credit, Figueroa was not very explicit, except that he felt that holding credit at a fixed level from April 1 onward simply was impossible. According to Figueroa, this was a big change in the position which Jones had taken in his talks with them in December. At that time he agreed that increases in the money supply were justified as physical production expanded and as prices rose for reasons other than the government’s fiscal and monetary policy. In Buenos Aires, however, they took a very rigid attitude that there should be no further increases in credit after April 1, for the reasons indicated above, and it was obvious that Figueroa felt hurt that the Fund representatives should thus raise the ante in view of his sincere efforts to meet their requirements. Vergara expressed particular interest in knowing what the Embassy group thought of their program. The Ambassador indicated that taking account of the political realities in Chile he considered the program sound and that he thought people in Washington were generally sympathetic with respect to helping Chile. He went into considerable detail in emphasizing the importance which the U.S. Government attaches to Chile first coming to an agreement with the Fund on its economic program. This is not because the U.S. wants to hide behind the skirts of an international agency but rather because the Fund is in a better position to deal objectively with this kind of problem. In addition, numerous countries are seeking help from the United States and these requests can be handled on a more effective basis and better programs developed by the countries collaborating with the Fund. Vergara and Figueroa indicated their recognition of the soundness of this position and the reasoning behind it. While he could not say just how much help would be extended or in what form, the Ambassador said he felt confident help would be available once Chile had reached agreement with the International Monetary Fund. Vergara was particularly interested in knowing what the attitude would be of U.S. lending agencies if Chile succeeded in getting a “light-­green” signal from the Fund but not a full “green light” endorsement. In reply the Ambassador said that in view
