submit reservations showing the views therein expressed. In regard to the form of paragraph 6 (relating to category 3 concerning naval production), I was able to gain a large measure of assent from the delegates to the form of article suggested in the Department’s draft of Article 4. Preliminary study led me to send my telegram No. 1, of August 27, 12 noon, and to request Major Yount to proceed from Paris. We considered the matter of civil and commercial aviation with the utmost care and reached the conclusion that it was advisable to submit a reservation or explanation of our attitude to be incorporated in the text of Article 1. In the minutes of the fourth meeting (C. F. A./P. V. 4) the Department will find a statement which I made in explanation of our attitude in submitting this reservation.66 As I rose to present this, the Department’s telegram No. 1, of August 28, 1 p.m., was handed to me, and I was happily able to assure myself that the action which I had planned was in harmony with the Department’s views on this subject. I shall take up the preliminary draft article by article. Preamble: I stated that the use of the phrase “governmental supervision” in paragraph 2 of the preamble, as amended, might cause us some embarrassment in view of our known attitude as to the in-acceptability for us of any form of licensing. I added, however, that I did not insist strongly on this at the present time since this was a preliminary agreement only and our interests were, I believed, covered by our general reservation. Article 1: I have already explained the attitude taken by the delegation in a preceding paragraph. Articles 2, 3, and 4, which deal in general with the licensing system, was a subject of extensive debate in which I took little part, save to insert remark No. 3 under Article 3 published in the Report. My observations in this connection will be found on pages 12 and 13 of the minutes of the first meeting (C. F. A./P. V. I).67 Article 5: The debate began on this article and it was on this article that the most divergent views were expressed. The
