1054
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
study (Tab F).13 The draft PD is not ready for transmittal to the Presi-
dent. The PD might be useful after a PRC review of recommendations
of the funding study (see Tab D).
State may argue the need for the PD to serve two functions:
(1) It would allow for presentation at UNCSTD; where the U.S.
would point to the broad openness of U.S. Government agencies
toward international cooperation and (2) it would be an explicit policy
statement regarding international S&T activity which is still somewhat
undefined.
Recommended Action: Defer preparation of a PD until PRC review
of the Funding Study. The PRC could approve a broad statement of
support for technical agency consideration of LDC R&D priorities and
recommend that the Presidential Message to UNCSTD include a refer-
ence to such support. The statement to be noted could be drawn from
the draft PD, as follows:
To this end, domestic and foreign policy agencies of the Govern-
ment should devote increased attention to how their research and
development programs can contribute more effectively to our major in-
ternational objectives such as strengthening U.S. economic compet-
itiveness, promoting closer ties with other countries, improving the ca-
pabilities of developing countries and utilizing finite global resources
more effectively.
Agenda Item #4 Funding of USG International S&T Activities
(Tab F)
The PRC is asked to: (1) take note of the Committee on Interna-
tional Science, Engineering and Technology (CISET) initiated funding
study and direct agencies to cooperate in its preparation; and (2) to di-
rect the chairman of CISET through the chairman of the Federal Coor-
dinating Council for Science, Engineering, and Technology (FCCSET)
to provide the results of the study with recommendations for their im-
plementation to the PRC by February 1, 1980.
Recommended Action. Support the recommendation that the PRC
direct the completion of this study and submit it for PRC consideration
by February 1, 1980.
13 Tab K, attached but not printed, is a paper providing “Instructions on Executive
Order to Implement Title V.” Tab F, attached but not printed, is an undated paper enti-
tled “Agenda Item #4, Funding of U.S. International S&T Activities.”
