832 Foreign Relations, 1955ŌĆō1957, Volume III, Supplement factor in connection with some important decision, obviously we will have something of an added problem. We met with the Secretary yesterday afternoon. No particular decision was made except to hold firm on the position we have clearly staked out. We believe it is a good and eminently defensible position. If Wang should precipitate a break, we believe we can more than hold our own in a public exchange. The Secretary feels that we may be able to do something with the Chinese prisoners question which could be helpful to our cause, at least from a public information standpoint later on. We have already sent you a copy of the letter dated Feb. 28 to the Attorney General requesting a survey. We are not quite as inclined as you apparently are to discount entirely the possible utility of seeking to arrange the voluntary deportation of some Chinese aliens in prison. While it is probably an academic question, the Secretary did express the view that if Wang should request a recess of the talks during the next few weeks, we should raise no objection. It was the consensus that we should not propose any recess for the period of the SecretaryŌĆÖs absence from Washington. No new tack of any sort is planned for you to take during this period, but it was felt that it would be a mistake for us to propose a recess. We understand your distaste for having to repeat ad nauseam the same old things, but it seems necessary under the circumstances. While it is naturally repellent and frustrating, we doubt whether it is harmful from the tactical standpoint in the given situation. Everyone agrees with your surmise that the Secretary may be pre┬Ł sented with some sort of package proposal when he gets to Delhi. All the signs point this way. We anticipate that the Indians and the ┬ŁChinese Communists may have sought to enlist at least the moral support of several of the SEATO powers for some sort of scheme which would involve the off-┬Łshore islands and a higher level meeting. The ┬ŁSecretary anticipates that the pressure on the off-┬Łshore islands question is going to be greatly stepped up in connection with the campaign for a higher level meeting. He expects to have a very full and frank review of this whole problem with the Generalissimo in Taipei on March 16. The dis┬Ł position here is to adhere to the position already stated on the higher level conference question. In this connection the letter which ┬ŁSenator George wrote to the Secretary last October was recalled yesterday. This is an important statement which is still believed to accurately represent the position of the majority of Congress in both parties. I donŌĆÖt believe you were ever sent a copy of this letter. It is now enclosed. Moreover we are very mindful of our pledge to the GRC not to discuss matters involving its rights, claims or essential interests without its presence or concurrence. We find it difficult to visualize Chou En-┬Łlai sitting down at the same conference table with George Yeh and the Secretary. (You
