Comprehensive Test Ban
627
256.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Director of the Office
of Science and Technology Policy (Press) to President Carter1
Washington, October 31, 1980
SUBJECT
Augmented Nuclear Test Program (U)
Earlier this year, you authorized us to develop an Augmented Nu-
clear Test Program (ATP)2 aimed at improving the basic research con-
tent of our test program and enhancing our readiness for CTB. The
initial submission by the weapons laboratories3 was insufficiently re-
sponsive to these objectives and we convened an OSTP panel to review
the draft ATP. The Panel produced a useful and interesting report (Tab
C)4 and most of its recommendations were incorporated in the final
ATP (Tab D),5 which is supported strongly by Harold Brown and
Charles Duncan (Tab E).6 (S)
The ATP consists of a detailed two year test plan under which our
testing rate would be increased from the present 10–12 to about 20 per
year (the current Soviet rate is about 25–30 per year). Also, although not
requested, the ATP includes an out-year program for an additional
three year effort in which testing would be increased to about 25 per
year. Consistent with the OSTP Panel recommendations, the program:
(1) emphasizes R&D tests aimed at reducing weapons physics uncer-
tainties such as boosting which are important to stockpile reliability;
(2) includes so-called stockpile confidence tests of production-line war-
heads and alternate warheads for key weapons systems (these were not
done in the past); and (3) provides for more thorough documentation of
warhead design and components and other measures to improve our
ability to maintain the stockpile without testing. Brief summary chart
on the status of the warhead development effort and R&D objectives of
the ATP are included at Tab B.7 (S)
On the whole, we are well-satisfied with the final draft of the ATP
and believe that it merits your endorsement. We feel that your concern
that an increased test program not subvert effort toward a CTB has
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 20,
PRM/NSC–38. Secret. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote
“C.”
2 Not found.
3 Not found.
4 Document 249.
5 Not attached.
6 Not attached.
7 Not attached.
