1980 923 —In peacetime, until there are signs of specific threats elsewhere, the Persian Gulf-Middle East theater should be our first concern for deployment. Any draw-­down of forces to provide for this should come from the European theater first and the Pacific second. We bear the exclusive defense burden in the Persian Gulf-Middle East theaters, and our allies in Europe should be made to recognize the impact of our shortfall. Specifically, as many naval forces as necessary would be drawn down from the Mediterranean. This would have minimal impact on the war-­fighting capability of NATO. The psychological impact on the Alliance would be alarming, though salutary. Specifically, land-­ based air, and ground forces presently in Europe would remain there, but only on the assumption that the allies would accede to their rapid deployment to a crisis area when necessary to meet U.S. interests. —In the event of general war with the Soviet Union, Western Europe would have to call on almost all of our forces from the other theaters (e.g., a return to the Navy’s “Swing” strategy). This is similar to our concentrating on one theater strategy of the early years of World War II when our forces were inadequate to do more. —In the event a vital interest were endangered in any theater, and a decision made to defend it, mobile forces would be concentrated on that problem. [portion marking not declassified] 2. This strategy would establish extensive bases in both Israel and Egypt as forward staging points for land-­based air and ground forces. This reassurance for the security of Israel would be part of the price for Israeli acceptance of the settlement with the Arab world from which we would hope to gain greater access to other facilities in the Middle East area. [portion marking not declassified] 3. There would be a necessary reorganization of existing U.S. military forces and a remodeling of future forces to fit this strategic concept. [portion marking not declassified]

Appendix 2

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency5 Washington, undated Steps to move to an economic strategy for the United States in the 1980s: 1. The U.S. is totally unprepared to conduct a coherent economic strategy against a specific adversary. The first step in pursuing such a strategy would be to establish a mechanism empowered to coordinate and control economic warfare (including export/import controls, 5 Secret.
