Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II people (whatever our differences with their government). In some cases humanitarian assistance will be the only practical human rights help the international community can give to people living under a repressive regime. Finally, it is important to make clear that economic human rights are as important to us as any other category, and that we are not sacrificing their promotion in pursuit of others. When we oppose a genuinely basic human needs loan in an IFI, we give ammunition to those (in LDC governments generally as well as the particular applicant country) who charge that we are trying to impose Westernstyle political values on them at the expense of their economic needs.2 P.S. Fred Bergsten has read this memo and supports S/P’s position. Attachment Talking Points Prepared in the Department of State3 Washington, undated TALKING POINTS ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND FOREIGN ASSISTANCE: THE CONSISTENCY QUESTION We have a good record of consistency in application of human rights considerations to bilateral assistance programs on the one hand, and our role in the IFIs on the other. —We almost always support economic assistance programs which serve basic human needs, whether bilateral or multilateral. We define “basic human needs” as food; shelter; health care; and education. We also consider that assistance programs with major job-creating potential in areas of high unemployment meet the basic human needs standard, since we would rather put people in a position to purchase essential goods and services for themselves. —When applying the basic human needs standard, we look closely at the specific situations. Will a construction loan build hotels for the tourist industry, or housing for the poor? How many jobs will an industrial or mineral development loan create? Will an energy loan increase the number of households that have electricity, or increase 2 Lake added the following handwritten notation: “(In addition, I believe strongly that it is simply wrong to harm (or fail to help) the immediate economic prospects of needy people for the sake of possible gains with their governments regarding political human rights.) TL.” 3 No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the talking points.
