Special Session on Disarmament 1181 478. Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, January 20, 1978 SUBJECT Specific US Initiatives for the SSOD This memorandum describes five possible specific initiatives that the United States might propose at the SSOD. These initiatives are intended to take advantage of the opportunities for significant progress in arms control that the SSOD offers, and to respond positively to the concerns of SSOD participants. Unhappily, possibilities for US initiatives that could be acceptable within the United States government do not correspond precisely to the priorities of the developing countries and the nonaligned, or to favorite themes of the NGOs. Still it seems best to pursue initiatives that have real rather than apparent content, even if they are less responsive to the expressed demands of other participants in the Special Session. We think the problem is not one of overloading the system, but rather identifying at most two or three specific initiatives that the United States can present. The memorandum also outlines the course we propose to pursue in developing positions on other issues that are not likely to be the subject of specific US initiatives. If, in the course of our work over the next few weeks, we are able to identify additional promising initiatives, we will send you further reports on any major possibilities. Possible Specific Initiatives 1. Nuclear Non-Use Assurances. We might want to take an initiative in the area of nuclear non-use assurances to support our nonproliferation objectives, while maintaining alliance deterrence capabilities. Specifically, we could revive a formulation that we proposed to the Soviets in 1968 in the NPT negotiations and that became the basis for our adherence in 1971 to Protocol II2 of the Treaty of Tlatelolco— non-use against non-nuclear weapon states party to the NPT (or other binding international non-proliferation commitments) except those en- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disarma-
