1142 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Navy was honest enough to say that things they have tried didn’t work just right and was positively for you making sure you knew where the target was before shooting. ADM BURKE: Yes, they don’t know where the target is unless you shoot into these. CAPT AURAND: I brought up this nuclear sub problem of going into Japan. . . He said that I’m not sure that doing that would solve the problem and in fact, I’m not sure it wouldn’t cause more trouble than they had in the first place. He said particularly with the Emperor. And, I got a . . . . on the Emperor. The Emperor’s safety is the highest priority thing they have. They wouldn’t think of letting him ride in an open car, even before the riots. ADM BURKE: Well, maybe the Emperor’s son, the Crown Prince— CAPT AURAND: I don’t think you’re going to get much action out of …… ADM BURKE: I’m going to write him a letter myself. MacArthur is just a little bit afraid that I had upset his apple cart when I was out there. CAPT AURAND: He’s the kind of guy though, that when he gets a little mad he’ll put his heels in. ADM BURKE: Yes, and he gets vindictive. He also wants to be liked. MacArthur wants to be liked. I know his mother pretty well. CAPT AURAND: Well, he didn’t go for that one very much. Just had the idea, I, on the dotted line, have briefed the incoming staff. I have got one with Salander and Jim Hagerty on the Presidential relo­ cation set-­up of communications and all of that but as of now we have three probable places that the President would go. He makes up his mind at the moment. I was thinking that maybe just gratituously put­ ting in the NORTHAMPTON. ADM BURKE: More than that. Put in the NORTHAMPTON and say that we are working on this and we will get—she could be used right now except she doesn’t have any files aboard for this sort of busi­ ness—but we are going to convert her and make her a little more suit­ able. We won’t change her ability as far as an operating ship and then tell him that I am playing with the idea of an old conventional sub­ marine and gutting it and putting in communications and things and a small crew up here at the Gun Factory. She would have bunks and emergency communication equipment. She would be primarily for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Then she would go out in the river and sink to the bottom. CAPT AURAND: She can’t sink very far.
