858
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
moderates will not be able to contain sharply critical LDC statements
during the early stages of the November meeting. The ability of the US
to respond constructively to that criticism may determine whether or
not we will be able to channel the common fund negotiations toward
technical working groups following the November meeting. Such
groups would be preferable to another high-level, highly politicized
negotiating session.
The major European countries have been informed of the possi-
bility that the US might have to revise its position in the light of events
during the November meeting. An improved US response might:
—force the Group of 77 to react to a constructive proposal rather
than maintain their maximum demands in a confrontational manner.
—enable the US to resist pressure to make more changes in its
proposals.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The following are my recommendations related to the main ques-
tions posed at the beginning of this memo:
Question 1:
Is the US prepared to continue the negotiations and contemplate
compromises which may be necessary to bring them to a successful
conclusion?
The President has approved your suggestion of a US approach to
the LDCs based on cooperation and shared responsibility. That ap-
proach justifies a serious US intent to negotiate a common fund.5
Question 2:
Can possible changes in the US negotiation position be examined
during November, (a) on foreign policy grounds (given the importance
of the negotiation to the overall North-South relationship) and (b) in re-
lation to the credibility of the OECD proposals and the viability of a
common fund itself?
We should seek from the PRC policy guidelines which authorize
the serious exploration of improvements in the US position, for ex-
ample those found in paragraphs 9–15 of the discussion paper. A PRC
request to explore urgently those, and other, possible changes in the US
position could aim at providing our representatives in Geneva with the
negotiating flexibility that they may use as needed.6
5 Brzezinski did not indicate his preference with respect to any of the recommenda-
tions. On Question 1, the Disapprove option includes the action to “Prepare steps to con-
tain damage to US relations with OECD countries and LDCs.”
6 The Disapprove option under Question 2 includes the query “other action?”
