24 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI MAJOR FACTORS BEARING ON THE PROBLEM Both the U.S. and the USSR have and are further developing satellite capabilities in space for a range of activities spanning peacetime, crisis and wartime. These include treaty verification, national and military intelligence, weather, navigation, communications and attack warning. Both sides are increasing the use of satellites as sources of tactical intelligence to provide near-real-time photography, electronic ferreting, and radar targeting of military assets. The Soviet Union currently has an advantage over the U.S. in antisatellite capabilities. They have an orbital interceptor which has been judged to be operational [8½ lines not declassified] The U.S. has no ASAT capability. A nuclear interceptor system was operational until 1975 at Johnston Island. Currently, the U.S. is developing a new interceptor which is planned for testing by 1981. [3½ lines not declassified] SUMMARY OF THE ISSUES On the one hand: • Limitations on Soviet capabilities to attack U.S. satellites would be desirable since the U.S. is becoming increasingly dependent on its space assets, and relies on a smaller number of more sophisticated satellites than the USSR. • There has never been a confrontation in space and treaties have tended to give space a special status as a peaceful arena where both sides can work cooperatively. • ASAT limitations might preclude a potential arms race in space with its attendant action-reaction cycles, public concerns, increased defense costs and potential instabilities. On the other hand: • The U.S. must assess the need, independent of Soviet ASAT capabilities, for a U.S. ASAT system to counter threatening Soviet satellites. • There are difficult treaty verification problems in this area. • Incentives to cheat may be greater than under previous agreements. Because each side has a small number (6–15) of critical satellites, small numbers of ASATs could be decisive. This is in contrast with current treaties limiting ICBMs and ABMs, where stability is not affected by small numbers of weapons. APPROACHES Under all of the approaches discussed below, U.S. ASAT research and development activities will continue, and be modified to con-
