24
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
MAJOR FACTORS BEARING ON THE PROBLEM
Both the U.S. and the USSR have and are further developing satel-
lite capabilities in space for a range of activities spanning peacetime,
crisis and wartime. These include treaty verification, national and mili-
tary intelligence, weather, navigation, communications and attack
warning. Both sides are increasing the use of satellites as sources of tac-
tical intelligence to provide near-real-time photography, electronic fer-
reting, and radar targeting of military assets.
The Soviet Union currently has an advantage over the U.S. in anti-
satellite capabilities. They have an orbital interceptor which has been
judged to be operational [8½ lines not declassified]
The U.S. has no ASAT capability. A nuclear interceptor system was
operational until 1975 at Johnston Island. Currently, the U.S. is devel-
oping a new interceptor which is planned for testing by 1981. [3½ lines
not declassified]
SUMMARY OF THE ISSUES
On the one hand:
• Limitations on Soviet capabilities to attack U.S. satellites would
be desirable since the U.S. is becoming increasingly dependent on its
space assets, and relies on a smaller number of more sophisticated sat-
ellites than the USSR.
• There has never been a confrontation in space and treaties have
tended to give space a special status as a peaceful arena where both
sides can work cooperatively.
• ASAT limitations might preclude a potential arms race in space
with its attendant action-reaction cycles, public concerns, increased de-
fense costs and potential instabilities.
On the other hand:
• The U.S. must assess the need, independent of Soviet ASAT
capabilities, for a U.S. ASAT system to counter threatening Soviet
satellites.
• There are difficult treaty verification problems in this area.
• Incentives to cheat may be greater than under previous agree-
ments. Because each side has a small number (6–15) of critical satellites,
small numbers of ASATs could be decisive. This is in contrast with cur-
rent treaties limiting ICBMs and ABMs, where stability is not affected
by small numbers of weapons.
APPROACHES
Under all of the approaches discussed below, U.S. ASAT research
and development activities will continue, and be modified to con-
