National Security Policy  727
Atomic Energy Commission; the Chairman, Council of Economic 
Advisers (Item 1); the Special Assistant to the President for Economic 
Affairs (Item 1); the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic 
Affairs (W.T.M. Beale) (Item 1); General Thomas D.  White for the 
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; 
the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Assistant to the President; 
the Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs 
and for Security Operations Coordination; the White House Staff 
Secretary; Mr. Howard Furnas, Department of State; the Assistant 
White House Staff Secretary; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the 
Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. EFFECTS OF U.S. IMPORT TRADE POLICY ON NATIONAL 
SECURITY
Mr. Gray reminded the Council that the President had recently 
asked the State Department to prepare for the Council a report on the 
effects of our trade policy, primarily our import restrictions, on the 
national security. He then indicated that Mr. Beale, the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs would make the presentation.
(A copy of Mr. Beale’s report is filed in the Minutes of the Meeting). 
(A copy of Mr. Beale’s report is also attached hereto).
When Mr. Beale had concluded his report, the President com­
mented that while a number of business interests were seeking import 
restrictions on a number of products, Mr. Saulnier and the Council of 
Economic Advisers were reporting to the President such a boom in our 
U.S. economy that we were actually concerned about a real runaway 
boom. It therefore seemed a good time for the U.S. to try to develop a 
better feeling and sentiment about our trade policy insofar as it con­
cerned friendly foreign countries. The President pointed out that no 
less than eleven foreign countries were affected by our import restric­
tions on clothespins yet the President believed that all the clothespins 
in the U.S. were made by six small companies in the State of Maine, 
employing as the President recalled, only some 260 employees. This 
kind of situation seemed silly to the President.
The President then observed that meetings have been occurring 
designed to devise some kind of an adjustment policy which would 
enable us to find a solution for some of our domestic industries in the 
face of foreign competition. For example, it might be possible to change 
from the manufacture of clothespins to the manufacture of baseball 
bats. Most such suggestions, however, get turned down. Secretary 
Dillon pointed out certain difficulties which lay in the way of making 
the kind of adjustments mentioned by the President.
