1424  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
364.	 Telegram Secto 8 From John Foster Dulles at USUN1
New York, August 20, 1958, 1 p.m.
Secto 8. Personal from Secretary to Acting Secretary. I have again 
gone over the August 19 draft of Presidential statement to be made at 
the time of the release of report of Geneva Meeting on Nuclear Testing.
1. I understand that the language on one-­year suspension will read 
“to withhold further testing of atomic and nuclear weapons for a period 
up to one year beginning October 1, 1958”. This would in my opinion 
permit of the use of atomic and nuclear power for clearly civilian and 
peaceful purposes, and do so without loss of world propaganda effect 
because our statement would be in this respect substantially identical 
with the decision of the Supreme Soviet of March 31, 1958.
2. While accepting the foregoing draft as a statement of United 
States policy, I believe that the President’s public statement could with 
great advantage be substantially simplified. I am adding redraft at end 
of message to carry out this thought.
Let me emphasize that I am not seeking through this redraft to 
retract or modify in any way any of the previously agreed language 
so far as it is a United States policy position. However, since the public 
statement is primarily designed to influence world opinion and gain 
good will, I believe that it is desirable to emphasize the positive aspects 
and avoid expressing publicly some of the difficulties and complexities 
we foresee and which are inherent in the situation. Following is text of 
public statement I would suggest:
Begin text: The United States welcomes the successful conclusion 
of the Geneva discussions on technical requirements for monitoring 
testing agreements.
Important questions remain to be resolved before a test monitoring 
system can be established. These include the organization of the control 
system and its relationship to the United Nations and national govern­
ments, the implementation of staffing and on-­the-­spot inspection, and 
the participation of the authorities on whose territories control posts 
should be located.
In an effort to resolve these questions, the United States is prepared 
to join with the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom, the other nations 
which have tested nuclear weapons, in negotiating an agreement for 
an effectively inspected suspension of nuclear tests. Representatives 
1 Source: Draft Presidential statement on cessation of nuclear testing. Confidential. 
3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/8–2058.
