Afghanistan 131 2. Summary: Availing ourselves of Department’s invitation (reftel) to comment on possible Soviet conduct in the evolving Afghanistan situation, we would note at the outset the obvious fact that the Soviets have a major investment in the Kabul regime which they will go to some lengths to protect. We doubt, however, that the Soviet leadership would seriously consider the large-scale dispatch of Soviet combat troops to Afghanistan under foreseeable circumstances.3 Moscow is more likely to increase its military advice and aid to Kabul while intensifying Soviet propaganda and diplomatic support for the DRA.4 Some forms of more direct Soviet military involvement are possible in situations where Soviet personnel or equipment were endangered, if foreign forces were seen as assisting the anti-DRA regime inside Afghanistan, or if fighting approached Soviet borders. We believe that Moscow is not irrevocably wedded to Taraki. In the coming weeks and months, it will be prepared to stick with him or to adopt other options, with the choice depending in large measure on developments within Afghanistan itself. End summary. 3. We continue to see Moscow’s policy toward Afghanistan as twofold: (A) to assist the Khalqi regime to consolidate power and eliminate its “counter-revolutionary” opponents, and (B) to draw Afghanistan into closer dependence on the Soviet Union in economic, military, administrative and other areas, while maneuvering to reduce Western and Chinese presence and influence in Afghanistan. The December 5, 1978, Soviet-Afghan treaty served to institutionalize close Soviet-Afghan relations and has been followed by further efforts by both governments to deepen their relationship.5 4. The Soviets have made a considerable investment in Afghanistan which they will go to some lengths to protect through additional steps to shore up the Taraki regime. Afghanistan’s proximity to the Soviet Union and recent setbacks to Soviet foreign policy interests and perhaps 3 In telegram 2778 from Kabul, April 10, the Embassy reported that the DRA believed that the Soviet Union would, in fact, offer direct military assistance to the Afghan Government, a request for which would not be made “unless the leadership were genuinely desperate in the face of a hopelessly deteriorating domestic security situation— fully beyond the control of Khalqi military and police forces.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghanistan (Jan 79–Apr 79)) In telegram 3626, May 9, the Embassy maintained that Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan remained possible but unlikely. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790170– 0074 and P850147–1917) The Embassy in Moscow concurred in telegram 13083, May 24. (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Soviets in Afghanistan—General Part #2) 4 In telegram 2710 from Kabul, April 8, the Embassy estimated that the Soviet Union had approximately 800–1,000 military advisers stationed in Afghanistan. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790160–0975) 5 See footnote 2, Document 33.
