Costa Rica 403 its budget for the coming fiscal year depended on an increase in revenue from taxes on the United Fruit Company operations in his country. It will be recalled that Echandi appealed to the Treasury Department during his visit to the United States for a greater share of the tax returns from the United Fruit Company. At present the taxes collected by the United States are based on an arbitrary division of fifty-­fifty which is explained briefly in Embassy San José telegram No. 303 of May 20.3 President Echandi told me that if Dr. Milton Eisenhower could inform him during his visit to San José that the Treasury Department had modified its determination in favor of the banana producing countries he would score, as he put it, a home run. Echandi claims to have obtained approval from the Governments of the other Central American countries where United Fruit operates to undertake to obtain increased tax returns from the Company. Whatever benefit Costa Rica received would, naturally, extend to Honduras, Guatemala and Panama among the countries that Dr. Eisenhower plans to visit. Sam Baggett, Vice President and General Counsel of United Fruit Company, was a guest of Echandi at the inauguration ceremonies in San José. I had two talks with Baggett and he informed me that Mr. Dan Throop Smith, of the Treasury Department, who would be the person responsible for recommending a change in the tax system, appeared to be favorable toward Echandi’s request. I was present when Echandi talked with Smith in Washington and I was impressed by the Costa Rican’s reasoned arguments. Baggett told me that Smith also was favorably impressed at that time. Since then, Baggett informs me that he has talked with Smith and found him receptive to the idea of giving Costa Rica, and per se, the other banana countries, a better share of the tax returns. Since my return from Central America I have been told that the Echandi proposal is now under study by the Bureau of Internal Revenue. I asked Mr. Baggett to send me a memorandum outlining in detail the Treasury Department’s system of assessing taxes on the United Fruit Company and he promised to do so after a brief vacation that he is taking in Costa Rica. However, we have correspondence from Ambassador Woodward on the whole matter and it is rather complete. Mr. Baggett says that he does not believe that the basic principle used by the Treasury in assessing taxes on all foreign business done by American companies would be affected by a decision to change the percentage in so far as the United Fruit Company division of taxes 3 It reported that a Treasury Department determination in 1950 allowed the producing country to tax half the company’s profits. Willauer believed that the increased cost of capital equipment raised the producer’s share in the value of the marketed fruit, possibly justifying a revision of the 1950 determination. (961.6218/5–2058)
