723.2515/1416 [Document 208] The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) WASHINGTON, April 9, 1925. EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 2nd instant enclosing a Memorial, signed by the President of the Defense Commission of Peru, addressed to the President of the United States as Arbitrator in the Tacna-Arica controversy, and to transmit herewith the ruling and observations of the Arbitrator on the questions presented. I beg to request that you transmit this document to the Defense Commission of Peru. The ruling and observations of the Arbitrator will be given to the press for publication in the morning papers of Friday, April 10, and I therefore beg to request you to consider this note and its enclosure as strictly confidential until that time. In accordance with your authorization to Mr. White,45 in your telephone conversation with him on the 7th instant, the communication addressed to the President on April 2, by the President of the Defense Commission will be given to the press at the same time. Accept [etc.] FRANK B. KELLOGG [Enclosure] The Ruling and Observations of the Arbitrator The Arbitrator has had the honor to receive and carefully consider the communication addressed to him under date of April 2, 1925, by the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission, the representative of Peru in the pending arbitration under the Protocol and Supplementary Act signed by the representatives of Chile and Peru at Washington, July 20, 1922. In the course of his communication the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission first, submits the views of the Peruvian Government in regard to the Award of the Arbitrator, second, informs the Arbitrator of certain acts said to have been perpetrated against the Peruvian inhabitants of Tacna and Arica since the date of the Award, and, third, requests certain guarantees in regard to the conduct of the plebiscite decreed under the Award. The Arbitrator deems it his duty to make the following reply: First: The views of the Peruvian Government with respect to the Opinion and Award have been duly noted.
