746 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 an example be made of the senior officer who disobeyed the orders of his Commander in Chief, so even though General McClure thinks Riahi is a fine man, I am afraid that I think he should suffer. Mr. Wisner: I have a number of other questions to ask, but I think that probably they could wait. I am sure, however, that General Cabell and the rest of us would like to hear something about what happened in London. Mr. Roosevelt: Oh, yes. Well, I don’t know whether you want all of this taken down or not. Mr. Wisner: No, I don’t think this is necessary. 308. Monthly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated. IRAN August 1953 A. General Developments 1. The fall of the Mossadeq government overshadowed all other activities and operations in Iran. The successful outcome of the efforts of General Zahedi and his supporters to gain control of the government and the return of the Shah to Iran have undoubtedly paved the way for increased internal stability and closer relations with the U.S., and have created a favorable atmosphere for CIA operations in the country. As a result of the change of government CIA contacts in key government and military circles have been greatly increased; few losses were sustained. 2. Experience has proven, however, that the Iranian internal political situation is given to rapid and drastic change. While CIA should capitalize to the fullest extent on the present favorable situation it should at the same time prepare itself to cope with problems arising under new and possibly unfavorable conditions. 3. The greatest assurance for the maintenance of the present government in power and internal stability lies in a rapid improvement of the country’s finances and economy. Prompt initiation of new labor giving projects under the long-range developmental program, known 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO–IMS Files, Job 81–01061R, Box 2, Folder 3, Monthly Report—August 1953—Country Summaries and Analyses. Top Secret.
