682  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
147.	 Briefing Note for the March 5 NSC Meeting1
Washington, March 4, 1959
NSC 5904
At its meeting on January 22, the Council discussed NSC 5401/1, 
“U.S. Objectives in the Event of General War with the Soviet Bloc”, in 
the light of a series of questions sent forward by the Planning Board. 
With the guidance from the Council discussion, the Planning Board has 
drafted a new statement of policy, NSC 5904, which is before you today. 
The new paper is entitled, “U.S. Policy in the Event of War”, and is 
divided into two separate sections: a first section (Section A) deals with 
general war; then, because some Planning Board members felt that the 
paper should also give policy guidance for limited war, a second section 
(Section B) was written addressed to other kinds of war than general 
war.
Taking up Section A, then, there was general agreement as to the 
first objective.
(READ Para 1)
There was also agreement as to the second objective and the policy 
guidance to carry it out, insofar as the USSR is concerned.
(READ Para 2a with last 2 lines, 
Para 6a with last line)
There was a split as to whether the same objective and guidance 
that apply to the USSR should automatically apply to Communist 
China; the European Bloc countries, such as Albania or Poland; and the 
non-European Bloc countries, such as North Viet Nam, North Korea or 
Outer Mongolia. As indicated by the bracketed clauses in Paragraph 2 
and Paragraph 6, some members of the Planning Board believed that 
the guidance should apply to those other Bloc countries only if they 
were “involved in the hostilities.”
Other members of the Planning Board pointed out the difficulty of 
determining whether a Bloc country was “involved in the hostilities” 
once general war was upon us. There was a strong feeling that whether 
or not we were “at war” with Country A or Country B in the classical 
sense would be academic; and that the purpose of the policy guidance 
1 Source: NSC 5904. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File.
