102 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 These parallel meeting tracks resulted in a finalized November 20 contingency paper printed as Document 42 and a White House statement released on November 20. The full statement reads: There are reports that the American citizens being illegally held as hostages in Tehran with the support of the Iranian Government might soon be put through some sort of ’trial.’ This would be a flagrant violation of international law and basic religious principles, and the Government of Iran would bear full responsibility for any ensuing consequences. The United States is seeking a peaceful solution to this problem through the U.N. and every other available channel. This is far preferable to the other remedies available to the United States. Such remedies are explicitly recognized in the Charter of the United Nations. The Government of Iran must recognize the gravity of the situation it has created. (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, page 2148) 42. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, November 20, 1979 CONTINGENCY PAPER SUBJECT Trials of Hostages I. Introduction Khomeini apparently has now committed himself to trying the hostages for espionage. He has said nothing about the modalities or how many would be tried, nor has there been any official comment on the possibility raised by the German Embassy that prisoners would 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 11/17/79–11/20/79. Top Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. A handwritten note at the top of the page reads, “Revised.” For the background to this paper, see Document 41. The paper was briefly discussed at the November 21 SCC meeting, and it was agreed that “it would be useful for the President to see it after key members of the SCC had had the opportunity to comment.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic Files, Box 13) An unknown hand wrote on Brzezinski’s November 21 Iran activities log: “Odom to Camp David with operational plans.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 31, Iran 2/80) In his memoir, Brzezinski wrote that he had sent Odom to Camp David “with a sealed envelope containing a chart outlining additional military options developed by Defense and summarizing for the President their scale and likely impact.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, p. 483)
