Dominican Republic 487 DR–11. Editorial Note Large numbers of Dominicans were arrested in January 1960 on charges of conspiring to overthrow the régime of Generalissimo Trujillo. In telegram 396 from Ciudad Trujillo, January 25, 1960, Ambassador Farland advised the Department of a proposal received from the Papal Nuncio Lino Zanini, that they present Trujillo, with a note verbale requesting general clemency for the Dominican political prisoners. The telegram stated further that Farland advised the Nuncio of the delicacy of the United States position regarding non-­intervention in the internal affairs of other nations. The telegram concluded, “However, I assured Nuncio that if circumstance propitious, prior my departure. I would informally express to GODR principles involved aforesaid note in context hoped for diminution Caribbean political problems.” (739.00/1–2560) In telegram 367 to Ciudad Trujillo, the Department commended Ambassador Farland for his handling of the approach by the Papal Nuncio. The telegram stated further, “Should opportunity arise, Department would not object to Ambassador’s informal approach (independent of Nuncio’s) appropriate GODR official in most discreet way pointing out that while U.S. strongly adheres to non-­intervention principle it is concerned with problem of possible general amnesty for humanitarian reasons and from point of view of reduction of tensions in area.” (739.00/1–2560) On January 31, 1960, a pastoral letter from the six Roman Catholic bishops in the Dominican Republic was read in all Dominican churches. This letter reaffirmed the rights of freedom of conscience, the press, and assembly, stressed the Church’s determination to alleviate the suffering of the Dominican people, and urged Generalissimo Trujillo to end the excesses which plagued the nation. On March 3, in response to this pastoral letter, Trujillo stated that he could not interfere with the judicial proceedings then underway, but added that he would free all women held prisoner under the conspiracy charges. In a synopsis of State and Intelligence material reported to the President, dated March 10, John S. D. Eisenhower stated, “There is no prospect for an early improvement in the deteriorating church-­state relations in the Dominican Republic which have contributed to a serious weakening of the Trujillo dictatorship. The church leaders’ demand for clemency for political prisoners has not been satisfied by Trujillo’s 3 March statement.” (Eisenhower Library, DDE Diaries) On February 15, 1960, the Council of the Organization of American States adopted a proposal providing for an investigation of the Dominican situation by the Inter-American Peace Committee, which was reactivated at the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics, held at Santiago in August 1959.
