Preface Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the administration of Jimmy Carter. This volume covers U.S. foreign economic policy from 1977 to 1980, focusing on international monetary policy, trade policy, economic summitry, North-South economic relations, and commodity policy. Readers interested in U.S. energy policy and the implications of the 1979 oil crisis should consult Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980. For U.S. economic relations with a specific country or region, readers should consult the relevant geographically-focused volume in the Foreign Relations Carter subseries. Additional documentation on foreign aid and human rights, as well as world hunger, may be found in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. The political aspects of North-South relations are covered in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XXV, United Nations; Law of the Sea. Finally, for the organization of the foreign economic policymaking process, readers should consult Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XXVIII, Organization and Management of Foreign Policy. Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III During Jimmy Carter’s four-year tenure as president, the United States was beset by a host of economic troubles: in addition to the high rates of inflation and oil shortages for which the late 1970s are perhaps best remembered, the United States experienced persistent trade deficits and a steep decline in the value of the dollar. The volume examines the Carter administration’s efforts to grapple with these challenges through its international trade and monetary policies and its involvement in the Group of Seven (G–7) summit. In crafting his policies in this area, Carter relied upon advice from policymakers such as Special Representative for Economic Summits Henry Owen, Secretaries of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal and G. William Miller, Special Representative for Trade Negotiations Robert Strauss, President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski, and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, as well as advisers such as President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy Stuart Eizenstat and Council of Economic Advisers Chairman Charles Shultze. In the realm of trade policy, the volume documents the effort, led by Strauss, to bring the Tokyo Round IX
