Preface
Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series
This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Rela-
tions series that documents the most important issues in the foreign
policy of the administration of Jimmy Carter. This volume covers U.S.
foreign economic policy from 1977 to 1980, focusing on international
monetary policy, trade policy, economic summitry, North-South eco-
nomic relations, and commodity policy. Readers interested in U.S. en-
ergy policy and the implications of the 1979 oil crisis should consult
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980.
For U.S. economic relations with a specific country or region, readers
should consult the relevant geographically-focused volume in the For-
eign Relations Carter subseries. Additional documentation on foreign
aid and human rights, as well as world hunger, may be found in For-
eign Relations, 1977–1980, volume II, Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs. The political aspects of North-South relations are covered in
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XXV, United Nations; Law of the
Sea. Finally, for the organization of the foreign economic policymaking
process, readers should consult Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume
XXVIII, Organization and Management of Foreign Policy.
Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, Volume III
During Jimmy Carter’s four-year tenure as president, the United
States was beset by a host of economic troubles: in addition to the high
rates of inflation and oil shortages for which the late 1970s are perhaps
best remembered, the United States experienced persistent trade defi-
cits and a steep decline in the value of the dollar. The volume examines
the Carter administration’s efforts to grapple with these challenges
through its international trade and monetary policies and its involve-
ment in the Group of Seven (G–7) summit. In crafting his policies in this
area, Carter relied upon advice from policymakers such as Special Rep-
resentative for Economic Summits Henry Owen, Secretaries of the
Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal and G. William Miller, Special Repre-
sentative for Trade Negotiations Robert Strauss, President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski, and Secretary of
State Cyrus Vance, as well as advisers such as President’s Assistant for
Domestic Affairs and Policy Stuart Eizenstat and Council of Economic
Advisers Chairman Charles Shultze. In the realm of trade policy, the
volume documents the effort, led by Strauss, to bring the Tokyo Round
IX
