384  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
counter-­intelligence, civil affairs, psychological warfare, public and 
troop information, and criminal investigation.
In 1948, following the assassination of Jorge Eliécer Caitán, 
leader of the Liberal Party, the Liberals attempted to overthrow the 
Conservative government. Failing in this effort, Liberal leaders and 
many of their followers fled to the almost inaccessible rural areas of 
Colombia. They subsequently were joined by other Liberals persecuted 
by the Conservatives in that party’s attempt to extirpate the Liberals as 
a major political force, by criminal elements desirous of reaping per-
sonal advantage from the political chaos attending the civil warfare that 
ensued, and by subversive elements interested in promoting the cause 
of international Communism. Well organized and well equipped gangs 
of bandits and guerrillas preyed upon isolated peasants and small vil-
lages, disrupted communications facilities, and laid waste extensive 
areas of Colombia’s agricultural land. Between 1948 and 1958, it is esti-
mated that over 200,000 persons lost their lives as a direct result of ban-
ditry and guerrilla warfare and property damage totaled hundreds of 
millions of dollars.
In 1956, with Colombia’s status as a viable political entity in doubt, 
Liberal and Conservative leaders agreed to merge their differences 
in the interests of national unity. President Gustavo Rojas Pinilla was 
deposed in May 1957. Following an interim government presided over 
by a military junta, the Liberals-Conservative coalition implemented 
an unusual—­although so far workable—­formula for governing the 
nation. Under the guidance of Alberto Lleras Camargo, now President 
of Colombia, the Liberals and Conservatives agreed that for a period 
of 16 years they would collaborate in a bi-­partisan parity government 
called the National Front.
The Liberal-Conservative rapprochement has not meant an end of 
organized banditry or guerrilla activities. Gangs of bandits and guer-
rillas still roam throughout much of rural Colombia. In five provinces 
martial law is still in effect. In recent months, bandit activity has spread 
to three provinces hitherto untouched. Most of the gangs are comprised 
of criminal elements for whom banditry has become a way of life. There 
is increasing evidence, however, that Communist and pro-Castro ele-
ments have penetrated many of the gangs and, in some cases, the gangs 
are acting under direct Communist leadership.
The Colombian armed forces have been unable to eradicate the 
bandits. They have devoted their main effort to restricting them to 
the mountainous regions in which they are strongest. While incidents 
of violence have diminished considerably during the two years that 
Lleras Camargo has been President, the problem actually has grown 
more acute. The fear of residents of bandit-­infested areas that they will 
be killed if they cooperate with the forces of law and order restrains a 
large segment of the population from cooperating with the government
