Non-Proliferation
917
359.
Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the
Department of State1
Washington, November 7, 1977, 2129Z
4402. USIAEA. Subject: 32nd UNGA: Non-proliferation—Visit of
Deputy Under Secretary Nye to USUN. Ref: USUN 4350.2
1. Summary: In Nov 3 visit to USUN, Deputy Under Secretary Nye
met with 19 representatives, mainly from developing countries to de-
scribe our non-proliferation objectives and review purpose and goals
of the INFCE conference. In addition, he discussed the draft res on
“Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Develop-
ment” in bilaterals with Yugoslavs and Pakistanis (Reftel, paras 4–7).
Mission and Disarmament Del believed Nye visit was timely and valu-
able, enabling us to explain our policy in greater depth to UN Dels and
also providing opportunity for them to express their concerns and aspi-
rations directly to Nye. Comment by participating Delegations has
been uniformly favorable. End summary.
2. In afternoon session at US Mission, Nye presented a summary of
US non-proliferation policy to 19 UN Delegations including a question
and answer period. The following states attended: Algeria, Australia,
Argentina, Bahamas, Brazil, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia,
Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Singa-
pore, Sweden, Venezuela and Yugoslavia.
3. Nye briefly outlined the origins and general philosophy of our
non-proliferation policy, emphasizing our concerns to maintain an ap-
propriate balance between the objectives of non-proliferation and
access to nuclear materials and technology for peaceful purposes in de-
veloping countries, and the complexities created by the emergence of
new nuclear technologies since the 1950’s. The Carter administration,
he said, was committed to stopping both vertical and horizontal prolif-
eration. He outlined the purpose and goals of the INFCE conference:
Indicated our interest in opening up the London Suppliers Club to
other participants.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770431–0609.
Confidential. Sent for information to the Mission in Geneva and Vienna.
2 Telegram 4350 from USUN, November 4, reported that Non-Aligned countries
planned to introduce two resolutions in the UN General Assembly. The first would
amend a Malaysian, West German, and Czechoslovakian draft resolution “inviting IAEA
to increase the representation of developing countries on its board of governors.” The
second would “table Yugoslav/Pakistani draft resolution (with additional co-sponsors)
‘on the peaceful use of nuclear energy for economic and social development.’ After state-
ments by 10–12 countries, consideration of both resolutions will be deferred pending fur-
ther consultations and negotiations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770406–0432)
