3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
557
[Omitted here are the sections entitled “Cuban Objectives,” “U.S.
Policy Dilemma,” “Desirable U.S. Policy Objectives,” “Actions To
Achieve Our Policy Objectives,” and “Actions To Neutralize Cuban
Activities on the Spot.”]
Actions To Take With The Soviets
Approach the Soviets at the highest level and review the entire sit-
uation of the influx of offensive weapons to Cuba and the joint Cuban/
Soviet involvement overseas.
—We should be prepared to tie the approach to major U.S./USSR
issues, including economic steps as well as political and military
moves.
—Redefine the agreements and understandings which precluded
the introduction of nuclear and offensive weapons into Cuba.
—Point out where the use of Cuban forces overseas are contrib-
uting to deterioration of our relations and outline steps we feel might
alleviate the situation and steps we may be forced to take to counter
such actions if they continue.
[Omitted here are the sections entitled “Actions To Take Regard-
ing the NAM,” “Economic Actions,” and “Longer Term Actions.”]
Why These Courses of Action?
We believe that our current efforts toward normalization with
Cuba, while achieving limited domestic benefits, have damaged our
long term strategic interests. If our intelligence is correct, the Cubans
now do not expect significant improvement in U.S./Cuban relations
over the next few years. Therefore, they feel they have much to gain
and nothing to lose by continuing their present course on issues of con-
cern to the U.S. In order to make them moderate their actions, this per-
ception must be reversed. Strong, across-the-board but progressively
measured actions as outlined above will lay the groundwork for the
United States to respond to disturbances in the Third World fomented
by the Cubans and Soviets. Keeping the Cubans and Soviets “honest,”
even at a short term cost to normalization, would be preferable to the
unopposed activism of the Cubans and Soviets. It might well advance
us more toward normalization with Cuba in the long term. It would in-
crease U.S. prestige and credibility worldwide. And it would, most im-
portantly, force reconsideration of what appears to be a joint Cuban/
Russian attempt to project force in this hemisphere, i.e., introduction of
offensive weapons, construction of bases.
Implications for U.S.–USSR Relations
If we depart from the premise that Cuba’s actions are motivated
both by Castro’s “revolutionary” zeal and the level of support received
from the USSR, then we need to either decrease the level of USSR sup-
