914
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
347.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to Secretary
of Defense Brown and the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 27, 1980
SUBJECT
Strategy for Southwest Asia
As tasked at the August 22 SCC meeting,2 we are providing draft
talking points for possible use with Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Egypt
on the increased Soviet threat to Iran and the need for accelerated
cooperation.3 As indicated below, we do not believe they should be
used in the form prepared.
Our view is that the new intelligence is not sufficiently persuasive
to be the basis for an extraordinary effort to gain enhanced regional
cooperation. Instead, we think this intelligence, properly scrubbed,
should be integrated in the following way into the comprehensive
diplomatic strategy we are developing:
1. We should, subject to the constraints of protecting sources and
methods, pass our latest intelligence through normal intelligence chan-
nels to the British, French, Germans, Turks, Saudis, and Egyptians.
(Italians?) (Japanese?).
2. General Jones should use this intelligence in his planned consul-
tations with the Saudis, following its use in the scheduled September
intelligence exchange. It should be incorporated in a statement of our
long-term purposes and concerns about the growing Soviet threat,
however, and not emphasized as a near-term emergency requiring
immediate Saudi action. We should not press our specific cooperation
needs upon the Saudis now: to do so would produce a negative
response before our longer-term security dialogue has had any chance
to have an effect on their outlook.
3. With other regional states, we ought to pursue the “baseline
strategy” (separately distributed),4 which is aimed at creating an endur-
ing sense of common interest and confidence that we have a credible
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box
22, SCC Meeting #337 Held 9/2/80. Top Secret; Sensitive.
2 See Document 346.
3 The talking points are attached to an August 26 memorandum from Newsom to
Muskie. (Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary
of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran 1980–81)
4 Presumably Muskie’s August 1 memorandum; see Document 332.
