3. But Chile’s right to continue her administrative authority during the
holding of a plebiscite is no clearer than is her duty with respect to the
holding of plebiscite itself. Under Treaty of Ancon which, as Arbitrator held,
was still in effect, Chile not less than Peru was bound by provision for the
plebiscite. This provision manifestly implied fair opportunity for a plebiscite
through absence of coercion or intimidation which would frustrate purpose of
a plebiscite. The fact that Chile had the right to maintain administrative
authority during plebiscite period gave no color of right to permit coercion or
intimidation so as to destroy fair opportunity for a plebiscite, but on contrary
placed on her the responsibility of exercising her administrative authority in
such way as to provide fair opportunity and to protect from intimidation,
fraud, and oppression those who were entitled to vote. Chile’s very right to
retain possession of the territory in dispute is based on her agreement for the
plebiscite which implies necessarily use of her authority properly to
safeguard it. This duty of Chile’s is fundamental, underlying the award and
all proceedings under the award for the holding of the plebiscite.
4. As the Governments of Chile and Peru had not been able to agree upon
conditions of a plebiscite, the Arbitrator was empowered, should he find that
a plebiscite should be held, to establish these conditions for it. Purpose of the
submission to the Arbitrator of conditions of plebiscite was manifestly to
permit establishment of conditions which would permit fair plebiscite and not
merely to define details of a plebiscite which by means of intimidation,
coercion, or fraud would be plebiscite in form only and not one in substance
and truth as contemplated by the treaty. While Arbitrator was not empowered
to deprive Chile of her right under Treaty of Ancon to continue her
administrative authority during plebiscite period, he was empowered to
require use of that administrative authority for proper safeguarding of
plebiscite in such manner as to prevent coercion, intimidation, and fraud in
connection with it. As Chile’s retention of administrative authority was
conditioned by Treaty of Ancon upon holding of a plebiscite, her exercise of
administrative authority until and during the plebiscite was subject to the
conditions laid down by the Arbitrator, and these conditions could properly
embrace such requirements with respect to her administrative authority as in
opinion of Arbitrator were essential to fair opportunity for the plebiscite. It
was to this end that the Arbitrator provided that Chile and Peru should enact
appropriate legislation for protection of members of the Plebiscitary
Commission and of the registration and election boards in discharge of their
functions and for apprehension, trial, and punishment of persons guilty of
intimidation, bribery, fraud, or other offenses in connection either with
registration or with voting, or of interference with the Commission or of the
boards or of their members, etc. Not only was Chile bound by her agreement
for the plebiscite to use her administrative authority to protect voters against
