National Security Policy 695 152. Memorandum of Discussion of the 403d NSC Meeting1 Washington, April 23, 1959 SUBJECT Discussion at the 403rd Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, April 23, 1959 Present at the 403rd NSC meeting were the President of the United States, presiding; the Vice President of the United States; the Secretary of State (Item 1); the Under Secretary of State (Items 2 and 3); the Secretary of Defense; and the Acting Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also present and participating in the Council actions below were the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director, Bureau of the Budget. Also attending the meeting were the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Deputy Secretary of Defense; Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; Mr. Robert Amory, Central Intelligence Agency; Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs; for Science and Technology; and for Security Operations Coordination; the White House Staff Secretary; the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC. There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the main points taken. [Omitted here is agenda item 1.] 2. U.S. OVERSEAS MILITARY BASES (NSC Actions Nos. 1876 and 2034; SNIE 100–10–58; SNIE 100–3–59; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated March 17, 1959) Mr. Gray briefed the Council on the problem of U.S. Military Bases overseas and noted that the last time the Departments of State and Defense had reported to the Council on various U.S. Bases (January 15), they had covered everything except our bases in Brazil, the Caribbean area, and the Philippines. He understood that the Secretaries of State and Defense were now prepared to render a supplementary report covering these areas. The report was summarized for the Council by General Twining who indicated that the Memorandum addressed to the Council by the Secretaries of State and Defense on these bases showed no apparent adverse factors sufficient to over-ride the desirability of continuing to maintain these bases and their facilities. However, the Secretaries of 1 Source: Agenda item 2: U.S. Overseas Military Bases. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
