September 1953–December 1954 120,000 votes, Kashani was second with 100,000. The reason for this is that, Mossadeq, although he had no objection to Kashani’s election, did not want him to be first deputy. Electioneering agents of the National Front were instructed to repeat Makki’s name on the ballots 20,000 times more than Kashani’s. (Every source utilized for this report maintains that Makki could not have gotten 5,000 votes fairly, while Kashani is generally conceded to have 15,000 votes in the Bazaar.) 2) For a case study in changing ballot boxes, see Attachment A. Although the Shah attempted to elect his candidate from Karaj, the area was under civil government control and he was unsuccessful. If the government cannot figure out a way to change the ballot boxes, they may play safe and just stuff them. Government employees of various factories and the railroad are granted paid leave for one or more days and ordered to form queues in front of polling places. They are instructed not to allow “outsiders” to join them. Qavam did this in the election for the 15th Majlis. He did not want Kashani to be reelected and so he stuffed the ballot boxes. In addition, the electoral boards were instructed not to stamp the identity cards of voters who voted for the government list. The result was that the 12 deputies of Tehran each got more than 40,000 votes while Kashani received only 15,000. One voter is known to have voted 132 times in this election. Total figures for the election ran to 600,000 votes cast at a time when Tehran’s population was roughly 750,000. b. Tribal areas. In the areas occupied by tribes, the military usually plays an important role. This means, of course, that the Shah has the upper hand. His Majesty’s chief vehicles of influence are the Army and the clerics. The royal influence is therefore exercised mostly in frontier regions where the military holds sway, and in regions where the influence of religion is strong—such as in areas inhabited by Sunnites. Examples of the Shah’s influence are: 1) In the elections to the 17th Majlis the Shah wanted Mir Ashrafi to be deputy from Meshgin Shahi. Mir Ashrafi is a former Army officer who was expelled from the Army for being too corrupt. During the war he acquired for himself the reputation of being one of the worst crooks in the country. However, Meshgin Shahi is a region inhabited by simple peasants who certainly had never heard anything of or about Mir Ashrafi. Since the Army controlled the area, the Intelligence Bureau of the General Staff communicated the royal desire to the Commanding officer at Meshgin Shahi. A few men were instructed to fill thousands of ballots with the name of Mir Ashrafi and the peasants were ordered to cast the ballots into the ballot boxes. It is probable that the majority of “voters” never learned whose name was on the ballots they cast. The whole thing was done so smoothly that even Mossadeq did not know what was afoot until the results were published.
