Dominican Republic  469
the United States relating to military and technical cooperation, and 
the operation of a guided missile facility in the Dominican Republic. 
This Resolution is now under study by the Executive Branch of the 
Dominican Government which is expected to take a decision by July 
2. Ambassador Farland plans to deliver our views to the Dominican 
Foreign Minister this Saturday or Sunday.
Background:
The Dominican Government under the dominance of Generalissimo 
Trujillo took this action because of its resentment over the steady crit-
icism it has received from certain members of our Congress and press 
as a result of the Galíndez-Murphy affair, and the extravagant indis-
cretions of General Trujillo, Jr. The final insult (in their eyes) was the 
recent decision of our Command and General Staff College not to grant 
a diploma to General Trujillo Jr. because of his long absences and low 
academic standing, although this factor is not included in the bill of 
particulars drawn up by the Dominican Congress.
Our Objectives and Proposed Action:
Our objectives in this situation are to preserve our right to operate 
the missile tracking station for the ten years agreed upon; continue our 
mutual security program if the Dominicans decide after mature con-
sideration that it is in their interest to do so; and to minimize the reper-
cussions of the present incident on our long-­term interest of carrying 
on normal friendly relations with the Dominican Republic as one of 
the American Republics. To achieve these objectives we plan to inform 
the Dominicans by formal note or aide-­memoire that it is our policy to 
seek normal friendly relations with the other American Republics and 
to carry on present cooperative programs if there is a corresponding 
disposition on their part. We are trying to avoid any appearance in the 
eyes of the world of threatening or cajoling the Dominicans in this mat-
ter, or of knuckling under to this type of pressure.
Attached is a biographic summary of Mr. Farland (Tab B). The 
Ambassador will be accompanied by Mr. C. Allan Stewart.4
4 Deputy Director of the Office of Middle American Affairs. In a memorandum to 
Rubottom dated June 25, Stewart explained in detail the background to the joint reso-
lution, and he recommended that Farland deliver to the Dominican Government a for-
mal note acknowledging the actions of the Dominican Congress (739.5–MSP/6–1958) 
Rubottom approved the recommendation on June 27. No record of a meeting between 
the Secretary and the Ambassador was found in Department of State files.
