Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1145
sador Gros opined that Cuba wished to send a clear message of intran-
sigence to the other Latin American States. (Gros remarked on the in-
teresting contrast between the tone of the Cuban note and Moscow’s
praise of the Treaty of Tlatelolco at the February Vienna INFCE
review.)
[Omitted here is the body of the telegram.]
8. Comment: The Cuban note will certainly disappoint the GOM
which is pressing for French notification of Tlatelolco Protocol One
during President Lopez Portillo’s visit to Paris in May and a Brazilian
waiver to allow entry into force for that country during Lopez Portillo’s
scheduled July visit. The Soviet reaction is also of some interest since
the Cuban note could be read as an implicit rebuke of Soviet signature
and ratification of Tlatelolco Protocol II. In light of the Cuban note, we
would expect that the GOM and other States of the region would be-
come increasingly interested in the state of safeguard negotiations on
the Soviet-supplied nuclear power plant being constructed near Cien-
fuegos, Cuba. (Drafted: Jon D. Glassman)
Ferch
466.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Buenos Aires, March 24, 1980, 3:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
Nuclear Consultations
PARTICIPANTS
Argentina—
Vice Admiral Carlos Castro Madero, President, CNEA
Dr. Antonio Carrea, Advisor to CNEA President
Dr. Hugo Erramuspe, Director of Research and Development, CNEA
Dr. Carlos A. Kroll, Coordinator of General Secretariat, CNEA
Dr. Jorge Martinez Fabini, Manager of Law Division, CNEA
Ing. Alejandro Placer, Advisor to CNEA President
1 Source: National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disarma-
ment Agency, Office of the Director, Lot 81D155, Box 14, Argentina, Jan–March 1980.
Drafted by Clifton Metzner. The meeting took place at the Comisio´n Nacional de Energı´a
Ato´mic (CNEA). Copies were sent to the Ambassador, the Deputy Chief of Mission, the
Science Counselor, the Defense Attache´, the Bureau of Security Assistance, Science, and
Technology, the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, the Bureau of Oceans and Scientific
and Environmental Affairs, and the Secretary.
