National Security Policy  867
was accounted for by USIA. He noted that there were 10,000 hours 
of international broadcasting every week of which 25 percent were 
Communist and 75 per cent Free World. USIA accounted for 6 per cent. 
Referring next to motion pictures, he stated that 2700 feature films are 
produced each year of which 12 per cent are Communist and 88 per 
cent Free World. The U.S. accounted for 10 per cent. USIA produced no 
feature films, only documentaries.
Mr. Allen then went on to state that exhibitions were often the most 
effective way of reaching people. As an example, he pointed out that, 
when he first went to Belgrade as Ambassador, Tito had just broken 
with the Kremlin and had been afraid to show any sympathy with the 
U.S. The Yugoslavs would not go to the USIA Library. However, USIA 
had had a display window on the main street which was changed each 
week. When the people of Belgrade promenaded on this street every 
evening, the area around the USIA window was mobbed. Mr. Allen also 
noted that the Moscow Exhibition had been the most spectacular sin­
gle incident involving USIA programs during the last year; it had been 
attended by three million Russians. He noted the role of the performing 
arts in USIA programs and called attention to programs for sending 
American athletes and lecturers abroad.
He pointed out that the people-­to-­people program provided a means 
through which the American people could make contacts with people 
with similar interests in other countries. He noted that the business com­
munity was now getting into this program in a big way. He suggested 
that official visits were one of the most important ways of communicat­
ing with peoples and in this connection mentioned the impact of the Vice 
President’s visit to the USSR on the Russian people. He again empha­
sized the impact of the President’s trip to Europe on European peoples 
and went on to point out that in the history of the U.S. no President had 
visited the area of Asia and the Middle East where one-­half the popu­
lation of the world lives. He noted the speculation in the press that the 
President might make a trip to this part of the world. He stated that, if the 
President should make such a trip, it would greatly overshadow USIA 
efforts in its impact upon the peoples of this area in addition, of course, 
to its importance in providing opportunities for communication between 
the President and the leaders of countries in the area.
Mr. Allen suggested that the American people and other peoples 
of the world were alert to propaganda. In the light of this alertness 
USIA could take two approaches to its job. It might conceal itself as 
much as possible, making use of local publications, the furnishing of 
background information to local newspapers and similar activities. 
Often this was the most effective way of doing the job. On the other 
hand, Mr. Allen felt that the main effort should be to make the label 
“USIA” something not to be ashamed of—something to be respected. He 
believed that our efforts should be directed toward creating a situation
