Chapter 2, January–June 1989 205 — It could be seen as a dramatic gesture and rebound to the United States credit in the public diplomacy arena. — U.S. strategic modernization would be protected. — Soviet heavy ICBMs would be eliminated. Potential disadvantages include: — Such a ban is almost certainly non-­negotiable. If the Soviets will not accept a 3300 ICBM sublimit (which does not constrain them), they will not accept something this radical. — The attempt to introduce such a radical proposal could disrupt negotiations, as did similar attempts in the Carter Administration, and delay achievement of a START treaty. — If downloading is not allowed, the United States must give up the entire Minuteman III force. — If downloading is allowed, the Soviets will have a large breakout potential. — Total elimination of silo-­based ICBMs could leave the United States without the flexibility offered by a single-RV missile until the turn of the century. — Total elimination of silo-­based ICBMs ignores the important role of silo-­based ICBMs in complicating attack timing problems against bombers and in attacking time-­urgent hard targets. III. Additional approaches. Three additional approaches have been suggested and are attached: — Warhead sublimit on silo-­based MIRVed ICBMs. — Immediate portal monitoring of mobile ICBM final assembly facilities. — Ban on future MIRVed ICBMs. Agencies have not reviewed these approaches. Forum for raising any new initiatives. If the United States elects to present a new initiative, there is a question of whether to present it, at least in general terms, at the opening of the Nuclear and Space Talks or to defer until the next meeting of Foreign Ministers. During the Moscow Ministerial, the Soviets proposed regular (3 to 4 times annually) Foreign Ministers’ meetings. The Soviets indicated that they viewed such meetings as be the appropriate forum for presenting new initiatives or significant new positions. On the other hand (a) the United States has long sought to avoid bypassing or downgrading the Geneva negotiations and (b) an initiative not presented until fall loses the public diplomacy benefits of being seen as a new Bush Administration proposal growing out of a thorough review of U.S. policy.
