September 18–December 16, 1978 489 ernment will be withdrawn “as soon as” the self-governing authority is established. It would be easier if you were to set the interim date at the time of elections, not tied to the withdrawal of Israeli forces. Vice President Mubarak: We want the self-government to start functioning at the time the interim withdrawal is completed. Secretary Vance: After one month, negotiations will begin. Do you see two sets of negotiations? One dealing with Israel, Egypt, and Gaza and the second involving Israel, Jordan, with the West Bank issue? Vice President Mubarak: We want to start with the West Bank and Gaza together. The President: This is your preference? Vice President Mubarak: Yes. We are sure that the West Bank will be delayed. It would be very good if they were ready. It would be ideal for both to go together. Secretary Vance: Gazans would be in the Egyptian delegation, and this would be a sign of your positive relationship. The President: There is nothing to prevent West Bank Palestinians from joining your delegation, if they have someone to speak for them. Vice President Mubarak: We are making contacts with them. Khalid al-Hassan is coming in one week. I’ll meet with him secretly. He is very moderate. Even Arafat is moderate, but he has a problem with the Syrians. They once put him in jail. The Palestinians in Kuwait are also in contact with us. Some Palestinians are totally opposed to any solution, but not all. The President: You will be pleasantly surprised to know the quiet support for this process that the Saudis are giving. King Hassan has the same attitude, as does Numeiri. They expressed this support quietly. Vice President Mubarak: I have been in touch with the Saudis. The President: Good. This places a responsibility on us not to take any action or make any statements that will make it difficult for the Saudis. They want unity and moderation in the Arab world and they want to have some influence over the Iraqis and others. We shouldn’t make it hard for them to keep one foot in that camp. President Sadat should recognize their constructive role. It hurts the Saudis to be publicly criticized, and Fahd particularly feels this. The Saudis tried at Baghdad,5 and perhaps they made too many compromises, but I would like to see close cooperation between Sadat and Fahd. Vice President Mubarak: We have contacts, but we keep them quiet. I saw Fahd before Camp David for four hours. He was very convinced. He approved the trip of President Sadat to Camp David. President 5 See footnote 7, Document 91.
