106
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
43.
Memorandum From Ambassador Eilts to President Carter1
Washington, November 21, 1979
This supplements my series of reports from the field (attached).2
INTRODUCTION
At your request,3 I visited Cairo, Jidda and again Cairo during the
period November 13–November 20. While in Cairo, I met twice with
President Sadat and also with Vice President Mubarak, Prime Minister
Khalil and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Boutros Ghali. In Jidda,
I met first with Islamic Conference Secretary-General Chatti and, subse-
quently, had a four-hour conversation with Prince Fahd. In both capi-
tals, I briefed the ambassadors on my mission and the results of my
talks.
Both Sadat and Fahd asked that I pass on to you their warm regards and
best wishes.
You had asked that I take up with Sadat and Fahd (a) the Iranian
hostage situation, (b) the need for a thaw in Egyptian/Saudi relations
in the interest of progress on the Middle East peace process, and
(c) any other matters that they might wish to raise. With Chatti, you
asked that I take up the Iranian hostage problem. This report is divided
into three sections: (a) Iranian hostage problem, (b) Egyptian/Saudi
relations, and (c) other matters.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box
77, Presidential Advisory File, Sensitive X: 11–12/78. Top Secret; Eyes Only for the
President. According to Carter’s personal notes, Eilts reported the contents of this memo-
randum to him on the evening of November 20. (Carter Library, Plains File, Box 1)
Carter had returned to Camp David at 6:15 p.m. and he spoke to Eilts on the telephone
from 9:29 to 9:51 p.m. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary)
2 Not found.
3 According to a November 13 memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, Carter
would give Eilts three tasks: First, Eilts was to talk to Sadat and Fahd about Saudi-
Egyptian relations. Second, he was to get their advice on “how the Islamic world might
be helpful in resolving the hostage situation.” Third, he was to mention to Sadat “the
possibility of a retaliatory military action against some facilities in Iran; and in this
connection ask Sadat a) for his assessment of the likely reaction of the Arab countries,
notably oil producers, to such an action; b) whether Sadat would permit the use of the
Aswan airfield by a limited no. of U.S. planes (perhaps even as few as only 2) for such
a strike.” Brezezinski wrote point three at the bottom of the memorandum by hand.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 77, Presidential
Advisory File, Sensitive X: 11–12/78) The portion of Eilts’s report not related to the
hostage crisis is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IX, Arab-Israeli Dispute,
August 1978–December 1980, Second, Revised Edition, Document 312.
