National Security Policy  79
Planning Board noted that Defense is currently considering such alter­
natives, and recommends the adoption of the following language:
(READ the recommendation on page 7, discuss, and dispose)
13. The sixth issue (page 8) concerns transferring to Australia a por­
tion of our “moth-­balled” merchant fleet and stocks of surplus grain 
and other provisions, for possible use in the aftermath of an atomic 
war as reserves in a place relatively secure from the immediate conse­
quences of such a war.
(READ the entire Planning Board comment)
(READ the Planning Board recommendation, explaining the split, 
discuss, and dispose)
14. The seventh issue (page 9) involves two matters concerning 
the Organization of American States. The Nash Report recommended 
(a) that greater use be made of the OAS and its military organs to pro­
vide a collective security framework for U.S. bases in Latin America; 
and (b) that early consideration, be given to the desirability of bringing 
the West Indies Federation into the OAS. The Planning Board rejected 
the first recommendation but accepted the second.
(READ the Planning Board comment on page 9, discuss, and 
dispose)
15. The eighth issue (page 11) concerns criminal jurisdiction, which 
the Nash Report found to be one of the major common problems of our 
existing base system. The Report recommendation is as follows:
(READ the “Statement of the Issue” except the indented portion)
(READ the Planning Board recommendation with its split, discuss, 
and dispose)
16. The last issue (page 13) concerns sharing defense responsibili­
ties with Canada. The Planning Board felt that the military aspects of 
US-Canadian relations were already stated in a general way in exist­
ing policy, but that better cooperation is required in non-­military mat­
ters. The Planning Board comment points out that there is no national 
security policy paper on Canada, and that there is a Joint US-Canadian 
Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs at the Cabinet level.
The Planning Board recommendation on page 14 is split between 
a majority proposal to ask the CFEP to study means of improving 
­US-­Canadian economic relations and a proposal by ODM for the 
preparation by the Planning Board of a full-­scale policy statement on 
U.S. relations with Canada.
(Discuss and dispose)
(Approve suggested Council action)
