North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
847
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The PRC met on September 22 to consider PRM 8-Track III, the
PRM 8 working group’s report on US relations with the developing
countries over the next twelve months. The working group’s report re-
quested PRC decisions on six points.2
1. Basic Policy Framework. The PRC decided that the US approach to
North-South issues set out in PRM 8-Track III is sound. (It was pointed
out that strategic issues would have to be taken into account in a com-
prehensive framework for North-South relations.) The importance of
delivering on US commitments was emphasized as was the likelihood
that US capacity to deliver would fall short of expectations in the devel-
oping world. Developing-country reactions to what they perceive as in-
adequate US initiatives may create tensions toward the end of the next
twelve months.
2. Quantitative Targets. After a review of the issues posed by the use
of targets, the PRC decided to ask the Development Coordination Com-
mittee to undertake a study of specific, achievable targets which could
be appropriately used by the US for internal planning as well as in in-
ternational discussions, for example, during the preparations for the
Third Development Decade.
3. Role of the UN in the North-South Dialogue. The PRC was informed
of the President’s directive to (a) steer UNGA North-South discussions
toward broad issues, (b) avoid negotiations within the General As-
sembly, and (c) negotiate on specific issues within functional bodies.3
On the question of a review mechanism within the UN, it was
pointed out that the circumstances had changed since the President
had discussed the issue of CIEC follow-up with President Perez. Dis-
cussions at the 32nd UNGA were focusing on two possibilities for a UN
review of the North-South dialogue: (1) the Second Committee of the
UNGA, and (2) the ECOSOC, if it were made more effective as a result
of a UN restructuring exercise. The PRC agreed that it might be neces-
sary to reconsider this issue according to developments during the
32nd UNGA.
4. Participation of LDCs in the International System. The PRC agreed
to ask the PRM 8 working group to explore means of increasing LDC
involvement in international organizations.
5. Basic Human Needs (BHN). The PRC reviewed the issues posed
by PRM 8-Track III and decided to defer the discussion of BHN until
October 11 when PRM 8-Track III, the DCC report, and the Brookings
study could be examined simultaneously.
2 See Document 274.
3 See Document 275.
