723.2515/1936b: Telegram
[Document 159]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 16, 1926—5 p.m.
10. I have come to the conclusion that time has arrived to present directly to
Governments of Chile and Peru the opportunity to adjust Tacna-Arica
controversy outside terms of award. The former president of the
Plebiscitary Commission, General Pershing, the present president, General
Lassiter, and their advisers have stated definitely that in their opinion actual
conditions are such that celebration of a fair plebiscite is impossible. They
place blame squarely upon Chile, and I am convinced that in absence of
some agreement for a settlement along different lines it may become
necessary for Plebiscitary Commission eventually to make finding that fair
plebiscite is impossible or else that plebiscite has failed through fault of
Chile; result would be that this dispute of long standing will remain still
unsettled for indefinite period. General Pershing has reported a very
significant conversation he had with Edwards before leaving Arica. He says
that Edwards stated specifically that Chile was ready to make adjustment on
general basis of neutralization of entire territory. As for Peru I am led to
believe that now for first time that Government may also be ready to
discuss a settlement on this or some other reasonable basis. It becomes my
duty, under these circumstances, to place situation fully before both Chile
and Peru and to ascertain, if that be possible, what, if anything, they are
disposed to do. To that end you will immediately seek a personal and
confidential interview with Minister for Foreign Affairs, explain to him
fully seriousness of situation, and invite expression of his views. Naturally,
Chile and Peru must decide for themselves whether they shall insist on
going ahead under present conditions, with immediate risk to Chile of
having plebiscite abandoned or held void by Plebiscitary Commission on a
finding which will fix responsibility upon her for failure. Should Minister
for Foreign Affairs prove receptive to this suggestion, you will endeavor to
