International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
307
the significance of the agreement lies as much in what we avoided as in
what we achieved. We avoided confrontation in trade issues with the
Japanese. We possibly avoided an increase in protectionist pressures in
the United States, and we certainly avoided a sharp deterioration in
U.S.-Japanese relationships.
The Joint Statement announced by Ambassador Strauss and Am-
bassador Ushiba on Friday, January 13, covered three important areas:
macro-economic policies, multilateral trade negotiations and some bi-
lateral trading issues. (copy attached)5
Macro-economic Policies
The Japanese committed themselves to a 7 percent growth target
and to reducing the current account surplus considerably (to $6 billion)
in fiscal year 1978, aiming at equilibrium by the end of FY 1979 and
thereafter, with a deficit accepted if it should occur. (The Japanese fiscal
year is from April 1 to March 31.) While the Japanese had previously
announced the 7 percent growth target, their previous commitment
was for “around 7 percent”. The commitment is now firmed up for 7
percent and the economic policies are directed toward achieving that
target.
During the talks, there was some skepticism raised about the
ability of the Japanese Government to meet its 7 percent growth target.
There is some justification for this skepticism since a great deal de-
pends upon private sector consumption and investment. I have sug-
gested that we publicly avoid raising skepticism since it would tend to
affect adversely the confidence factor and in a self-fulfilling way bring
about that lower growth rate.
The focus of the Japanese economic program is on domestic de-
mand. This means a structural shift in the Japanese economy away
from the export-oriented growth, resulting in additional bankruptcies,
unemployment, and a lower growth rate than otherwise would be the
case, but it is clearly an emphasis which is consistent with the needs of
the international economy and should be welcomed.
The language on the current account reflects a significant shift in
the Japanese position. I was told that this position was approved by
Prime Minister Fukuda. What it really means is that, in the medium-
term, Japan’s objective has shifted from equilibrium on basic balance to
an equilibrium on current account.
MTN
Ambassador Strauss’ STR team (he was accompanied by his
number two man, Alan Wolff, his number three man and chief negoti-
5 Attached but not printed. See footnote 3 above.
