3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
772
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
268.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 17, 1980, 8–10:30 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin
The conversation started with Dobrynin expressing considerable
pessimism about the longer range trends in U.S.-Soviet relations. He
feels that we are on a spiral—that both sides are becoming increasingly
antagonistic, and that he does not see much prospect for an early
improvement.
I suspect that this was a deliberate line designed to “smoke me
out.” I made the point in response that he may well be right, but that
what happens this year in U.S.-Soviet relations is likely to influence a
great deal the next four years. This is why we both have an obligation to
see if something could not be done in the near future to reverse the neg-
ative trends set in motion by the Soviet action in Afghanistan.
Substance
The discussion then turned more specifically to the question of Af-
ghanistan. Dobrynin spoke at some length, reviewing recent history.
He said that the Soviets had no intention of moving into Afghanistan
but the deteriorating situation gave them no choice. (Incidentally, he
told me that Babrak returned secretly to Kabul in October of last year.)
The Soviets have no intention of dominating the region according
to him and will withdraw once a “stable government” has been
created. He put a lot of emphasis on organizing a new Afghanistan
army which will carry on once the Soviets have left. In response to a
question, he indicated that it may be up to a year or so before the So-
viets can leave, but he professed great optimism about their capacity to
crush the resistance.
He said that the Soviet Union would be willing to give guarantees
to us that it has no designs against Pakistan and Iran.
I responded by saying that the key issue is whether the Soviet
Union insists on imposing a Communist government on Afghanistan
or whether it desires an Afghanistan that is genuinely non-aligned and
non-hostile to the Soviet Union. If it is the former, conflicts between us
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 19,
U.S.S.R.—U.S.-Soviet Relations: 7/78–3/80. Secret. The meeting took place at Brzez-
inski’s residence. The initial “C” is written in the upper right-hand corner of the first
page, indicating that Carter saw the memorandum.
