It will be recalled that during 1919 and 1920 conditions in Austria were so
serious that the United States and a number of European governments found
it necessary to furnish foodstuffs and other relief supplies on credit. The Act
of Congress approved March 30, 1920,45 authorized the United States Grain
Corporation, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, to furnish
flour on credit “to relieve populations in the countries of Europe or
countries contiguous thereto suffering for the want of food”. Pursuant to
that legislation, flour was sold to Austria, and the Government of the United
States now holds an Austrian bond in the principal sum of $24,055,708.92,
given in payment therefor. Certain other governments, namely, Denmark,
France, Great Britain, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland, hold relief bonds of similar character in the sum of about
$95,000,000. The relief bonds of 1920 enjoy “a first charge upon all the
assets and revenues of Austria”. They rank ahead of Austria’s reparation
obligations.
The bond held by the United States is dated September 4, 1920, and by its
terms matured January 1, 1925. In 1922, conditions in Austria were such as
to necessitate financial assistance from abroad in order to permit the
stabilization of the currency, the balancing of the Budget, and the
resumption of the economic life of the country. The credit of Austria was at
a low ebb. No exterior loan could be floated as long as relief loans and
reparations constituted prior charges on Austria’s assets and revenues.
Accordingly, the relief creditors, including the United States, and the
Reparation Commission, agreed to subordinate their liens to permit the
flotation of a reconstruction loan. Under the terms of the so-called Lodge
Resolution of April 6, 1922,46 the Secretary of the Treasury extended the
maturity date of the relief bond held by the United States Government until
June 1, 1943, and at the same time agreed to subordinate the lien enjoyed
by the United States for the purpose of permitting the reconstruction loan of
1923. The Lodge Resolution, which set forth the urgent need for relieving
Austria from the immediate burden of the lien, reads as follows:
“Whereas the economic structure of Austria is approaching
collapse and great numbers of the people of Austria are, in
consequence, in imminent danger of starvation and threatened by
diseases growing out of extreme privation and starvation; and
