1294  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
I hope you have lots of news waiting for me at Geneva, so that I 
know at least as much as the other fellow about what has happened, if 
anything.
All the best,
Sincerely yours,
U. Alexis Johnson
772.	 Letter 63 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 63
Washington, January 14, 1957
Dear Alex:
I hope you got my letter No. 62 of January 4, sent to you at Prague. 
I presume you did since we received no word that you would carry 
through the travel and leave plan which you were considering when you 
wrote your letter No. 51 of December 13 (received here December 21).
I am leaving on the 17th to participate in a panel discussion of 
Communist policy at the Air Command and Staff School at Maxwell 
Air Base, Alabama. I hope we can get our guidance telegram for the 
January 19 meeting on the wires not later than Wednesday, the 16th. I 
hope we can have a preliminary meeting today. There will be nothing 
really new to put in it unless we decide to have you bring up the missing 
servicemen again. I’m going to recommend that the subject be brought 
up at this week’s meeting. I assume you will have enough time to pre­
pare your presentation, and it needs to be done to satisfy Defense, and 
to back up many letters to the relatives in which we state that we are 
continuing to pursue the question actively. It is evident that we are not 
going to make any headway in the MAC. I agree with the suggestion 
in your last letter that some blanket inquiry be included which would 
cover other incidents where military personnel have disappeared in the 
general area of China and adjoining waters.
We do not feel that we have any good explanation for Wang’s insist­
ence on not having this week’s meeting on January 17. Chou ­En-­lai’s 
current trip to Poland may have something to do with it, although 
it seems doubtful that Chou’s present itinerary had been planned in 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal.
