Covert and Overt Operations —A series of political crises which have narrowed the base of the revolutionary leadership and destroyed the original coalition. (from March 1979 and still developing); and —Eventual political and economic reconstruction. Phase two is not complete. The highly fluid current situation is characterized by competing factions striving to establish a solid political base upon which to begin building Iran’s brave new world. Phase two revolutionary politics are dominated by two fundamental questions. First, is the Revolution an essentially conservative movement designed to restore the prestige and influence of Iran’s traditional socio-economic elites i.e. the clergy and the bazaar merchants? Is it instead a process which will eventually revamp Iran’s entire social structure by instituting radical income and land redistribution policies, as well as bringing to the forefront a new leftist-oriented elite? Or is it some combination of religious fundamentalism and reform? These complex questions pit the religiously-oriented ruling entourage against various leftist groups. By and large, the dominant clerics are satisfied with the revolution’s principal achievement: the ousting of the Shah and his “henchmen”. Beyond re-establishing the predominance of Islamic law those clerics have little genuine interest in fundamentally altering Iranian society. The leftists, however, see the Shah’s fall as the first step in a process which will throughly restructure the Iranian socio-economic order. Bani-Sadr is in the middle between these two positions and is often attacked by both. A second question is simultaneously being debated within the current governing entourage: who will rule post-Khomeini Iran? In that connection, an intense power struggle has emerged, primarily between the young hardline clerical fundamentalists and the “Islamic technocrats” (i.e. those individuals who have been secularly educated— often in the West—but who claim to be devout Moslems). The leftists are not so directly involved in this question, preferring to bide their time for now. This framework helps to explain the seemingly incoherent twists and turns in Iran’s domestic politics: most of these machinations are part of the attempt to answer definitively the two previously mentioned questions. Even so macabre an issue as the return of the American dead, for example, is related to the second question: if President Bani- Sadr favored sending the bodies back to the US, then as a matter of principle, the fundamentalists would have to oppose his policy or risk a loss of prestige in their continuing struggle with the President over future pre-eminence. The Key Actors: Several actors are participating in this on-going drama. Ayatollah Khomeini, of course, remains the Revolution’s preeminent figure and the final repository of revolutionary legitimacy and
