166 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 We are well on our way to being cast as anti-Islamic, anti-nationalist and “imperialist” in most of the Muslim world. Local demagogues find such tactics expedient, and their appetites are whetted every time we look weak. The Soviets cannot resist exploiting these opportunities. We deceive only ourselves if we take soothing words Dobrynin may utter to Marshall Shulman as evidence of real Soviet concern for our welfare in these countries. If we apply the “but-there-is-no-evidence” principle to judging what the Soviets may be doing to undermine us among Muslims and avoid looking for it, we delude only ourselves. We might serve our national purposes better if we reverted to some of the healthy suspicion that characterized our reaction to events such as the North Korean invasion of the South in 1950. (C) The Soviets, who have been viciously oppressing Islam in their own territories for 60 years, aim to emerge from the present commotion in the Middle East with an enhanced image as protectors of Islamic nationalism. They will have to resort to some extraordinary acrobatics to get this point across in Afghanistan—but what has been happening in Iran, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia has pushed Afghanistan far into the background. We can challenge Soviet misrepresentations and expose their own record successfully only if we equip ourselves with the means to do so. (U) There is nothing irretrievable about our present predicament in the Islamic world. We survived commotion which was at least as severe in 1967 and again in 1973.2 But our net image as a nation which defends its interests and protects those associated with it was a bit brighter then than it is now; and the Soviet effort to denigrate us was not so highly developed. We have neglected our defenses too long in this part of the world, and have slipped into a habit of defensiveness. We have become too apologetic about our own interests. This makes it difficult for our friends—who still outnumber our enemies in the Islamic world—to take any kind of action in our behalf. (U) Bluster, military threats with little obvious rationale or substance behind them, retaliatory schemes contrary to our traditions, and punitive measures against minor or defenseless groups do us no credit as a great power. They will not help us achieve our goals in this important region of the world. Quite the opposite. (U) In our approach to the Islamic World we need: • to display a determination to stick it out and assert ourselves, • to maintain embassies, cultural centers and other facilities and let everyone know they are going to be strongly defended, 2 The 1967 Six-Day War and the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
