September 1953–December 1954
951
this scale would also require collateral economic aid since, even with
the oil revenues anticipated in the next three years, Iran will be unable
to afford the construction and development involved, for example, in
moving military facilities and industries or in building military roads.
52. At present the Iranian armed forces have extremely limited ca-
pabilities even for a short term delaying action. Capabilities in this re-
spect could be improved, but this would require outside aid in the form
of equipment, training, and financial support for military purposes. To
increase Iran’s defense capabilities so that Iran could contribute sub-
stantially to Middle East defense would be difficult and time con-
suming. Such a program would require extensive outside aid, a drastic
improvement in the professional standards of the officers corps, the de-
velopment of a will to fight on the part of Iran’s conscript forces (which
would in turn depend largely on the over-all state of national morale),
and a government resolute to resist aggression.
53. At least in the short run, therefore, the chief effects of an ex-
panded US military aid program would be political. Such a program
would strengthen the self-confidence and pro-US orientation of the
Shah, Army leaders, and other key elements in Iran and would demon-
strate to them that the US has not written Iran off militarily. If accompa-
nied by improved pay and living conditions, such a program would
also tend to lessen the vulnerability of the armed forces to Tudeh ap-
peals and thereby to improve their long-term reliability.
IV. Foreign Affairs
Relations with the US
54. Under the Zahedi government, and with the strong support of
the Shah, Iran has moved toward alignment with the West, particularly
the US. The timely extension of US support and guidance has made the
US the dominant Western influence in the Iranian Government. The
present leaders of Iran appear to welcome this relationship.
55. The Shah and other important leaders have shown themselves
generally responsive to US advice over settlement of the oil issue, re-
sumption of relations with the UK, methods of improving the armed
forces, and certain internal matters such as economic planning and ad-
ministration. Iran has generally supported the US in issues before the
UN and tends to follow US advice in its relations with other Asian
states. Morever, since the signing of the Turk-Pakistani agreement and
the start of US military aid to Pakistan and Iraq, Iranian leaders, partic-
ularly the Shah as Commander-in-Chief, have expressed growing in-
terest in eventual participation in US-backed regional defense prepara-
tions. Iran has maintained a firm position in the face of Soviet protests
over the prospects for its defense cooperation with the West, and the
