Chile’s power to govern the plebiscitary territory during the plebiscite is without limitation. The Commission’s control can exist only in derogation of the power of Chile to exercise authority within the plebiscitary territory, and to this derogation Chile consented in agreeing to the supplementary act appended to the protocol of arbitration by which the Arbitrator was empowered to determine the conditions of the plebiscite. Were the authority of Chile unlimited, the Commission could have no control whatever over the plebiscite. The Commission would have no function and there would exist no reason for its establishment, [apparent omission] inconsistent with the high character of the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator specifically mentioned certain matters requiring regulatory action by the Plebiscitary Commission, in some instances adding instructions as to how the regulatory power of the Commission should be exercised, but manifestly he did not attempt to cover the whole ground and he provided for unknown factors and unforeseeable emergencies by empowering the Commission in broad terms to exercise complete control generally over the plebiscite, thus investing the Commission with the power to deal with everything that is essential to a fair election and equal justice to both parties, subject only to the terms of his opinion and award. (7) The plebiscite looked to by the award is one fair not only in form but in substance. As a corollary it follows that Chile is not entitled to any unfair or inequitable advantage by reason of her right to possess and govern the territory during the period of the plebiscite. Complete control over the plebiscite was given the Commission by the Arbitrator for the very purpose of making certain that Chile should not use possession and control of the territory subject to the plebiscite to obstruct or prevent it. (8) It is well within the powers of the Commission to adopt the proposed resolution setting forth certain prerequisites to a fair plebiscite in Tacna-Arica. Whether the accomplishment of the reforms suggested in that resolution is essential to continuing with the plebiscite is a question of fact addressing itself to the judgment and accomplishments of the Commission rather than being a question of law. The resolution represents a careful and successful effort not to overstep the line between counteractive checking and forestalling misgovernment, on the one hand, which tends to obstruct or prevent a fair plebiscite, all of which is within the competence of the Commission, and taking over the plebiscitary territory, on the other, which is not within the competence of the Commission. The resolution merely points out some instances where it is necessary for Chile to take such action as will amount to the observance of her obligations to exercise her control of the plebiscitary territory so as not to interfere with or prevent a fair plebiscite but to facilitate one. Doubtless Chile will contend that the Plebiscitary Commission can not lawfully adopt the proposed resolution by arguing that the award invests the Commission with only the limited powers specifically mentioned in the award and that under the award the Commission is required to formulate at once regulations governing the plebiscite. This position is untenable both practically and legally. A committee to formulate the election and registration regulations has been constituted but it can neither carry forward nor
