International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 743 ready been agreed to by all relevant agencies and is problem-free: We will modify existing reexport controls to stop requiring a reexport license for any case in which we have already approved reexport of the same product as part of the COCOM process. The second change, however, has a more far-reaching effect. While all relevant agencies and all your advisors are agreed that the action would not compromise our controls or security in any substantive way, there may be some political reactions in taking the action. Hence we are referring it to you for decision. We propose that national security controls on exports of Commercecontrolled goods and technology to COCOM member countries and to Australia and New Zealand be essentially the same as present procedures for Canada (i.e., basically, no validated license will be required in advance of shipment). Instead, the exporter will be required to file with the Commerce Department, at the time of export, assurances that there will be no reexport unless our reexport licensing requirements have been satisfied. Controls on exports of munitions, nuclear-related items, and items in short supply would not be affected. Last year the Department of Commerce approved more than 22,000 licenses for export to COCOM countries and to Australia and New Zealand. There were no denials to these countries on national security grounds. These licenses account for nearly one-third of the 72,000 export license applications processed last year. At an average exporter preparation cost per license of at least $100, the total burden to business was over $2 million. All your advisors agree no diminution in the effectiveness of our controls would result from the change. The licenses for exports to these countries now principally serve an informational function. The information needed (and binding legal undertaking) will be available from forms that exporters would be required to complete at the time of shipping. Security objectives might actually be enhanced, as we would be able to concentrate some additional time on the problem countries. Finally, an irritant to our relations with our allies would be removed. There would, however, be a symbolic effect of “reducing” controls that some may see as reducing their effectiveness. Senators Jackson and Garn in particular may disagree in principle. Accordingly, we will discuss the changes, at least with Senator Jackson, prior to any public announcement. We recommend you approve the proposed substitution of postshipment reporting procedures in place of validated license requirements for shipments to COCOM countries and to Australia and New Zealand. In implementing this change, the Department of Commerce would consult with the Department of Justice and other relevant agencies to
