170 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 billion held by the Bank of America. Treasury and Justice are taking steps to get counsel there, and Secretary Miller will be in London today for talks. A ruling could be produced within a few weeks. The Japanese are not being helpful on financial matters. They will be contacted with a more direct appeal for cooperation. (S) 3. Iranian Credit. State, Treasury and CIA will present options for the meeting tomorrow in response to the President’s suggestion that we step up efforts to restrict Iranian credit access. (S) 4. Immigration. 20,000 students have been interviewed and the Attorney General believes that it is time for a high-level note of congratulations to the INS. A draft will be prepared. Guidelines for exemption in cases of humanitarian concern will be required by next week to prevent deportation of minority groups and other individuals put into jeopardy. (C) Political-Military Issues: 1. International Court of Justice. In view of the postponement of the Security Council session until this weekend, the Secretary of State recommended and the SCC agreed that it would be desirable to proceed simultaneously with our suit in the ICJ,3 subject to further discussion with the President later today. The Attorney General registered concern about the timing of an approach to the ICJ, that it might introduce an element of confusion into our various approaches, and that it could give rise to counter-claims and charges of intelligence activity. Secretary Vance said that those claims are going to be put forward this weekend in any event. (I feel you should know that this step will lock you into up to three weeks of litigation, making other alternatives more difficult.) (S) The SCC then went into restricted session with only those principals who had been present at Camp David for a discussion of our overall strategy.4 Public Posture on Hostages. Before beginning the principal topic, Secretary Vance noted that the report of hostages being moved out of the embassy to other locations5 was probably going to leak soon since it was known in at least four capitals and rather widely in Washington. He proposed that we be prepared to respond quickly with a statement 3 Carter underlined “to proceed simultaneously with our suit in the ICJ,” then wrote “ok” in the left margin. On November 29, the United States filed a case with the ICJ against Iran for violation of the principles of international law, for supporting the actions of those holding the hostages, and for “threatening to subject the hostages to trial.” The application and the Court’s response of November 30 are in Department of State Bulletin, January 1980, pp. 37–41. 4 See Document 51. 5 See Document 63.
