876  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
to agreement on this question of renunciation force. If we would work 
along this line we would be helping our talks forward rather than pre­
venting any progress.
22. I said our difficulties with regard to draft—and let me say not 
only with regard to words of draft, but with regard understanding 
between us—seemed to revolve around two points primarily. First, was 
specific mention of Taiwan area and other was self-­defense clause. He 
had said many times these meetings, that any declaration would cover 
Taiwan area. I found it completely inexplicable that he unwilling accept 
specific mention Taiwan area in his December 1 draft, if that were correct.
23. I said the other point—with regard self-­defense clause—was 
that neither us would in this declaration be renouncing what we each 
considered to be our legitimate right of individual and collective self-­
defense. These were two simple and fundamental propositions.
24. I said I had given him my thought over and over again about 
how I thought they should be embodied in declaration. If he continued 
to disagree to form of words I had suggested for embodying these two 
thoughts I would hope that at our next meeting he would be able sug­
gest form he would consider more desirable. I felt both thoughts were 
fundamental to meaningful declaration. But I had not taken hard and 
fast position on exactly how they should be stated. I not able think of 
any better way of stating them than what we had already suggested. 
If he had other thoughts, as I had said, I would certainly be glad listen 
them. I did not see how my position could be any more reasonable or 
show any greater desire to get ahead with this.
25. Wang said with regard two points I had mentioned, namely 
specific mention Taiwan area and self-­defense clause, he had already 
made his position adequately clear and did not think necessary him to 
repeat his previous statements. He must however remind me that our 
discussions which we been conducting should be directed to seeking 
reasonable and peaceful solution disputes between our two countries. 
There would be entirely no meaning for conducting these talks if they 
were to allow US to achieve design of continuing seizure of Taiwan by 
any formula or any way. If US should in any way still cling to illusion 
that his side might in any way concede or capitulate to this position my 
side it would be futile.
26. Wang said as regards mentioning of Taiwan in our declaration 
he should say that this was precisely what they had done in their draft 
of October 27. They had asked me to choose from two drafts of their 
side. If I were really concerned with mentioning Taiwan area, then why 
not accept their draft October 27.
27. Wang said I had said I would be ready listen and consider any 
thoughts he might have. His thoughts were very simple. As he had said 
they have two drafts. I might choose either these two. He also hoped at
