1296  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
has issued an order providing that the testimony of these witnesses be 
taken in the form of depositions before an American consular officer in 
Hong Kong. However, Wirin avers that in order to get the witnesses to 
come to Hong Kong he must go personally to Communist China and 
North Korea to interview the witnesses and others with information 
relating to the case (including Chou En-­lai and Kim Il-­sung.) Having 
been denied a passport valid for travel to Communist China and North 
Korea, Wirin appealed to the court and the judge issued an order (copy 
enclosed) to the effect that he was to go to these two areas as an officer 
of the court, at government expense, depositing his passport in Hong 
Kong, and the court would protect him from any criminal or adminis­
trative action against him by reason of this travel. L, which has primary 
responsibility in this situation, has decided not to contest the judge’s 
action and Wirin has announced, according to the press, that he will 
depart for Hong Kong and Communist China on January 28. Thus, we 
have another precedent and another breach in the dike.
Regards and good wishes to all of you,
Sincerely,
Walter P. McConaughy
Enclosures:
1. Press Release No. 341 of May 1, 1952.
2. Copy of court order.
3. Two Nehru Briefing Papers:
(a) Chinese Prisoners in U.S. Penitentiaries.
(b) Background Paper on Father C.J. McCarthy.
4. Copy of Television Interview—Edward R. Murrow and Chou 
En-­lai
P.S.
It would be useful if you could let us know right away if any 
breaching of the line at all on travel of Americans in Communist China 
would compromise your position in your talks with Wang. You will 
recall that you have mentioned several times to Wang that we could not 
change our policy while Americans are unjustly held. If you have any 
important observation on the effect in Geneva of any modification of 
the policy, it might be well for you to telegraph as well as write.
We are naturally interested in the interview which Worthy is to 
have with American prisoners in Shanghai today or tomorrow. But we 
have decided it would be inappropriate for us to transmit any ques­
tions for Worthy to put to the prisoners, as we have an opportunity to 
do. We do not wish to seem to be capitalizing in any way on Worthy’s
