March 1952–February 1953
345
able question and according to informal Department legal opinion
might well not stand up in the courts. Although major oil companies
have made no effort to purchase Iranian oil, interest has been shown by
numerous independents of varying reputation and nationality and by
the Argentine and Brazilian Governments. [1 page missing in original]
British Embassies in Tehran both report that they see little hope of a
“more reasonable” successor to Mosadeq in the foreseeable future.7
The communist organization in Iran is growing stronger. Commu-
nist agitation among the unemployed oil workers and communist in-
citement of peasant dissatisfaction against landlords furnish explosive
opportunities for sudden outbreaks of violence. Recent government
land reform decrees have given hope of increased prosperity to masses
of Iranian peasants but Iranian inefficiency and resistance by landlords
will probably prevent for some time any actual effect of this reform
upon the peasants’ prosperity. Although factors for social revolution
are rapidly developing in Iran, the Embassy has reported that the com-
munist organization will probably not attempt an open revolt at this
time but rather will seek to take advantage of a deteriorating situation
by developing their association with left-wing nationalists and by grad-
ually capturing the leadership of the nationalist movement.
These are political factors but their development is based in the
current situation primarily on economic factors. Iran’s deteriorating
economic situation is a problem which must be met before any stability
or any direction of social evolution can be found. Observers differ as to
the time when the communists might take control of the Iranian Gov-
ernment but all agree that if the economic situation continues to deteri-
orate hopelessly, a communist coup must eventually be expected.
The leaders in the National Front are increasingly at odds. Mullah
Kashani’s ascendency to power has undoubtedly fed his known ambi-
tions to be sole authority in Iran. His position in Parliament is such that
he could lead a strong Parliamentary group against Dr. Mosadeq or
any other target he chose. His street organization has been one of the
most important elements in recent nationalist successes. His alliance
with the communist organization during the anti-Qavam riots has ap-
parently not been lasting but Kashani’s over
?
8 has led him to
declare on various occasions that he could “swallow up” the commu-
nists in any alliance. He has joined hands with the Qashqais in de-
stroying the old clique of top army officers. Upon his return from
7 Although there is no indication in the source text, the portion of the document
from this point, until “Conclusions,” appears to be an earlier draft of the preceding three
paragraphs.
8 Underscore and query in the original.
