Arms Control and Disarmament 1563 policy. National policies reflect the working of other important factorsвҖ” the basic incompatibility of Communist and Free World objectives, the reduced power position of Western Europe as compared with the US and the USSR, the dependence of much of the non-ВӯCommunist world on the US for strategic security, and the continuing search of the peoples and governments in the former colonial areas for a solution to insecurity, want, and the problems of modernizing their societies. 32. To date European governments have supported the theory that allied forces must be prepared to maintain and use nuclear weapons as an essential support on which they depend in meeting Soviet presВӯ sures. Although Norway and Denmark have declined to accept IRBM sites on their territories, they have joined all the other NATO nations in affirming the strategic necessity for a nuclear defense system. In Italy agreements to install IRBMs were in process of completion when the Fanfani government fell. In France negotiations towards this end were stalled by nationalist trends in French policy which have been intensified by de GaulleвҖҷs advent to power and not by any basic oppoВӯ sition on the part of the government to nuclear weapons. Even West Germany, which has been subject to a broad range of Soviet threats, including total devastation if it were to permit nuclear weapons on its territory, has approved in principle the equipping of the BundeВӯ swehr with tactical nuclear weapons. Significantly, however, most of the governments involved have proceeded with the utmost delicacy, and have attempted where possible to minimize publicity or public discussion of the IRBM question. 33. Soviet technological advances have not frightened the WestВӯ ern allies into isolation from the US because by-Вӯand-Вӯlarge they recogВӯ nize their ultimate dependence on US protection. But there has been increased concern on the part of some Europeans for the protection of their own local interests independent of their role in the over-Вӯall WestВӯ ern defense system. 34. The UK has pushed ahead with its program of developing some deterrent nuclear forces of its own and France is seeking to join the вҖңnuclear club.вҖқ While there has been some criticism from the BritВӯ ish Labor Party over what is described as excessive investment in the nuclear field, this has caused no fundamental turning away from the principal strategy of nuclear deterrence. Recent British defense minВӯ istry thinking may indicate, however, that the government is increasВӯ ingly concerned that there may be insufficient conventional capabilities for limited war situations. There appears to be a tendency in official circles to divide military problems into those which deal with nuclear armament, and those, usually pertaining to traditional British interests outside the NATO area, which do not. 35. Although the NATO governments are determined to maintain a strong and unified defense (at least to the extent that the economic
