Arms Control and Disarmament  1563
policy. National policies reflect the working of other important factors—
the basic incompatibility of Communist and Free World objectives, the 
reduced power position of Western Europe as compared with the US 
and the USSR, the dependence of much of the non-­Communist world 
on the US for strategic security, and the continuing search of the peoples 
and governments in the former colonial areas for a solution to insecurity, 
want, and the problems of modernizing their societies.
32. To date European governments have supported the theory that 
allied forces must be prepared to maintain and use nuclear weapons 
as an essential support on which they depend in meeting Soviet pres­
sures. Although Norway and Denmark have declined to accept IRBM 
sites on their territories, they have joined all the other NATO nations 
in affirming the strategic necessity for a nuclear defense system. In 
Italy agreements to install IRBMs were in process of completion when 
the Fanfani government fell. In France negotiations towards this end 
were stalled by nationalist trends in French policy which have been 
intensified by de Gaulle’s advent to power and not by any basic oppo­
sition on the part of the government to nuclear weapons. Even West 
Germany, which has been subject to a broad range of Soviet threats, 
including total devastation if it were to permit nuclear weapons on 
its territory, has approved in principle the equipping of the Bunde­
swehr with tactical nuclear weapons. Significantly, however, most of 
the governments involved have proceeded with the utmost delicacy, 
and have attempted where possible to minimize publicity or public 
discussion of the IRBM question.
33. Soviet technological advances have not frightened the West­
ern allies into isolation from the US because by-­and-­large they recog­
nize their ultimate dependence on US protection. But there has been 
increased concern on the part of some Europeans for the protection of 
their own local interests independent of their role in the over-­all West­
ern defense system.
34. The UK has pushed ahead with its program of developing 
some deterrent nuclear forces of its own and France is seeking to join 
the “nuclear club.” While there has been some criticism from the Brit­
ish Labor Party over what is described as excessive investment in the 
nuclear field, this has caused no fundamental turning away from the 
principal strategy of nuclear deterrence. Recent British defense min­
istry thinking may indicate, however, that the government is increas­
ingly concerned that there may be insufficient conventional capabilities 
for limited war situations. There appears to be a tendency in official 
circles to divide military problems into those which deal with nuclear 
armament, and those, usually pertaining to traditional British interests 
outside the NATO area, which do not.
35. Although the NATO governments are determined to maintain 
a strong and unified defense (at least to the extent that the economic
