736  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
straightforward: their draft announcement of December one last year 
is proposal acceptable to either side. If there real intent make such 
announcement, he failed see any reason why we could not reach agree­
ment on draft of their side of December one.
23. I replied it seemed me that we faced somewhat same problem 
which I had often discussed and did not intend belabor this morning. 
That is, whether our objective here is to momentarily give world sur­
face appearance of agreement, but in fact, because lack of meeting of 
minds, there would be no agreement. I did not conceive this to be real 
purpose and did not believe it would really contribute anything to situ­
ation to follow such course. In fact, seemed me that in end it could only 
be counterproductive.
24. I said question between us of most fundamental nature was 
whether either side intends initiate hostilities in Taiwan area in attempt 
settle our dispute there in that manner. We really renounce all appeal to 
force settle that dispute.
25. I said I had carefully attempted avoid discussion substance this 
dispute itself at this stage. Wang had in past and again this morning, 
and his govt had in its public statements, it seemed to me, continued 
confuse this question of substance our dispute and question of agreeing 
simply that we would not use force settle this dispute. Neither one of us 
questioned fact there is dispute there.
26. I said Wang had often set forth his position re substance that 
dispute. As I had said last meeting, I did not dispute his right hold 
those views and advocate them by all peaceful means. He well knew 
I opposed those views but I not trying force my opinions on him at 
this stage.
27. I said Wang well knew it position my govt that Taiwan and off-­
shore islands we had just been discussing not their territory and never 
been their territory. I was not asking Wang accept that view. However, 
appeared to me, at this stage in discussing this declaration, Wang was 
continuing insist my govt concede to their view on that matter.
28. I said view my govt is Taiwan, which ceded to Japan by China, 
was surrendered by Japan 1945 under orders SCAP and that it now 
lawfully administered and held by GRC which sovereign govt. It is 
with that govt that US has treaty relationships and obligations. How­
ever, this all concerns substance our dispute.
29. I said position he taking seemed me required US in effect to say 
it has no rights in Taiwan area and to abandon its position with regard 
to our dispute. As he had again said this morning, he looked upon 
declaration we discussing as of necessity leading to, if I understood 
correctly, abandonment by US of its position. I think it entirely wrong 
to regard this declaration as “leading to” abandonment its position by 
either side.
