International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
11
by the very real domestic legal and political considerations which, in
each case, will have to be taken into account.
a. Escape Clause Cases
In the first two months of the new Administration, a Presidential
decision will be required on whether to place import restrictions on
shoes as recommended by the U.S. International Trade Commission.
The domestic industry is clearly injured. Last year President Ford de-
cided that the impact on consumers was too great to provide relief. The
$1.4 billion in annual U.S. imports is primarily supplied by Italy, Spain,
Taiwan, Korea, and Brazil. Onerous import restrictions would be
reacted to strongly by exporting countries, especially the EC, Spain and
Brazil, any of which could retaliate against U.S. exports.
Import relief decisions will also more than likely have to be made
with respect to imports of televisions (1976 imports $800 million) and
sugar (1974 imports approximately $1 billion). These cases are likely to
be presented for Presidential action during March–May, 1977. A Presi-
dential decision on mushrooms (1976 imports $71 million) is due by
March 11. Under the Trade Act, Presidential decisions in any of these
cases can be overridden by a vote of both Houses of Congress.
b. Countervailing Duty Litigation
Perhaps of even greater concern than the above cases are two legal
actions which have been brought to require the Secretary of the Treas-
ury to countervail against the exemption of exports from taxes nor-
mally borne by products abroad. The Zenith Radio Corporation con-
tends that additional duties should be applied equal to the Japanese
commodity tax (ranging from 10 to 20%) on imports of $3 billion of con-
sumer electronic products from Japan. If, as is not unlikely, the
Customs Court sides with Zenith under language contained in two old
Supreme Court cases, bonds will have to be posted by importers for the
potential additional duty. This will have an immediate restrictive im-
pact on trade. A court decision is expected soon.
The U.S. Steel Company has brought a similar case against the re-
bate of European value added taxes (VAT). The issue is the same in
principle as the Zenith case, and an adverse decision in Zenith would be
a precedent for the VAT case. The trial is scheduled for December, 1977.
The rest of the world would view U.S. countervailing against the
rebate of indirect taxes (sales and excise taxes, and the VAT), which is a
practice expressly sanctioned by the GATT, as an act of completely un-
warranted economic aggression. Massive retaliation against U.S. ex-
ports would be a real possibility unless the courts or the Congress give
the Secretary of the Treasury discretion to avoid countervailing against
these common practices.
