406  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
attainment of 100% readiness on a quantitative basis will still leave us 
with a substantial modernization problem.
Illustrative of our qualitative situation is the following chart which 
shows the problem of modernization cycles. The 90 millimeter and 120 
millimeter anti-­aircraft guns have served their purpose for over 15 years. 
They now have a very limited defense capability and are being phased 
out for modern weapons capable of destroying today’s supersonic air­
craft. The Nike-Ajax has been operational for only five years but is being 
modernized to the Nike-Hercules. Within the next five years, it is antici­
pated that the Nike-Zeus will be in the engineer-­user test phase. The next 
chart shows the projected M-Day composition of the fighter-­interceptor 
forces in the Air Defense Command and the Air National Guard. Nearly 
all the aircraft in the regular forces will be supersonic and most will have 
an atomic capability. The National Guard forces are equipped primar­
ily with subsonic aircraft, with 69% of the forces equipped with aircraft 
having no atomic or Falcon capability. This is explained by the fact that 
generally new aircraft are not purchased for the Air National Guard. 
Both the Air Reserve and Air National Guard units are equipped with 
aircraft which are transferred from the Regular Air Force as it receives 
more modern aircraft equipment. Some of these aircraft, even though 
subsonic, are nevertheless effective operational aircraft.
In other areas, our rate of modernization is not keeping pace with 
the obsolescence of existing equipment. Our deferral of ship replace­
ment has reached a point where the Navy foresees the loss of one half 
its force within the next ten years. To varying degrees, elements of 
the other Services are faced with like situations in either their force or 
equipment needs. In several instances our technology complicates the 
problem by out-­distancing previously accepted modernization cycles.
Basic policy refers to two other aspects of our material readiness 
and I will address myself to these very briefly. One of these requires pro­
visions of reasonably protected prepositioned stocks outside the United 
States. The next chart shows the current status of such stocks. The bars 
show the percentage of the requirement for prepositioned stocks which 
is located with forces or in depots overseas. All Services have met more 
than two thirds of their requirement, with Marine Corps and Navy in 
the best position. Most of the Air Force prepositioned stocks are with 
or immediately accessible to the using units as shown on the green por­
tion of the bar, while most of the Army and Marine Corps stocks are 
in depots as shown in the yellow portion of the bars. Navy ammuni­
tion and petroleum products are likewise in storage sites. Additional 
pre-­positioned stocks of all types of Navy supplies, are afloat with their 
mobile logistic support forces.
Limited protection of these prepositioned reserve stocks has been 
provided for ammunition and part of the petroleum products. This pro­
tection is of substantial value where coupled with dispersion, but is of
