Human Rights 527 separate telegram and requested that the Mission delay transmission of the report until September 6, as Department officials planned to discuss the substance of the report with Department of Justice officials on September 5. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780360–0276) Telegram 224205 to Geneva, September 2, transmitted the draft text of the U.S. response, which stated, in part: “The United States seriously questions whether a single complaint which makes reference to only a few specific allegations, all of which are claimed to have occurred in a single city, which have been and are being investigated by Federal, state, and local officials, and which are the subject of amelioratory action, can meet the standard required by resolution 1503.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780360–0288) In telegram 13482 from Geneva, September 8, the Mission provided the Department with the version of the response delivered to the Director of the United Nations Human Rights Division, Theodore Van Boven, on September 5. The response summarized efforts taken to investigate police brutality and drew attention to the anticipated September 6 release by the Tennessee Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights of a report entitled “Civil Crisis—Civic Challenge: Police-Community Relations in Memphis,” which purportedly would refute the allegation that there had been no response to the complaints. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780366–0460) Prior to the Subcommission’s consideration of the U.S. response, National Security Council Staff member Jessica Tuchman Mathews communicated with U.S. Representative to the UN Human Rights Commission Edward Mezvinsky and U.S. Representative to the Mission at Geneva William vanden Heuvel concerning Ambassador Beverly Carter’s actions as a member of the Working Group. In the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s September 5 evening report, Tuchman Mathews commented that she had spoken to Mezvinsky regarding the citation issued against the United States, which she believed was “potentially devastating to the [administration’s human rights] policy,” noting, “we can’t pursue an aggressive human rights policy until our own house is basically in order, which means ratifying the major international covenants and treaties, and staffing our UN missions so that we avoid shooting ourselves in the foot at regular intervals.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues— Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 9–12/78) Tuchman Mathews again expressed concerns to Vanden Heuvel on September 6, as she informed the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski: “Vanden Heuvel is in a very delicate situation in that the Sub-Commission is supposed to be composed
