Human Rights
527
separate telegram and requested that the Mission delay transmission of
the report until September 6, as Department officials planned to discuss
the substance of the report with Department of Justice officials on Sep-
tember 5. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780360–0276) Telegram 224205 to Geneva, September 2, transmitted
the draft text of the U.S. response, which stated, in part: “The United
States seriously questions whether a single complaint which makes ref-
erence to only a few specific allegations, all of which are claimed to
have occurred in a single city, which have been and are being investi-
gated by Federal, state, and local officials, and which are the subject of
amelioratory action, can meet the standard required by resolution
1503.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780360–0288)
In telegram 13482 from Geneva, September 8, the Mission pro-
vided the Department with the version of the response delivered to the
Director of the United Nations Human Rights Division, Theodore Van
Boven, on September 5. The response summarized efforts taken to in-
vestigate police brutality and drew attention to the anticipated Sep-
tember 6 release by the Tennessee Advisory Committee to the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights of a report entitled “Civil Crisis—Civic
Challenge: Police-Community Relations in Memphis,” which purport-
edly would refute the allegation that there had been no response to the
complaints. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780366–0460)
Prior to the Subcommission’s consideration of the U.S. response,
National Security Council Staff member Jessica Tuchman Mathews
communicated with U.S. Representative to the UN Human Rights
Commission Edward Mezvinsky and U.S. Representative to the Mis-
sion at Geneva William vanden Heuvel concerning Ambassador Bev-
erly Carter’s actions as a member of the Working Group. In the NSC
Global Issues Cluster’s September 5 evening report, Tuchman Ma-
thews commented that she had spoken to Mezvinsky regarding the ci-
tation issued against the United States, which she believed was “poten-
tially devastating to the [administration’s human rights] policy,”
noting, “we can’t pursue an aggressive human rights policy until our
own house is basically in order, which means ratifying the major inter-
national covenants and treaties, and staffing our UN missions so that
we avoid shooting ourselves in the foot at regular intervals.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 9–12/78)
Tuchman Mathews again expressed concerns to Vanden Heuvel
on September 6, as she informed the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski: “Vanden Heuvel is in a very del-
icate situation in that the Sub-Commission is supposed to be composed
