174  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
degree of force is necessary, even at the risk that major Communist 
counteraction may spread the hostilities into general war, or whether 
(2) U.S. interests would be served by applying only that degree of force 
judged necessary to confine the hostilities to a limited area and to the 
objective of restoring the status quo ante, thereby seeking to minimize 
the risk that major Communist counteraction would spread the hostil­
ities into general war.
c. Within the total U.S. military forces, therefore, there must be 
included ready forces which, with help as may realistically be expected 
from allied forces, are adequate (1) to present a deterrent to limited mil­
itary aggression, and (2) while minimizing the risk of general war, to 
defeat or hold, in conjunction with indigenous forces, any such limited 
aggression, pending the application of such additional U.S. and allied 
power as may be deemed necessary to suppress the limited aggres­
sion. Such ready forces must be highly mobile and suitably deployed, 
recognizing that some degree of mal-­deployment from the viewpoint 
of general war must be accepted. Military planning for U.S. forces to 
oppose limited military aggression will be based on a flexible and selec­
tive capability, including an appropriate nuclear capability for use as 
authorized by the President.”
REASON: This paragraph is a realistic and workable policy for the 
United States in an era when Soviet ability to deliver a massive nuclear 
attack on the United States will provide a strong deterrent to such an 
attack by the United States, except in retaliation. It properly emphasizes 
the increasing importance of further developing and maintaining the 
capability, including a nuclear capability, to oppose limited aggression, 
and recognizes that limited aggression may occur wherever our poten­
tial enemies see advantage in such action. Furthermore, it allows much 
needed political flexibility in that it does not require in advance that the 
United States, once committed to action in a limited war, must apply 
unlimited force to achieve military victory regardless of consequences, 
but leaves the United States free to fight for a limited objective if such is 
the best course under the conditions then existing.
8. Page 7, paragraph 19—­add new last sentence to read:
“In addition to the foregoing, the United States should be pre­
pared to provide limited military assistance to uncommitted nations 
as required to prevent such nations from seeking and obtaining mil­
itary assistance from Communist sources and thus falling within the 
Communist sphere of influence.”
REASON: To establish a policy intended to avoid repetition of dif­
ficulties in Egypt, Indonesia, etc.
9. Page 8, paragraph 20, third sentence—Change to read:
“. . . . At the same time its must be recognized that the attainment of 
relative nuclear parity by the USSR will probably result in Sino-Soviet Bloc
