March 27–December 31, 1979
835
means of attracting Palestinian support would be to stake out cred-
ible positions on settlements and the scope of authority of the self-
government. (S)
After this preliminary discussion, we will need to accelerate our ef-
forts to develop a coherent strategy for the next phase of negotiations.
This meeting should try to resolve issues of staffing and to set broad
guidelines for the conduct of the talks. (S)
commitments of the United States to Israel and that the United States Government is not
obligated to obtain Israel’s prior approval.” Begin noted that the U.S. commitment nei-
ther to recognize nor negotiate with the P.L.O., as affirmed in the 1975 and 1979 Memo-
randa of Agreement between the United States and Israel, was “an absolute one.” “The
fact cannot be disregarded that any direct or indirect contact by the United States Gov-
ernment with a representative of the P.L.O.,” Begin continued, “is tantamount to recogni-
tion of that organization and will inevitably confer on it a degree of legitimation. This is
the case, whether or not the contact takes place in the context of negotiations.” (Telegram
110026 to Tel Aviv, May 1; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Country File, Box 36, Israel: 5–11/79)
250.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Lebanon and Israel1
Washington, May 6, 1979, 1541Z
115270. Eyes Only for Ambassadors Dean and Lewis from the Sec-
retary. Subject: Contacts With PLO/Fatah.
(S) Entire text
1. For Ambassador Dean: We have given further thought to the se-
curity problems in Lebanon which we discussed during your recent
consultation in Washington. We agree that the personal safety and se-
curity of you and all members of the Mission, along with private Amer-
ican citizens, makes it essential that all appropriate precautions are
taken.
2. In recognition of the decisive role that organized Palestinian
groups have played and could play in the security of our Mission and
the physical environment in which it must function, you are authorized
to initiate and maintain such contact with an appropriate PLO/Fatah
1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Box 10, Beirut. Secret; Roger.
Drafted by Draper; cleared by Saunders, William McAfee (INR/DDC), and Tarnoff; ap-
proved by Vance.
