First Responses 179 to lose the judgment, although appeals can stretch the process out for several additional weeks. This fact is an additional argument for going ahead with Option 4 in the relatively near future, to avoid the impression that our position is unravelling. (S) 4. Student Remittances. Licenses have been issued for $20 million in payments to Iranian students. Another $20 million will be licensed next week. The program is about $1 billion per year. All of this is new money being brought in for that specific purpose, consonant with the previous decision to license student remittances. (C) 5. Japan. Mr. Carswell will talk to the Japanese at a high level today and will make clear our displeasure at their lack of cooperativeness on financial matters regarding Iran. (C) 6. U.S. Payments. The SCC agreed that Treasury should issue licenses for about $100 million in new Iranian money to pay U.S. creditors for exports shipped before the freeze went into effect.5 (C) 7. Transfers out of Dollar Accounts. Iran has offered to pay interest on a loan for which Chemical Bank is the agent, if it is licensed to be paid in Switzerland in other than dollars. The amount of this payment is about $7 million. The SCC recommended that we insist on payment in this country in dollars as specified in the contract. We do not want to license moves away from the dollar, even though the company may not get its payment right away.6 (C) 8. Immigration. A total of 26,000 students have been interviewed; 20,650 are in status; 3,600 are technically out of status; 1,900 have been asked to provide additional information; 405 have chosen voluntary departure; 300 have requested asylum. There is some reluctance of many Iranians to choose asylum out of fear of retribution. An interpretation of INS regulations is being prepared which will specify the conditions for exception to deportation procedures in humanitarian cases.7 The legality of the original order will be tested in court next week; Justice feels that its legal position is good. (C) Political-Military Issues: 1. Hostages. We will continue hammering away in every available public and private channel to get access by neutral observers to the hostages.8 (U) 5 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and initialed in the right margin. 6 Carter approved this item with a checkmark. 7 Carter underlined the word “exception” and wrote in the left margin: “We should be fairly strict.” 8 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “We need to escalate P.R. It is not coming across at all.”
