the essentials of the present scheme, of which the convention is merely an elaboration, were placed before the Commission at its November session and that we and our respective governments have therefore had more than three months in which to consider. To my mind however this is neither here nor there. So far as I can recollect it has never been the practice of our Commission to assign committees to study proposals or refer them back to governments for examination if in the first general discussion it became evident that they were not acceptable in principle. I see no reason in the present instance for deviation from this sound and time-saving practice. For our present purpose it would seem sufficient to point out that the proposals are not only a radical departure from the work we have been engaged upon so far but that they are totally irreconcilable with the draft which is the basis of our discussions. We are engaged upon a study of how to effect a limitation and reduction of armaments by agreement. We are now asked to scrap this work which is the result of several years of negotiation and to accept in its place the total and immediate abolition of armaments. I will confess that the American delegation is unable to see how the two can possibly be reconciled and discussed simultaneously. The question before us is whether we shall continue on the task entrusted to us according to the method approved by our various governments or whether we shall suddenly scrap what has been done and embark upon an entirely different enterprise on the basis of proposals of a type which has frequently been considered in the past and invariably rejected as unworkable. Incidentally if it is felt that some of the points suggested under this convention would be of assistance in the preparation of our draft, certainly it is to be expected that the representative of any country will in the second reading introduce such amendments to the clauses as they now stand as they may see fit. However, it would certainly seem a cumbersome and unprecedented procedure to give further exhaustive study to the whole of an
