426 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement by President Echandi in various public pronouncements predicting a favorable re-­allocation. This prospect of increased revenues has been the subject of comment in these various countries and has prompted an especially laudatory comment from President Ydígoras of Guatemala. Ydígoras said in effect “this action takes the sting out of Communist allegations that the U.S. is exploiting the Latin American countries”. To reverse the expectation will cause us trouble in the Caribbean at a most unfortunate time. We will certainly lose good will throughout the area and will be exploited by our enemies. (4) The tax re-­allocation has been an objective of primary importance to Echandi since he first suggested it during his visit to the United States. He has interpreted our willingness to cooperate by revising the pertinent Treasury regulations as an assurance that a favorable re-­allocation will be made even though he has chafed at the delay in reaching a final decision as to how much. In this certainty he has made several public statements, the latest being on May 1, proclaiming his success in obtaining the re-­allocation and commenting on the significance the increased revenues will mean not only to Costa Rica but to the other six countries in which United Fruit has banana producing subsidiaries. Our failure now to follow through with the re-­allocation to which Echandi attaches so much importance and which is of relative insignificance for us from a loss of revenue standpoint will produce a situation of such embarrassment to Echandi that it cannot but fail to embitter his attitude toward us. (5) If Echandi fails to secure additional revenue by means of a re-­ allocation of United Fruit profits he will undoubtedly resort to other measures, such as special legislation or pressures to renegotiate the Company’s contract. Should any of these measures result in additional revenues to Costa Rica then such advantages would immediately be sought by other producing countries, thus starting a chain of events which could not fail to affect our relations and those of a U.S. firm with seven countries. Tab A contains a copy of my letter to Treasury setting forth the Department’s view of the importance of reaching a favorable decision on this tax problem.2 Attached thereto is a chronological summary of events concerning the case.3 It will be seen from Tab B that Mr. Smith’s attitude was one of encouragement and I had hoped that a favorable decision might be 2 The reference letter, dated March 16, 1959, is not printed. (818.112/3–1659) 3 A copy of the summary of events is in OAP Files, Lot 61 D 7, “United Fruit Company: Costa Rica, 1958.”
