138
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Dayan on two occasions in this part of the discussion expressed his
concern that the imposition of a freeze on settlements would very
quickly be extended by the Arabs to apply to east Jerusalem, and Israel
could not make itself vulnerable to that.
Weizman emphasized the importance of the settlements in Israeli
psychology. He said the whole of Israel had been made and defended
on the basis of settlements. Secretary Brown noted that if Israel did not
have the Israeli Defense Forces—as had been the case earlier in its his-
tory—Weizman would have a stronger argument. Weizman then
asked Secretary Vance to confirm his understanding that the United
States is saying all settlements should disappear. Secretary Vance re-
plied, “In the Sinai, yes.”
Secretary Vance then turned to Weizman and told him that Presi-
dent Sadat believes there is agreement between Weizman and Gamasy
on the Sinai airfields. Weizman said that is not the case. Weizman then
got out a map to explain how difficult it is for Israel to substitute for the
Sinai airfields, particularly the one at Etzion near Eilat. Dayan thought-
fully suggested that maybe it would be possible to reach agreement at
Camp David on the airfields so that only the issue of the settlements
would stand between us and agreement. However, Dayan was not sure
this issue could be negotiated with Sadat. Secretary Vance said tenta-
tively he thought it would be desirable to try to resolve the airfield
problem with Sadat at Camp David, but he said he would want to think
about it and talk with the President.
Weizman said he did not want to sound as if he were suggesting a
tradeoff between the Sinai and the West Bank, but he thought that if Is-
rael knew how the West Bank problem were to be solved, it would be
much easier to deal with issues in the Sinai when the negotiations focus
there again. Dayan thought Israel should try to reach agreement at
Camp David between Sadat and Weizman on the military problems in
the Sinai and then return to the issue of the settlements. He wondered if
the Secretary would arrange another meeting between Weizman and
Sadat.
The Secretary replied by saying that he would want to give this
more thought and then suggested that the conversation return to the
West Bank. He said he understood what Dayan and Weizman had said
about the settlements there, told them he did not find their arguments
compelling but promised to report them to the President. Dayan re-
minded him for the third time that any freeze on settlements would ul-
timately come back to apply to Israeli population of annexed portions
of east Jerusalem. Alluding again to his idea of a plan for the settle-
ments, he said that we could perhaps deal with the Arab concern by ap-
plying a freeze at such points where the Arabs feel Israel will use the
settlements to limit Arab activity on the West Bank.
