Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
259
Evaluation, which we proposed last spring.3 For the next several years
experts will work together on every facet of the nuclear fuel cycle.
The scientists and the policymakers of these nations will face a tre-
mendous challenge. We know that by the year 2000, nuclear power re-
actors could be producing enough plutonium to make tens of thou-
sands of bombs every year.
I believe from my own personal knowledge of this issue that there
are ways to solve the problems that we face. I believe that there are al-
ternative fuel cycles that can be managed safely on a global basis. I
hope, therefore, that the International Fuel Cycle Evaluation will have
the support and the encouragement of every nation.
I’ve heard it said that efforts to control nuclear proliferation are fu-
tile, that the genie is already out of the bottle. I do not believe this to be
true. It should not be forgotten that for 25 years the nuclear club did not
expand its membership. By genuine cooperation, we can make certain
that this terrible club expands no further.
Now, I’ve talked about the special problems of nuclear arms con-
trol and nuclear proliferation at length. Let me turn to the problem of
conventional arms control, which affects potentially or directly every
nation represented in this great hall. This is not a matter for the future,
even the near future, but of the immediate present. Worldwide military
expenditures are now in the neighborhood of $300 billion a year.
Last year the nations of the world spent more than 60 times as
much—60 times as much—equipping each soldier as we spent edu-
cating each child. The industrial nations spent the most money, but the
rate of growth in military spending is faster in the developing world.
While only a handful of states produce sophisticated weapons, the
number of nations which seek to purchase these weapons is expanding
rapidly.
The conventional arms race both causes and feeds on the threat of
larger and more deadly wars. It levies an enormous burden on an al-
ready troubled world economy.
For our part, the United States has now begun to reduce its arms
exports. Our aim is to reduce both the quantity and the deadliness of
the weapons that we sell. We have already taken the first few steps, but
we cannot go very far alone. Nations whose neighbors are purchasing
large quantities of arms feel constrained to do the same. Supplier na-
3 The first International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation organizing session took
place at the Department of State October 19–21, and was attended by delegates from 40
countries and 4 international organizations (IAEA, Common Market, NEA, and IEA). For
a press release announcing the meeting, the President’s remarks at the October 19 ple-
nary session, and the text of the communique´ issued on October 21, see Department of
State Bulletin, November 14, 1977, pp. 659–664.
