914  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
challenge is difficult for us to meet. Even a major increase in U.S. force 
capability in the region may not ultimately enable us to meet it.
Issue #3
Facilities may be the weakest link in our strategy for filling the 
PG/IO vacuum—­but we should not discount the fact that men, lift, 
prepositioned stocks may also be in short supply. Even if facilities are 
the main problem, we should stick to our strategy of diversification. 
It makes political—­and I would think strategic—­sense to do so. If our 
military doctrines place a premium on large, individual base com-
plexes, we should review those doctrines, or at least their application in 
this part of the world. Also, the way to get to the modern staging bases 
that we need is through a policy of gradually increasing our presence 
and rights throughout the area, rather than a make-­or-­break effort for 
a few super-­bases.
DOD’s idea of trading U.S. security assurances and new assis-
tance to Israel for progress toward a comprehensive peace is worth 
considering.
But I am doubtful about seeking an explicit security-­for-­oil bargain 
with the Saudis. It’s been implicit in our policies for some time. But 
we can’t be so sure that the Saudis would so value an explicit security 
commitment that they would commit themselves to permit sure access 
to oil at reasonable prices. For they know that we are pursuing our own 
security interests, and that we will probably act to protect those inter-
ests whether or not we make a commitment. They also could doubt 
the strength of our security assurances if we threaten to go slow on 
security measures unless oil is guaranteed—­with consequent damage 
to our security position in the area.
Issue #4
I agree with Harold’s argument here and throughout the paper that 
we should (a) force the Soviets in peace and war to spread their defense 
effort and deployments against all three fronts (Europe, Southwest Asia 
and East Asia) so that they cannot concentrate against any one (e.g. 
redeploy from the Chinese border to Europe, and (b) discourage the 
Soviets from expanding a conflict beginning in one of these areas to the 
other two. But this strategy raises major problems if it means expand-
ing the geographical scope of Japan’s military role and our direct con-
tribution to China’s military capabilities.
[2 paragraphs (34 lines) not declassified].
On China, it has been my understanding that they are so far behind 
the Soviets that the provision of “certain carefully calculated defensive 
weaponry” would not make an appreciable difference. The Chinese 
currently tie down about one-­fourth of Soviet armed forces and about
