Arms Control and Disarmament 1509 Mr. Herter referred to the first item on the agenda for the meet­ ing (Tab A), noting that the U.K. has again pressed the State Depart­ ment for a decision on the issue of abandoning a link to disarmament in the Geneva nuclear test negotiations. He recalled that this matter had previously been discussed in an Interdepartmental Working Group after receipt of the U.S. Delegation’s recommendation that we revise our position as the U.K. suggested, and that all interested agencies but the Department of Defense had agreed with the Delegation’s recom­ mendation. He noted that the U.K. had wished to make a major pub­ lic announcement of the proposed change in position. He inquired whether the Department of Defense had considered this question fur­ ther and whether a unanimous recommendation might be made to the President on the matter. Mr. Irwin said that Secretary McElroy was out of town and he had not been able to discuss the matter with him. However, the joint Chiefs of Staff are strongly opposed to the proposed policy shift. General Loper said that he had discussed the question with Mr. Quarles who maintained his previous position that the link should not be dropped. Mr. Herter said that if this position were confirmed, we should arrange for a meeting with the President to present the varying views as soon as possible. In response to Mr. Irwin’s inquiry regarding the pros and cons of the issue, Ambassador Wadsworth said that our present position left us very vulnerable to Soviet propaganda and provided a screen behind which the Soviets could always retreat when they wished to evade coming to grips with the issue of control. On the one hand we are seeking to write precise control provisions into the treaty and on the other insisting on the vaguest sort of expression of relationship with disarmament, where it was impossible for us to be specific in response to Soviet probing as to just what we mean. The Delegation felt that there was no real way to fit generalized provisions about disarmament progress into a treaty dealing with another specific issue, test cessation, which we claim is not a disarmament measure. Also our best chance of keeping the British firm on controls is to meet them on the disarmament link point, which they consider academic in nature, and untenable before public opinion. Mr. McCone said that the Atomic Energy Commission viewed this question as one lying within the responsibility of the Departments of State and Defense. His personal view was that we should not attempt to write the criteria of disarmament progress into an article of the treaty, in view of our inability to be specific, but that some mention should be made of disarmament, as an objective rather than as a condition, in a preamble to the treaty. Lack of disarmament progress should not constitute a reason for dissolving the treaty. He felt that the preamble in the Soviet draft, which dealt only with nuclear disarmament, provided a good entry for similar preamble extended to cover other disarma­ ment aspects in our own draft. Dr. Killian said that he agreed with the
