Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX cautiously optimistic about prospects for approval.2 The Chancellery would soon be instructing the Foreign Office to begin consultations with the Embassy on these and other issues involving the Radios. FRG officials expressed some concern over cosmetics of prospective move of RFE/RL presidency from Washington to Munich and Gronouski agreed to look at matter from that perspective. Wide-ranging discussions also dealt with accreditation to Olympic Games, jamming, program content and possible change in nomenclature of Radios. End summary. 1. Board for International Broadcasting (BIB) Chairman Gronouski and BIB Executive Director Roberts visited Bonn November 28 and 29 to discuss RFE/RL affairs with FRG officials. Gronouski briefed Chancellery (Political Director Ruhfus) and Foreign Office (State Minister Von Dohnanyi; Deputy Assistant Secretary Meyer-Landrut; and Deputy Director of Office charged with Radio Affairs Bauch) officials on his perception of Radio’s functions and matters of current interest. Principal comments of Gronouski and German officials are summarized below: 2. Holzkirchen modernization: Gronouski outlined work of Eisenhower Commission, noting recommendation to upgrade outmoded transmitter equipment at Holzkirchen and other stations. This recommendation predated present administration and was a technical imperative if Radios were to transmit effectively. President Carter had agreed with this recommendation and result had been his March 22 request to upgrade transmitters. Foreign Office officials (Meyer-Landrut and Bauch) confirmed that Ministry supported request to modernize Holzkirchen. The Foreign Office would discuss with the Chancellery the political questions involved and would urge approval. While the Chancellor had reservations about an increasing presence of the Radios in Germany, they were cautiously optimistic that approval would be forthcoming. They cautioned, however, that approval could take some time and they
