184
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
cautiously optimistic about prospects for approval.2 The Chancellery
would soon be instructing the Foreign Office to begin consultations
with the Embassy on these and other issues involving the Radios. FRG
officials expressed some concern over cosmetics of prospective move
of RFE/RL presidency from Washington to Munich and Gronouski
agreed to look at matter from that perspective. Wide-ranging discus-
sions also dealt with accreditation to Olympic Games, jamming, pro-
gram content and possible change in nomenclature of Radios. End
summary.
1. Board for International Broadcasting (BIB) Chairman Gronouski
and BIB Executive Director Roberts visited Bonn November 28 and
29 to discuss RFE/RL affairs with FRG officials. Gronouski briefed
Chancellery (Political Director Ruhfus) and Foreign Office (State Minis-
ter Von Dohnanyi; Deputy Assistant Secretary Meyer-Landrut; and
Deputy Director of Office charged with Radio Affairs Bauch) officials
on his perception of Radio’s functions and matters of current interest.
Principal comments of Gronouski and German officials are summa-
rized below:
2. Holzkirchen modernization: Gronouski outlined work of Eisen-
hower Commission, noting recommendation to upgrade outmoded
transmitter equipment at Holzkirchen and other stations. This recom-
mendation predated present administration and was a technical imper-
ative if Radios were to transmit effectively. President Carter had agreed
with this recommendation and result had been his March 22 request
to upgrade transmitters.
Foreign Office officials (Meyer-Landrut and Bauch) confirmed that
Ministry supported request to modernize Holzkirchen. The Foreign
Office would discuss with the Chancellery the political questions
involved and would urge approval. While the Chancellor had reserva-
tions about an increasing presence of the Radios in Germany, they
were cautiously optimistic that approval would be forthcoming. They
cautioned, however, that approval could take some time and they
2 In telegram 20853 from Bonn, December 16, Stoessel advised Vest that approval
for the transmitter modernization would not be given before the end of the Belgrade
Conference and even then the full request might not be granted. “The present German
analysis,” Stoessel reported, “was that the increased power we were seeking would
enable transmissions from Holzkirchen to extend beyond its present target area into
Central Asia, where nationality problems are of particular concern to the Soviet Govern-
ment.” Stoessel advised Vest to stress in his upcoming meeting with West German
Foreign Ministry Political Director Klaus Blech “the importance the USG attaches to early
and favorable action on our application for upgrading the transmitters at Holzkirchen.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840086–0527, P800023–0911)
Vest raised the issue on December 20 with Blech who reported that the Foreign Ministry
had recommended approval of the U.S. application. (Telegram 304575 to Bonn, December
22; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840086–0683)
