Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Charter. If the objective is to develop relations, which he repeated is what the GDR desires, they should be guided by efforts to contribute to detente and should concentrate on such matters. He explained that he had said in the morning that the U.S. and the GDR should act in areas where progress is possible. This was basic to further development of relations. There will naturally be questions on which it will not be possible to agree, but these matters should not become obstacles to the progress that was possible. Ms. Derian noted that Dr. Nier had to leave momentarily for an appointment at the Commerce Department. She felt it was important, however, to cover two points. She said that the U.S. and the GDR have parallel objectives. Dr. Nier had spoken twice about the Final Act being a single entity that should not be divided up. But it is not possible to speak at the same time about all its aspects. Issues have to be addressed one at a time, and human rights is part of the Final Act. Ms. Derian said that the two countries were trying to make a new relationship. She feared she had failed to transmit the message that as steps are taken that build that new relationship, humanitarian matters, policies that affect people, were essential to our ability to move ahead. She understood the GDR position, but progress in the human area was necessary if we were to move ahead. Of course the GDR could say for years that all of these were internal matters, but if we want to go ahead, they must be addressed. She noted that there is a well-known board game where players are occasionally told, “return to go”. Perhaps relations were sometimes like that, but the U.S. wants to move ahead. Ms. Derian said she was grateful for the opportunity to talk with Dr. Nier again. It was frustrating just to begin and then to have to stop. She recalled that Dr. Nier had, in the Berlin conversation, commented that all countries had constitutions and seemed to discount them as not of much significance. She asked if that were also the GDR’s view of the Final Act. Dr. Nier said that he had not meant to give that impression, that the GDR’s constitution was filled with life and was not just words. The GDR had the same feeling about the Final Act. But this could not happen with just this or that part of the document. He believed there had been progress in the past few years. The situation should be compared with 1975 when the Final Act had been signed. The present situation in Europe reflects forward movement between states with different social systems. There was no reason why more progress could not be made, but there was a need to prepare carefully and thoroughly so that we could go forward. Ambassador Grunert spoke up and said he would be interested in ongoing discussions.
