World Hunger and Food Policy
919
277.
Memorandum From the Acting Director of the International
Development Cooperation Agency (Erb) to President Carter1
Washington, August 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Hunger Commission Report
As you directed,2 IDCA has led an interagency review of interna-
tional actions recommended by the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger. A preliminary report3 on this review was submitted to you be-
fore the Venice Summit.4 The attached memorandum summarizes the
interagency conclusions.
Based on the review, Tom Ehrlich and I believe that the two most
important steps to further the Commission’s work are these:
1. Development Assistance—We will propose in our 1982 budget
submission a strategy to focus increased attention and resources, not
only on meeting world hunger as the first priority, but also on targeting
agricultural development assistance where it can be used with max-
imum effectiveness and efficiency, as the Hunger Commission
proposes.
This strategy will be consistent with the Hunger Commission’s
finding that to relieve world hunger and malnutrition we must attack
world poverty and build effective demand for food as well as in-
creasing food production and supply. A key element of this strategy
will be assisting developing countries to increase food production. It
will also include complementary efforts in energy and health/family
planning which will permit us to address the broader poverty issue.
2. Public Education—As the Commission recommends, increased
public attention must be focused on the importance of the United
States’ cooperation with developing nations generally and on hunger
particularly. We are involved in a number of efforts on this front. We
hope you will assign that matter a high priority. Your personal leader-
ship will be essential.
Tom Ehrlich has met with Ambassador Linowitz and other
members of the Commission and we will work with them in the
1 Source: Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box FG–224, Ex-
ecutive, FG–311, 11/1/79–1/20/80. No classification marking. Attached is a September
11 note for the files summarizing the interagency review.
2 See the first attachment to Document 272.
3 Not found.
4 See Document 273 and footnote 10 thereto.
