356 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX him I did not intend to do so). He said he had no objection to my meeting with West Bank and Gaza Palestinians as he understood I would be doing that evening. He added, however, that he felt our Consulate General in Jerusalem was too active and should not take over the Israeli job of dealing with Palestinians. No American, he asserted, should negotiate with the West Bankers and Gazans since that, under the CDA, is an Israeli task. He said he knows that officials of ConGen Jerusalem sometimes have contacts with these people and are exercising an Israeli right. Begin said he had just received an intelligence report of threats against those who had met with Atherton. He said he is watching out for them but faces significant security problems, including the availability of large quantities of explosives in the area. He said he would soon be writing President Carter and would outline the security problem. In closing, Begin wished me success in my mission. 32. Ambassador Lewis said he would like to make one point before the meeting broke up. Under the American distribution of responsibilities, it is Embassy Tel Aviv that has responsibility for contacts in Gaza and the ConGen which carried out the function in the West Bank. What both are doing, Lewis stated, is exactly what I had said I was doing. We are quietly explaining the CDA and taking soundings of views. We were not negotiating. We had no intent to suplant the Israeli role. We are all on the same team, trying to implement the CDA and bring peace to the Middle East. We recognize the security problems related to our contacts but also know that the local inhabitants incur risks by their contacts with Israeli officials too. Begin nodded assent. If Begin has any question about what we are doing, Lewis said, he could ask and we would tell him frankly. I added that I held a similar meeting with Palestinians on the East Bank and believed I was sensitized to the problems associated with such contacts. 33. Comment: Begin was quite tense when the meeting began (he barely looked at me while shaking my hand), but loosened up as our talk went along, after I expressed recognition of the personally difficult time he had been having and gave him a chance to talk about it. Although markedly distressed with our replies to Hussein, he periodically punctuated his comments with humorous asides. He was always courteous, and emotional only when discussing the Jerusalem issue. 34. At the same time, he had obviously pored over our responses in his lawyerly way. He seemed genuinely hurt and unable to understand why we had departed from the agreed CDA language in responding to the King. My explanation appeared to make no dent on him and I think we can expect soon a lengthy letter to the President from Begin enumerating the Prime Minister’s grievances. The meeting served its purposes, however, in letting him put his initial reaction on the record and
