968  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
continuing political stability. Having brought its population growth 
under substantial control, Japan can prosper if it can retain access to 
US and other Free World markets, and will be in a position to take an 
increasing role as entrepreneur to the rest of non-­Communist Asia. 
Moreover, given such prosperity, Japan will probably be able to keep 
local leftists under control. Thus Japan will probably offer to the rest 
of Asia an example of economic growth and political stability achieved 
through means other than communism, and will probably continue to 
identify its interests in international political affairs with those of the 
West. On the other hand, there is strong domestic pressure in Japan 
for increased trade and official relations with Communist China; while 
some expansion in these relations is likely over the next few years, trade 
levels will probably be limited so long as Japan’s Western ties remain 
strong, and Japan is not likely to take steps that would seriously impair 
its relations with the US. Japan will probably evidence an increased 
independence of action in foreign policy. In any event we do not foresee 
that Japan will develop major military capabilities of its own nor that it 
would associate itself with any regional military alliance.
37. India, the other potential major power of non-­Communist Asia, 
is now subjected to Chinese Communist pressures such that, even if the 
present issues were to be resolved, there would be a lasting residue of 
anti-­Chinese and to a lesser extent anti-­Communist feeling. India’s rela­
tions with Pakistan will probably continue to improve, and India will 
seek to strengthen its northern border defenses and ties. It might also 
step up efforts to expand its influence in Southeast Asia so as to support 
non-Communist regimes far more than to date. Although India is not 
likely to alter its basic neutralist policy or to enter regional alliances, it 
may look more benevolently on Western policies.
38. Internally India faces many political difficulties, and its eco­
nomic progress will be slower than that of Communist China. However, 
if India achieves steady economic growth, it could provide an example 
in Asia of an underdeveloped country adhering to humane policies 
and to evolutionary rather than revolutionary change in social values. 
Such growth could only be attained by an effective and sustained effort 
within India, and would depend heavily also upon foreign aid.
39. Prospects for the Growth or Containment of Communist Influence. 
In general the non-­Communist nations of Asia are subject to the same 
attraction toward pragmatic neutralism as other underdeveloped areas. 
Communist Chinese pressure could operate to increase neutralist sen­
timent, but in some circumstances it might have the opposite effect of 
strengthening orientation toward the West and increasing sympathy 
with the US.
40. In light of the number of precarious situations cited above, 
there is a fair chance that a Communist regime will come to power in
