1122 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement emphasized the need for adequate planning and suggested that ICA could provide technical assistance in this regard. End Summary. Prime Minister Beltran stated that, since becoming Prime Minister nearly a year ago, he had proceeded to set Peru’s financial house in order by attacking the problems of balancing the budget, foreign exchange, stabilization of the currency, and so forth. Now the question is, what next? The Government is expected to do something, as the people need help and want results. The principal sectors the Government must now attack are those of land and housing. The land problem is one entailing the people’s desire to work their own lands. It is, however, not simply a matter of dividing existing large holdings in settled areas, as much of the settled land is the poorest— that is, the land in the high Sierras, at an average altitude of 12,000 feet, which has extremely poor soil. Much of this land, moreover, has been subdivided by the Indians into uneconomical, small holdings. The result is the Indians have begun to migrate to urban areas, forming squatters slums around the cities. Around Lima, for example, there are from 200 to 500 thousand squatters. There is, however, marvelous land to the East of the Andes, in the Amazon basin. There are two types of jungle here, the low swamps and the upper jungle. In the latter, at between 2,000 and 3,500 feet, one can grow practically everything. One can, for instance, grow several crops of corn and cocoa a year. The soil is good, there are no seasons, there is adequate rain, it is not hot, and the climate is healthy. Some Indians have already migrated to this region and established their own farms. Clearing is no problem, as they can grow crops among the fallen logs. They build simple houses of natural materials. They find they need additional labor, so bring down other Indians from the highlands who eventually establish their own farms. The Indians who have migrated thus far, however, live at a very low economic level since they cannot market their crops. What is needed to settle this region properly are penetration roads and feeder roads, which would facilitate settlement and provide access to markets. Also needed are community centers and experiment stations. This would then attract new generations of settlers and would satisfy large scale demands for land. Mr. Dillon asked whether the Indians were willing to settle these regions. Sr. Beltran replied in the affirmative, stating that many have already migrated. For example, from 20 to 25 thousand Indians from the Lake Titicaca region have migrated to the neighboring lowlands, perhaps 10 thousand of whom are permanent settlers. These settlers are making profits from their produce even though they have to carry it out on their own backs. With new highways a great many more people would be attracted to these new regions from both the mountains and the coast. Such an approach to the land problem would be different from the
