852 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement President Lemus of El Salvador, it does appear that if Somoza decides to make a trip to the United States for medical reasons that he should be encouraged to come at a time when it will be possible for him to have a short visit with President Eisenhower. Recommendation: 1) That no invitation be extended at this time to President Somoza to visit the United States, but that, if possible, it be arranged for him to see President Eisenhower and have conferences with other government officials should he elect to make an informal visit to the United States for a medical check up. 2) That we take no further action at present beyond informing Dr. Eisenhower of our position on this matter.4 4 There is no indication on the source text that Rubottom approved the recommendation. On January 30, 1959, in a memorandum to Brig. General Andrew J. Goodpaster at the White House, John A. Calhoun, Director of the State Department’s Executive Secretariat, recommended against inviting Somoza to the United States. (717.11/1–2359) NI–11. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan)1  Washington, January 31, 1959. Dear Tom: We have been unable to reach an agreement with ICA about the ­designation of an USOM Director in Managua and I feel that the best way of settling the matter is for you to come to Washington for consultation as soon as Louis Blanchard finishes his temporary assignment as Departmental escort officer for ex-President Lásaro Cárdenas. I expect that this will be in early February. We will send your travel orders and I hope that you can arrange to be in Washington for a week or ten days. Your presence here will be particularly helpful because we feel that President Luis Somoza faces a difficult situation in the near future and 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 61 D 473, “Nicaragua.” Confidential; Official-Informal. This letter was drafted by Stewart and cleared by Dreier, Murphy, Wieland, and Bernbaum. There is no indication on the source text that the letter was sent. The source text is a carbon copy bearing Rubottom’s typed name.
