Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
55
ability to fight if necessary is the best way to avoid the chance for or the
requirement to fight.”
Valeriani returned to this theme later in the debate, asking Carter if
he really believed that the United States was not the “most respected
country in world,” or if the statement was campaign rhetoric. Carter
answered:
“No, it’s not just campaign rhetoric. I think that militarily we are as
strong as any nation on Earth. I think we’ve got to stay that way and
continue to increase our capabilities to meet any potential threat. But as
far as strength derived from commitment to principles; as far as
strength derived from the people, the Congress, the Secretary of State,
the President, sharing in the evolution and carrying out of a foreign
policy; as far as strength derived from the respect of our own allies and
friends, their assurance that we will be staunch in our commitment,
that we will not deviate, and we will give them adequate attention; as
far as strength derived from doing what is right, caring for the poor,
providing food, becoming the breadbasket of the world instead of the
arms merchant of the world—in those respects we are not strong. Also,
we will never be strong again overseas unless we are strong at home.
And with our economy in such terrible disarray, and getting worse by
the month—we have got 500,000 more Americans unemployed today
than we had 3 months ago; we have got 2½ million more Americans out
of work now than we have when Mr. Ford took office—this kind of de-
terioration in our economic strength is bound to weaken us in the
world.
“And we not only have problems at home but we export those
problems overseas. So, as far as the respect of our own people toward
our own Government, as far as participation in the shaping of concepts
and commitments, as far as a trust of our country among the nations of
the world, as far as dependence of our country in meeting the needs
and obligations that we’ve expressed to our allies, as far as the respect
of our country, even among our potential adversaries, we are weak. Po-
tentially we are strong. Under this administration that strength has not
been realized.” (Public Papers: Ford, 1976–77, Book III, pages 2409–2410
and 2426)
12.
Editorial Note
During the 1976 Presidential campaign, Democratic candidate
Jimmy Carter asked Cyrus R. Vance, who had served as Secretary of the
