662 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. Yeagley said that he had nothing to add on the subject beyond what had been contained in the memorandum of the ICIS to the Executive Secretary dated January 26, 1959. Mr. Gray commented that all of us shared with the President a cer­ tain sense of frustration between the two horns of the dilemma but he too put hope in the outcome of the Greene v. McElroy case. If the decision of the Supreme Court should be adverse, he wondered whether new legis­ lation might help to remedy the internal security situation. The Attorney General replied that if the decision of the Supreme Court in Greene v. McElroy went the wrong way, new legislation was not likely to help any. The President inquired whether the subversive people we were talking about were all citizens of the U.S. The Attorney General replied that in most cases he understood that they were. The President added that if they were not citizens they could presumably be deported. The Attorney General agreed but again pointed out that most of them were citizens and added that we faced the same problem in industrial secu­ rity programs that we were facing in the matter of the Port Security program. Mr. Gray suggested that the Council take another look at the problem after the Supreme Court decision. The President concluded the discussion by stating that if he had his way, the retreat would be a slow one if the decision of the Supreme Court were unfavorable in the case of Greene v. McElroy. The National Security Council: a. Noted and discussed the subject in the light of the report by the Department of Justice on the implementation of NSC Action No. 1862–­f (transmitted by the reference memorandum of ­January 7), the views of the Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference and the Interdepart­ mental Committee on Internal Security (transmitted by the reference memoranda of January 26), the letter from the Attorney General to the Director, Bureau of the Budget, on the subject, dated February 25, 1959 (circulated at the meeting), and the discussion in the Planning Board (presented orally at the meeting by the Special Assistant to the Presi­ dent for National Security Affairs). b. Agreed that the submission of the draft legislation and Exec­ utive Order called for in NSC Action 1862–­f should be held in abey­ ance pending the “legislative and judicial developments with respect to other personnel security programs” referred to in the memorandum by the Department of Justice enclosed with the reference memorandum of January 7 and the letter from the Attorney General to the Director, Bureau of the Budget, dated February 25, 1959. c. Noted that the Treasury Department will nevertheless continue to implement, so far as possible, the provisions of paragraph 19 of NSC 5802/1, and of paragraph 8 of the Port Security program approved by the President on April 21, 1958, relating to the exclusion of subversives from vessels, ports and waterfront facilities. d. Noted that, although recent court decisions make it impossible to carry out certain internal security programs effectively, it is never­ theless important that the responsible agencies of the Executive Branch
