North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 903 Development and Assistance Act of 1954 which became effective on October 1, 1977.2 The amendment provides: “Sec. 112. (a) No agreement may be entered into under this title to finance the sale of agricultural commodities to the government of any country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights, including torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, prolonged detention without charges, or other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty, and the security of person, unless such agreement will directly benefit the needy people in such country. An agreement will not directly benefit the needy people in the country for purposes of the preceding sentence unless either the commodities themselves or the proceeds from their sale will be used for specific projects or programs which the President determines would directly benefit the needy people of that country. The agreement shall be used to benefit the needy people and shall require a report to the President on such use within six months after the commodities are delivered to the recipient country. “(b) To assist in determining whether the requirements of subsection (a) are being met, the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate or the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives may require the President to submit in writing information demonstrating that an agreement will directly benefit the needy people in a country. “(c) . . . “(d) The President shall transmit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President of the Senate, and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate, in the annual presentation materials on planned programming of assistance under this Act, a full and complete report regarding the steps he has taken to carry out the provisions of this section.” Twenty-nine countries are scheduled to receive PL 480, Title I assistance during FY 78. They are listed under Tab 1.3 State, AID and Agriculture are complying with the new statutory requirement set forth above by seeking to include a new provision in the FY 78, PL 480, Title I agreements with certain countries. The new provision, calling for assurances that the food or the proceeds therefrom are used for needy 2 In November 9 memorandum, Katz, Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Patricia Derian, and Deputy AID Administrator Robert Nooter requested Christopher’s decision on how the amendment to Title I of P.L. 480 (P.L. 95–88) should be implemented. (Ibid.) In a November 22 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tuchman provided background on both the issue and how it was being pursued. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 49, PL 480: 11/77–1/80) Both memoranda are printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Documents 86 and 88. 3 Tab 1, attached but not printed, is a list entitled “Countries Scheduled to Receive PL 480, Title I Assistance During FY 78.” The following countries are on the list: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Korea, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Tanzania, Tunisia, Zaire, and Zambia.
