International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1083 extensively, including one of the most authoritative works in the field, Law and the Status of Women.4 Dr. Lee is currently in the Office of the Coordinator of Population Affairs. Although OES has a stake in advancing the status of women, it is not appropriate for the U.S. to be arguing the case for women’s and children’s rights on grounds of their impact on fertility rates. The issues are more clearly related to concerns of HA, not OES. We therefore recommend that a position be established in HA, to be filled by Dr. Lee, covering the international status and rights of women, children, and the elderly. We do not believe it feasible to cut the population affairs position in order to achieve this change. The staff of the Coordinator is, in fact, being reduced from five to four officer positions. The departure of Marshall Green and his replacement by a less senior FSO has already drawn criticism from Congress and from private institutions, on grounds that this represents a down-grading of the Department’s commitment to population issues.5 The Chairman of the House Select Committee on Population has requested a personal meeting with Secretary Vance to press his concerns on the Department’s role and activities in this area, and the Secretary has agreed to see him. Recent reaffirmation by the Secretary of the importance of population issues in our foreign policy has somewhat mollified Congressional and other criticism, but it is obvious that the Department is being closely watched by the population community. The loss of another population position would certainly raise new questions—especially at a time when responsibilities in this area, including coordination of expanding AID and nongovernmental programs, preparation and implementation of U.S. international development strategies for the Third Development Decade, and the complex interrelationships of population growth with such global issues as world hunger, the environment, unemployment, urbanization, energy and resources, etc.—are clearly growing. Mrs. Benson agrees with these recommendations. 4 Presumable reference to material Lee published in conjunction with a 1976–1977 issue of the Columbia Human Rights Law Review examining the legal status of women in numerous countries. 5 See Documents 318 and 321.
