Human Rights 473 144. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, May 10, 1978 SUBJECT Improved Coordination of Decisions on Economic and Military Programs in Light of Human Rights Considerations Cy: This memorandum analyzes the problems we have discussed concerning the lack of coordination in our decision-making on economic and military assistance issues as affected by human rights considerations. It then proposes a remedy which I think will be effective and ought to be implemented promptly. The Problem There is a pressing need to assure greater coordination of our decisions on economic and military programs in light of human rights considerations. Under current procedures, human rights review of economic programs is essentially divorced from human rights review of military programs. Moreover, such human rights review as does occur as to both types of programs has not always entailed coordinated consideration of our other fundamental foreign policy interests, in addition to human rights. More specifically, under current procedures, on military assistance PM conducts a case-by-case review of military issues raising human rights concerns. This review is conducted in accordance with procedures developed by the Arms Export Control Board (AECB) which provide for full participation by HA, S/P, the relevant regional bureau, AID, and ACDA (when the transfer has significant arms control implications). Where differences of view on human rights issues cannot be resolved through these procedures, the matter has been decided through appeal to T and then, if the dispute persists, through Action Memoranda to the Secretary (or the Deputy Secretary if he is acting for the Secretary in the matter). Attempts to resolve the differences at the Bureau level have sometimes produced lengthy delays. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 8, Memoranda to the Secretary—1978. No classification marking. Christopher sent the memorandum to Vance under a May 23 covering memorandum, indicating that in light of discussions held on May 22, he thought “the best course will be for me to put the attached memorandum back in my drawer for the time being.” (Ibid.)
