Human Rights
473
144.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, May 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Improved Coordination of Decisions on Economic and Military Programs in
Light of Human Rights Considerations
Cy:
This memorandum analyzes the problems we have discussed con-
cerning the lack of coordination in our decision-making on economic
and military assistance issues as affected by human rights consider-
ations. It then proposes a remedy which I think will be effective and
ought to be implemented promptly.
The Problem
There is a pressing need to assure greater coordination of our deci-
sions on economic and military programs in light of human rights con-
siderations. Under current procedures, human rights review of eco-
nomic programs is essentially divorced from human rights review of
military programs. Moreover, such human rights review as does occur
as to both types of programs has not always entailed coordinated con-
sideration of our other fundamental foreign policy interests, in addi-
tion to human rights.
More specifically, under current procedures, on military assistance
PM conducts a case-by-case review of military issues raising human
rights concerns. This review is conducted in accordance with proce-
dures developed by the Arms Export Control Board (AECB) which pro-
vide for full participation by HA, S/P, the relevant regional bureau,
AID, and ACDA (when the transfer has significant arms control impli-
cations). Where differences of view on human rights issues cannot be
resolved through these procedures, the matter has been decided
through appeal to T and then, if the dispute persists, through Action
Memoranda to the Secretary (or the Deputy Secretary if he is acting for
the Secretary in the matter). Attempts to resolve the differences at the
Bureau level have sometimes produced lengthy delays.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 8, Memoranda to the Secretary—1978.
No classification marking. Christopher sent the memorandum to Vance under a May 23
covering memorandum, indicating that in light of discussions held on May 22, he
thought “the best course will be for me to put the attached memorandum back in my
drawer for the time being.” (Ibid.)
