January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1253
see no virtue in any alternate negotiating forum so long as serious ne-
gotiations are underway and both sides want them to continue.
—With respect to the present “postponement” in the negotiations
that Sadat has brought about, the Egyptians are clearly upset by certain
actions the Israelis have taken, but they assure us that they have no in-
tention of breaking off the negotiations. We are in touch with both sides
and are urging a resumption of the negotiations at an early date. We
can understand the frustrations which each side periodically feels but
past experience has shown that a tenacious application to the negotiat-
ing process is the best way ultimately to resolve the issues.
5. In making these points, we would like you to find the occasion to
place them in the context of the President’s desire to maintain strong
and close relations with your respective host countries. We want to
continue our dialogue on the peace process, and we hope both gov-
ernments will agree with our view that it is of utmost importance to do
this in a manner which preserves our overall cooperation for the vital
strategic objectives we share.
Muskie
376.
Letter From the Israeli Ambassador to the United States
(Evron) to President Carter1
Washington, May 20, 1980
My dear Mr. President,
I have been asked by Prime Minister Begin to transmit to you the
following message:
“Dear Mr. President,
I thank you for your letter of May 15 which Ambassador Lewis de-
livered to me on his return to Israel.2
Indeed, the Ambassador, in the course of our discussion, added
valuable details concerning the developments. Among other matters he
made it clear to me that you, Mr. President, wrote your letter before
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Israel: Prime Minister Menachem
Begin, 3–12/80. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right-hand corner of the letter, indi-
cating that he saw the document.
2 See footnote 4, Document 370.
