1957  1401
demonstration of sincerity and good faith on the part of your author­
ities. I profoundly regret that your side has not seen fit to take such 
action. Even now, however, release of these prisoners would have a 
most favorable effect on the atmosphere of our meetings here as we 
continue to discuss the other issues before us.”
2. Wang replied. He had listened carefully to the review I had 
made of the two year old negotiations on which I had tried to draw 
a balance sheet for the past two years. However, he could discover 
no new factors or elements in the new statement which I had made at 
great length and taking great time. The essential issue before us is an 
old one, that is, how are we going to settle disputes between our two 
countries and how tensions between us in the Taiwan area are going to 
be relaxed. In the course of the negotiations we have disputed at great 
length our respective points of view on this issue. Now let us recognize 
that we could not bring about agreement in respect to the positions of 
the two sides. If we could have done so, he would assume we would 
have already reached agreement long before. However, to repeat old 
arguments and old positions gives no help to the present discussions.
3. Wang continued. They have agreed to the idea of making a dec­
laration by the two sides on the renunciation of force. Indeed, they have 
put forward a number of drafts of such a declaration. The objective 
of any declaration must be to find ways and means for settlement of 
disputes between the two countries in the Taiwan area so that tension 
there could be relaxed. The proposals my side has put forward under 
cover of so-­called renunciation of force, and unreasonable position con­
tained therein have long been refuted by his side. Our side’s attempts to 
get them to recognize the present situation of American occupation of 
Taiwan under cover of what we call right of self-­defense are futile and 
wishful thinking.
4. Wang continued. During long discussions during the two years 
of these talks U.S. side has shown it does not have serious desire to 
improve Sino-American relations or relax tensions in the Taiwan area 
because our side continues to carry out a hostile policy toward China. 
Even in the course of these talks, our side has never ceased to create 
tensions in the Taiwan area and around the territory of his country. That 
is the fundamental problem which still exists.
5. If the United States is not going to give up a policy of hostility 
and subversion and aggression against the PRC, and indulge in empty 
talk of renunciation of force, this can only be termed as a deceiving tac­
tic. He did not see how it would get us anywhere or give us any help in 
our present talk to repeat the old arguments made this morning.
6. Wang continued. I had suggested at the last meeting a new 
departure. However, he did not feel my statement this morning is 
prompted by the idea of a new departure.
