1226 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX of “legislative authority,” he would try to skirt the issue, and not use the words, but try to ensure that the SGA has the powers that it needs. There are no other specific issues. The rest of the problems are like the one on what to do with water. If we can use . . . that is the beauty of the Continuing Committee, if we use it to make unnecessary agreement now on all details. The President agreed. Ambassador Linowitz said that Begin should like this—since it means that everything doesn’t have to be decided now. The President said that even if Begin wants it, he won’t agree on it. He likes to run down a string of tedious points, to see what they can be traded for. Finally he gets to the point of making major concessions. Ambassador Linowitz asked if he could introduce a sensitive point: when—and he would like to keep this open—he should break off and come home early, if he hits a roadblock. This would show that we are serious. The President said that when Ambassador Linowitz asks him, he will say yes. In fact, Ambassador Linowitz will be more reluctant than he will be to have the Ambassador come home. Ambassador Linowitz said he just wants authority to do it. The President said he guesses that Egypt would pull out first. Ambassador Linowitz said that if Israel is not forthcoming on security, then Egypt might pull out then. He will tell this to Begin. The President said that maybe he should send a message to Sadat, and even do so early, so it will arrive by the time that the Ambassador gets there. He will ask that Sadat permit a few days for security to be discussed. Or he would ask that Sadat not pull his people out over security—this is better. Ambassador Linowitz said that this is good; it will keep the talks going. The President said he would tell Sadat that we have plans for making progress on schedule, not just for discussions. Before Sadat decides to withdraw, even under difficult circumstances, Sadat should consult with him (the President) first. Ambassador Linowitz said that this is a great idea. The President said that, where possible, the Ambassador should (in his approach) quote Camp David directly. Even if it is a matter of three words, this would be better. Ambassador Linowitz said he knows. Begin is almost Biblical about it! The President said almost.
