other Party which it deemed to be inadvisable. The agreement to make a special
protocol with undefined terms, did not mean that either Party was bound to make an
agreement unsatisfactory to itself provided it did not act in bad faith. Further, as the
special protocol was to be made by sovereign States, it must also be deemed to be
implied in the agreement set forth in Article 3 that these States should act respectively
in accordance with their constitutional methods, and bad faith is not to be predicated
upon the refusal of ratification of a particular proposed protocol deemed by the
ratifying authority to be unsatisfactory. In order to justify either Party in claiming to be
discharged from performance, something more must appear than the failure of
particular negotiations or the failure to ratify particular protocols. There must be found
an intent to frustrate the carrying out of the provisions of Article 3 with respect to the
plebiscite; that is, not simply the refusal of a particular agreement proposed thereunder,
because of its terms, but the purpose to prevent any reasonable agreement for a
plebiscite. While there should be no hesitation in finding such intent, or bad faith, if
established, and in holding the Party guilty thereof to the consequences of its action, it
is plain that such a purpose should not be lightly imputed. Undoubtedly, the required
proof may be supplied by circumstantial evidence, but the onus probandi of such a
charge should not be lighter where the honor of a Nation is involved than in a case
where the reputation of a private individual is concerned. A finding of the existence of
bad faith should be supported not by disputable inferences but by clear and convincing
evidence which compels such a conclusion.
It is unnecessary to review in detail the history of the negotiations between the Parties.
To determine whether Peru has sustained her burden of proof with respect to the course
of negotiations requires a painstaking examination of the diplomatic exchanges
between the two countries which fill hundreds of pages in the record. This examination
has been made and its results can be stated in a brief compass.
SUMMARY OF NEGOTIATIONS
Formal negotiations to arrive at the terms of the special protocol for a plebiscite were
begun in 1892’ and were diligently prosecuted for several months in formal
conferences, the debates in which covered the principal questions which had arisen
between the two governments, including the boundary questions which have been
submitted in the present arbitration, and resulted in the Jimenez- Solar exchanges of
January 26, 1894, which, however, left open the most vital conditions of the plebiscite.
The negotiations were continued, but the ten-year period expired without further
progress being made, and they were then interrupted, and the gains already made were
largely lost by a cabinet crisis in Chile and the death of the President of Peru. In the
early part of 1895, civil disturbances in Peru resulted in the establishment of a
Provisional Board of Government with which the Chilean Minister opened negotiations
in August, 1895, which were carried through numerous conferences and ended by an
exchange of notes in February, 1896, disclosing the respective views which had been
