1580  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
favorable response US position. Question of timing announcement of 
such a fall-­back position requires consideration. On balance delega­
tion believes that it would be better to have such announcement made 
immediately after recess and probably in Presidential letter. It would 
then have maximum impact in lessening disappointments occasioned 
by recess of Geneva negotiations. If announcement were deferred until 
close of Disarmament Commission meeting we would also be exposed 
to pressures for various different kinds of schemes and would not have 
advantage of starting out with own proposal.
4. We do not believe a meeting of Disarmament Commission can 
be avoided in any event and also think it could serve useful purpose 
from US point of view. Accordingly believe US and UK should take 
initiative in calling for Disarmament Commission meeting to consider 
results of negotiation thus far. Believe it might be difficult to get resolu­
tion in Disarmament Commission which clearly states acceptable basis 
for resumption of negotiations. Accordingly tentatively believe type of 
resolution should be sought which gives general endorsement impor­
tance effective international control and suggests that governments 
concerned attempt to reach agreed basis for further negotiations.
5. We believe some merit in idea appearing to keep negotiations 
going by some continuing discussion through diplomatic channels. 
Such discussion might be labelled as devoted to purpose of establishing 
sound basis for resumption negotiations and in particular for achieving 
preliminary agreements on basic issue of control adequate to warrant 
resumption Geneva talks. Call for further negotiations through diplo­
matic channels might therefore be included in Disarmament Commis­
sion resolution.
6. Believe some consideration should be given to utility consider­
ation question resumption of negotiations in proposed Foreign Min­
isters meeting in German problem. It might be difficult to find good 
reason for not having discussion this question on the side by three pow­
ers concerned at such a meeting if Soviets or members DC proposed 
such discussion. If it were desired to avoid such discussion at Foreign 
Minister meeting possibility might be explored having disarmament 
meeting begin two weeks or so after beginning Foreign Ministers meet­
ing rather than shortly after recess. If on other hand no major objection 
to discussing question on side at Foreign Ministers meeting this might 
be used as one response to kind of resolution in Disarmament Commis­
sion suggested above.
Villard
