Haiti  783
reasons had been given to him (he was Haitian representative on the 
joint development council at the time) and he was assured that funds 
were available for repairing Hurricane Hazel damage but the result 
was that very little assistance was forthcoming. Mr. Warner assured 
Ambassador Bonhomme that this is not the case now and that the United 
States is prepared to cooperate with the Haitian Government to carry 
out an effective program. He said he was not familiar with the situation 
in 1956 but that it has been our intention and still is to do everything 
we can to be of assistance in overcoming the problem in Haiti which 
we recognize as being serious and urgent. He said that we assume, and 
hope that the Haitian Government assumes, as a basic premise that 
there is good will and good faith on both sides and that with such an 
assumption, we would like to get down to specifics, identifying what 
the specific problems are and trying to work out specific solutions. Mr. 
Warner stated that as we see the situation, the next step in the Poté Colé 
project and in the Artibonite valley is for the Haitian Government to 
nominate the key personnel who are needed before activities can be 
fully resumed.
When asked again what specific problems he saw in the situation, 
Ambassador Bonhomme hesitated and then said that the question 
appeared to him to be one of general atmosphere. He thought that in 
some cases United States technicians had gone farther than they should 
in carrying out their advisory roles. The Ambassador thought that in a 
situation such as we have in Haiti, people should perhaps be allowed 
to make mistakes. The Ambassador seemed to be implying that United 
States advisors are sometimes paternalistic in their actions and that 
this had offended the dignity and self-­esteem of Haitian officials. 
The Ambassador was not specific other than to mention Mr. Yoe and 
Minister Philippeaux in this connection.
Ambassador Bonhmme also remarked that some of the best-­
qualified Haitian technical and administrative personnel are not polit-
ically in sympathy with the Duvalier administration. He thought that 
part of the assistance program should be to train technicians rather than 
to expect to find technicians already qualified. Mr. Warner commented 
that we realize the program cannot operate in a political vacuum and 
we recognize that political considerations have to be taken into account 
by the Duvalier government. We consider that President Duvalier is the 
best judge of the Haitian political picture. However, if there are political 
objections to individual Haitian employees, we think it would be better 
to talk over the situation ahead of the time instead of having the man 
abruptly fired. In this connection, Mr. Warner asked the Ambassador 
whether he thought the basic principle of having mutually acceptable 
personnel working in the program was a desirable principle from a
