1956 711 action by his government with respect Americans in his country could have promptly and quickly settled whole problem of return of civilians. 19. I said, however, he stated that his government not willing take simple steps necessary to match action taken by my govern­ ment which would have disposed of problem, but insisted on third power arrangement. Although it clear that only action by his gov­ ernment could remove impediments to departure of Americans from his country, in order meet his point of view I agreed with such third power arrangement. I even accepted his position there be no ­specific time limit set within which action to permit all Americans return would be completed, and agreed to his suggestion that simply term “expeditously” be used in this regard. Thus agreement was finally reached on our announcement September 10 last year, first agree­ ment between us. 20. I said as I pointed out to him at time, people of my country would interpret agreement to mean just what it said and would expect expeditious return from his country of all Americans who desired return. Agreement was received with much satisfaction my country and there was general hope that it portended opening of new phase in peaceful resolution of other questions between us. Additional announcement of release 10 Americans on day of agreement greatly encouraged belief that remaining 19 Americans would in fact quickly be released in accordance pledge made by his govt in announcement. Thereby this problem and irritant in our relations would quickly be removed. 21. I said, thus, if his govt genuinely desired establish conditions for improvement our relations and atmosphere which would permit fruitful discussion questions it desired raise, it had it entirely in its power and ability do so by simply carrying out promptly and in good faith clear commitment into which it had freely entered. 22. I said, however, his govt appeared deliberately to be dissipating these possibilities. Instead of carrying out its commitment in prompt and straightforward manner that would command respect and confi­ dence, it brings forward all kinds excuses and involved rationalizations for not doing what it full well knows it said it would do. Longer it delays in carrying out its pledged word, more inevitable is conclusion by American people, as well as people of world, that purpose is to con­ tinue hold these unfortunate human beings as political hostages. I was reluctant to come to conclusion his govt adopting such abhorrent pol­ icy but from statements made by his govt and continued failure release these people it increasingly difficult for me avoid doing so. 23. I said I also concerned with increasingly obdurate attitude his govt adopting concerning our simple and straightforward proposal Oct 8 and its persistent attempts misrepresent that proposal. I had at
