International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
431
Mike Blumenthal said in his speech to the Press Club that the
measure of a successful Summit is what happens in the year that
follows.3
The measure of the Bonn Summit will be:
—whether the Germans and Japanese propose additional expan-
sion to their parliaments this fall, and if so how much;
—whether the British and French make MTN trade concessions—
either before or after the Summit;4
—whether your energy program prospers—having been more
helped than hurt by what you did at the Summit;
—whether increased energy R&D and investment by Summit
countries follows;
—whether the pledges for increased aid to LDCs are fulfilled.
I’m more worried about whether these later actions will take place
than I am about the ability (which I suspect will be considerable) of the
heads of government at Bonn to portray what they have achieved as a
success. Limited and ineffective follow-up could lead to growing re-
crimination and divisions and, more importantly, to lost opportunities
after the Summit.
It is trite to say that we are at a turning point, but in this case it
seems to be true. The industrial world is poised between a relapse into
protectionism and an advance which will, if it is to take place at all,
have to extend to growth and energy, as well as trade. Bonn may not
decide the issue, but it could give things a substantial impulse one way
or another—not only by what is said in Declaration, but even more by
what you and the other heads of government agree about effective
follow-up.
At best, Bonn will be a modest success. But even a modest success
could make a considerable difference in determining what directions
things take in the year that follows.
3 Blumenthal spoke before the National Press Club on June 30; a report on his re-
marks was published in the July 1 edition of The Washington Post. (Hobart Rowen, “Blu-
menthal Sees Danger in Fed Policy,” The Washington Post, July 1, 1978, p. D8)
4 Under cover of a July 4 memorandum, Owen forwarded three letters on the multi-
lateral trade negotiations to Carter for his signature: one to Giscard, one to Schmidt, and
one to Jenkins. Noting that Strauss had requested that Carter send the letters, Owen re-
minded him that “a large gap still separates the US from EC positions in these negotia-
tions and a powerful political impulse will be required to close it.” Carter signed the
letters, which are dated July 5. In the letter to Giscard, Carter expressed hope that the EC
and the United States could reach “agreement on key issues in the Geneva trade negotia-
tions prior to the Bonn Summit.” In the letter to Schmidt, Carter expressed hope that
Schmidt could “convince your colleagues that the Community must be sufficiently flex-
ible to negotiate a mutually satisfactory multilateral trade agreement.” In the letter to
Jenkins, Carter asserted the need for Jenkins’ leadership to secure U.S.–EC agreement on
a trade deal. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 12, Europe: 1978)
