Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 298. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, September 27, 1979 SUBJECT Military Assistance Program for Egypt (U) As you know, the PRC met last week to consider how to respond to the Egyptian request for a five-year program of military cooperation and assistance. As indicated in the summary notes at Tab B,2 Cy Vance, Harold Brown and I agree that a major program is required. Jim McIntyre has submitted his comments separately at Tab A, rightly pointing out the budgetary implications of a very substantial, long-term security relationship with Egypt. (S) Egypt’s very large military establishment is facing massive obsolescence in the near future. There is no inexpensive quick fix for this situation. There is also no realistic probability that other sources of military support will soon appear. The questions which Jim raises in his memorandum underline the difficulties which we all recognize are associated with a program of sufficient size to respond to Egypt’s needs. A high-level Defense delegation visited Egypt in mid-August for frank and detailed discussions of the military supply problems Egypt faces.3 Our own subsequent analysis of the $8 billion Egyptian request concluded that a program in the neighborhood of $4.35 billion is required to meet Sadat’s basic military and political needs over the next five We do not underestimate the difficulties of presenting a program of this magnitude on the Hill, and we recognize that it would be used as leverage to increase Israel’s current aid levels. However, it is our reading of the mood on the Hill that the Egyptian predicament is understood and viewed with considerable sympathy. That viewpoint is substantiated by the findings of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Staff, which recently conducted a fact-finding visit to Egypt. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 77, PRC
