968
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
298.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Military Assistance Program for Egypt (U)
As you know, the PRC met last week to consider how to respond
to the Egyptian request for a five-year program of military cooperation
and assistance. As indicated in the summary notes at Tab B,2 Cy Vance,
Harold Brown and I agree that a major program is required. Jim McIn-
tyre has submitted his comments separately at Tab A, rightly pointing
out the budgetary implications of a very substantial, long-term security
relationship with Egypt. (S)
Egypt’s very large military establishment is facing massive obso-
lescence in the near future. There is no inexpensive quick fix for this sit-
uation. There is also no realistic probability that other sources of mili-
tary support will soon appear. The questions which Jim raises in his
memorandum underline the difficulties which we all recognize are as-
sociated with a program of sufficient size to respond to Egypt’s needs.
A high-level Defense delegation visited Egypt in mid-August for frank
and detailed discussions of the military supply problems Egypt faces.3
Our own subsequent analysis of the $8 billion Egyptian request con-
cluded that a program in the neighborhood of $4.35 billion is required
to meet Sadat’s basic military and political needs over the next five
years. (S)
We do not underestimate the difficulties of presenting a program
of this magnitude on the Hill, and we recognize that it would be used as
leverage to increase Israel’s current aid levels. However, it is our
reading of the mood on the Hill that the Egyptian predicament is un-
derstood and viewed with considerable sympathy. That viewpoint is
substantiated by the findings of the Senate Foreign Relations Com-
mittee Staff, which recently conducted a fact-finding visit to Egypt.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 77, PRC
123, 9/20/79, Egypt. Secret. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the memorandum, indi-
cating that he saw the document. The memorandum was found attached to an October 1
covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance and Brown, directing them to produce
by October 8 a joint State/Defense decision paper examining the implications of a
long-term military assistance program for Egypt and advising them of Carter’s view that
“we be cautious about excessive U.S. commitments” and that “budget constraints will be
very severe.” (Ibid.)
2 See Document 296.
3 See footnote 4, Document 274.
