Human Rights versy within the institutions, including accusations that the U.S. is politicizing them. Korea and the Philippines have considered sponsoring a “motion of regret” in the ADB Board over U.S. human rights initiatives in that bank. Nigeria and India have questioned the use of IFIs as a tool to bring about human rights improvements. Argentina may seek a legal opinion from the IDB on whether charter provisions prohibiting politicization are violated by our human rights initiatives. There have been indications that other LDCs may take similar steps. While we believe it is legitimate to bring human rights considerations to bear in the IFIs, the reaction of various LDCs makes it clear that we must handle the issue with great—Treasury would say greater—sensitivity to ensure we do not alter the apolitical characters of the IFIs and impede their effectiveness in promoting development. Towards this end, we think it desirable to the extent feasible to implement our policies discreetly by working behind the scenes rather than generating open confrontation in the bank boards. Thus, in opposing a loan because of human rights violations, we have been making our reasons clear beforehand to the government of the borrowing country and its executive director, as well as to other governments with whom we are consulting, but have generally refrained from mentioning human rights at the board meetings. To increase the likelihood that other countries will support us, we will be intensifying our efforts to consult with them on how to reflect human rights considerations in long-term bank lending programs in ways which would reduce the number of cases where an opposition vote of the U.S. would be required. We will also help to achieve this goal by relying increasingly on “rewards” rather than “sanctions” in furthering our human rights objectives in the IFIs over the longer term. Some LDC’s also have argued that donor emphasis in the IFIs and elsewhere on human rights and basic human needs is, in actuality, both moral imperialism and an excuse for reducing aid. Frequently LDC’s have claimed that human rights initiatives stress observance of “Western-style” human rights, i.e., the rights of the individual and political rights. They claim this ignores basic economic rights, such as the right to be adequately clothed, fed and housed, the right to education and to adequate medical care, etc. We believe our human rights initiatives do not warrant this criticism. We have repeatedly taken the position that our human rights policy seeks to promote economic and social rights as well as rights of the person and civil and political liberties. Our support of bilateral and multilateral assistance for the needy in countries with questionable human rights records demonstrates the importance we attach to economic and social rights.
