3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
886
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Gromyko agreed that our countries need to have confidence in
each other. But he decried the flood of US hostile propaganda against
the Soviet Union. All aspects of Soviet life are attacked by people totally
unconcerned about facts. This takes place every day in the US, in-
cluding at the top levels. The Soviet Union and its foreign policy are de-
scribed as the epitome of evil. This kind of propaganda is “not our
style,” Gromyko said, and we carefully weighed our reaction. Finally
we concluded that it would be a sign of weakness not to reply.
In the US we recognize that the tone of the media is set by the Ad-
ministration, which is following a policy designed to prejudice the le-
gitimate interests of the USSR. It is true that our confidence has been
undermined by this official Washington line and we do not know how
much time it will take to restore it.
Turning to SALT II the USSR believes that if the US Administration
took a stand for ratification this would not be hard to achieve. But we
are uncertain if Administration statements to the Congress are de-
signed to support ratification or undermine the Treaty. Objectively
they undermine it. A typical statement devotes one phrase to saying
the Treaty is mutually advantageous and then devotes 25 phrases to
undermining it. In fact the Administration pigeon-holed the Treaty be-
fore the Afghanistan question arose. In this connection, Secretary
Muskie’s references to the Afghan question won’t work.
Afghanistan
Gromyko went on to say that he would like to state the Soviet posi-
tion on Afghanistan so that it would not be necessary to return to this
question. The USSR has described the real situation in its correspond-
ence with the President and the Secretary and Gromyko explained it
to Muskie at Vienna. The USSR sent in its limited contingent in ac-
cordance with the Soviet-Afghan Treaty and Article 51 of the UN
Charter—a very good article which the US and the USSR wrote at San
Francisco. We said from the outset that we would withdraw as soon as
there is a guaranteed end to armed intrusions from the outside and if
there are effective agreements between Afghanistan on the one hand
and Iran and Pakistan on the other.
Gromyko said that he believed that the US did not in fact doubt
that the Soviet Union would live up to its word. If we didn’t, what posi-
tion would we be in? The US simply does not wish to admit this
publicly.
The continued incursions into Afghanistan are the fault of Pakistan
and Iran is also not without sin. While large-scale gangs no longer cross
the border, small bands of terrorists burn and loot the villages. You
won’t win this war, Gromyko said. We will keep our word and won’t
get out until there is a guaranteed and secured end to outside intru-
