Guatemala 719 GT–31. Letter from President Eisenhower to President Ydígoras1 Washington, September 12, 1960. Great and Good Friend: I wish again to express my appreciation for your friendly letter of August twenty-­third delivered personally into my hands by your Ambassador, Carlos Alejos.2 I am indeed pleased to renew the personal exchange of views I first enjoyed with you during your visit to Washington in February, 1958. Your frank and comprehensive comments on the present situation in Guatemala have been studied with interest and sympathy by officials of this government. Your letter further confirms my conviction that the countries in this Hemisphere face, individually and collectively, a very definite threat to our democratic way of life and to our American system that requires our constant vigilance and resolute action. From the very inception of our independence we in the Americas have recognized that we share a common destiny and that a threat from without to any one of us is a threat to all of us. This firm belief and our determination to uphold it was overwhelmingly confirmed at San Jose just a few days ago. Your timely efforts in alerting others to the most recent threat to the American system merit special commendation.3 I have noted with particular satisfaction your account of your efforts to provide the benefits of economic and social justice to the Guatemalan people without sacrificing democratic freedoms and practices. This is particularly important since it describes exactly that which distinguishes our system from the doctrine some now are seeking to impose in this Hemisphere. This insidious doctrine proposes that our peoples must relinquish their personal freedom and their individuality in order to achieve the material progress we seek. In response to this challenge, our representatives at the meeting of the Committee of Twenty-One in Bogotá have proposed that the forces of domestic action and of international cooperation working hand in hand can achieve the economic and social advancement of our people without sacrificing the 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Delivered September 21, 1960. 2 Not printed; Ydígoras asked for a grant of $20 million in special assistance and left the details to be worked out by his Ambassador in Washington with a special mission from Guatemala, if necessary. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File.) 3 In a conversation with Secretary Herter at San José on August 22 regarding the Seventh Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Guatemalan Foreign Minister Unda Murillo outlined Guatemalan difficulties with Cuba which Guatemala had brought to the attention of the Inter-American Peace Committee. (Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 64 D 199).
