3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 654 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI 224. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, September 17, 1979 SUBJECT Soviet Combat Forces in Cuba PARTICIPANTS US Secretary Vance Marshall Shulman USSR Ambassador Dobrynin Ambassador Dobrynin came in at his request to deliver to Secretary Vance the Soviet answer to the U.S. oral message of September 14,2 which contained a request for further clarification on a number of points. Characterizing the response as “rather negative,” Dobrynin transmitted the oral message in Russian, and did a sight translation for the Secretary. (U.S. translation of the Soviet note is attached.)3 The main points of the Soviet note were as follows: 1. The Soviet government felt that it had already provided clarifications on the matter, out of good will, even though it felt the issue was artificially raised. 2. The Soviet Union found the US “questionnaire” unacceptable in both tone and content, and saw it as an effort by U.S. intelligence to seek information regarding Soviet relations with other sovereign states. 3. The Soviet Union sees the issue as a pretext by forces seeking to undermine U.S.-Soviet relations. It hopes the U.S. Administration will take steps to close out this artificially-raised question. It repeats that the Soviet military personnel involved have been in place for 17 years, and have not changed their numbers or function. There is no violation of the 1962 understanding, which the Soviet Union intends to continue to observe. There can be no question of withdrawing these personnel. 4. If the US Administration is actually interested in improving relations by implementing agreements reached through joint efforts, especially by ratifying SALT II, its actions will be met by cooperation from the Soviet Union. 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 10, Vance–Dobrynin Meeting, 9/17/79. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. Drafted by Shulman. 2 See Document 223 and footnote 5 thereto. 3 Attached but not printed.
