893.5045/259: Telegram
[Document 570]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton)
WASHINGTON, December 3, 1925—8 p.m.
355. Department’s No. 236, July 22, 2 p.m. Your No. 274, August 27, 1 p.m.
Department’s No. 272, August 21, 5 p.m. and subsequent telegrams regarding
appointment of Judicial Commission to inquire into Shanghai incident.
It now appears that the Judicial Commission has completed its labors and that the three
Judges have submitted separate reports to the Diplomatic Body at Peking. The
Department is informed that while the reports of the British and Japanese Judges agree
in exonerating police and municipal authorities, the American Judge, while holding that
police had no alternative but to fire in the circumstances which arose, considers that
they were at fault in having allowed such a necessity to arise, and that he recommends
that McEuen, whom he finds not to have had a proper appreciation of his responsibility
in the maintenance of peace and good order within his jurisdiction, be succeeded by
one whose performance of duty shall be more nearly commensurate with his very high
responsibilities.
The Department is informed by the Legation at Peking32 that on November 27 the
British, Japanese, and American Ministers telegraphed their respective Consuls in
Shanghai outlining the differences in the findings of the Judicial Commission and
stating among other things that in order to prevent spreading of mischievous and
imaginary statements in the newspapers and among the Chinese, the Senior Minister
considered that it would be necessary in the near future to make a statement to the press
regarding the findings of the Judicial Commission prior to circulation and consideration
by the Diplomatic Body of the reports, which are very lengthy, and prior to their
eventual publication which will be unavoidable. The American Consul was instructed
that he should, in consultation with his British and Japanese colleagues suggest
privately and confidentially to their respective nationals on the Municipal Council the
urgent desirability of their spontaneously announcing to the Senior Consul that now
that inquiry has been held they do not wish to take advantage of any difference of
opinion but prefer to take steps in the direction of settlement by offering generous
compensations to the victims, both killed and injured and by devising ways of
dispensing with the services of the police commissioner and of the officers actively
involved in the incident.
