46 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III —Reversal of U.S. Policy—U.S. policy has favored free competition for commercial cargoes. —Violation of Treaties—Would be inconsistent with existing U.S. obligations under more than 30 bilateral commercial treaties. —Addition to World Tanker Surplus—Foreign tankers totalling more than 30 million DWT are not in layup. Tanker prices are much below U.S. tanker construction costs. The EPG has considered possible amendments to H.R. 1037 to make it more acceptable. It is unanimous, however, in the view that the bill would be unsatisfactory even in amended form. Modifications considered include: 1. Extend implementation timetable—Would reduce near term cost impact and might mitigate foreign objection, but would fail to overcome basic objections. 2. Reduce ultimate preference percentages—Would reduce advantages and disadvantages proportionately. 3. Provide operating and construction differential subsidies for preference tankers—Would minimize direct consumer impact by transferring most of cost to the general taxpayer. 4. Allow some foreign-built tanker participation—Would materially reduce costs, potential impact on Navy program, and addition to world overtonnage. Would not obviate basic foreign policy objections. (It is understood that U.S. maritime unions and shipbuilders would not object to some limited level of foreign-built tanker participation.) During the election campaign, you made a number of statements understood and remembered by maritime interests as commitments to support cargo preference. Some of these statements were quite categorical. A decision against cargo preference, which is recommended by the EPG on economic and foreign policy grounds, would be viewed by the maritime unions, and probably by the AFL/CIO generally as the breaking of a promise. It is possible that some alternative initiative or combination of initiatives to assist the maritime industry would mitigate somewhat the anticipated adverse political reaction to a negative decision on cargo preference. The EPG believes that under the stated circumstances the decision must be made by the President, and three basic options are worthy of consideration: OPTION A—Oppose H.R. 1037 and take no further action. OPTION B–1. Support H.R. 1037 with amendments. Would be consistent with campaign commitments. (An acceptable amendment package, including some combination of the four above noted suggested amendments, would have to be developed under this Option.) B–2. Support H.R. 1037 with amendments in conjunction with reductions in the maritime subsidy program.
