3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
136
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
The Ambassador said he understood, and asked if he could be
undiplomatic. The President joked that he hoped Dobrynin would not
be too undiplomatic. The Ambassador continued that the psychological
atmosphere had become bad—because of initiatives on the part of the
United States. Two or three years ago—and this had nothing to do with
personalities—there had been a sense in the Soviet Union that relations
were improving, and this feeling had become quite strong. Now this
was not the case.
The President said he would try to change that.
The Ambassador continued that if the improvement of atmosphere
were mutual, it would be good. They had been impressed that this Ad-
ministration—though not deliberately, but for some reasons—had
been trying to push the Soviet Union, and had been engaging in
anti-Soviet propaganda. This was the impression they had reluctantly
come to. In November and December, the Soviet press had been posi-
tive. Then some issues—and some actions in the White House—had
created a bad impression, as though we were starting psychological
warfare (not ideological struggle, which was good). This had led to a
spoiling of the atmosphere. The atmosphere in the Soviet Union was
strained with regard to the United States. He could say this was some-
thing to be worked on together; they are prepared to move their half of
the way.
The President said that we should do what we can, on both sides.
SALT
The Ambassador returned the conversation to SALT. He summa-
rized that the US should be prepared to look at the Vladivostok Agree-
ment as it is, with the levels as they were agreed, with cruise missiles
subject to negotiation in SALT II. Therefore, this would be the number
two US proposal, with cruise missiles.
The President said that we would prepare a draft on it, including
what we wanted to say on this. Secretary Vance said it should be in-
formal, sort of thinking out loud.
The Ambassador said it was clear that they did not want to talk
about the comprehensive US proposal. Both would be talking about
Vladivostok, though each side could call it what it wanted. The only
difference is on cruise missiles. On mobile missiles, that could be nego-
tiated—and could be prohibited or counted. The real issues that are left
are cruise missiles: with ALCMs, there was a preliminary under-
standing. Sea and land-based cruise missiles were left.
Secretary Vance said that we would think out other issues. The Presi-
dent said that this was a good start, and that the Secretary would pro-
vide our views (?).
