National Security Policy 717 that the planning described was inconsistent with the strategic doctrine which had been discussed earlier in the meeting. He felt that this illus­ trated the difficulty that we were in. We could not even in planning for possible situations follow current doctrine. Mr. McElroy commented that if there was a “fundamental” line of State Department thought on the strategic concept perhaps it would have to be changed for foreign policy reasons. Mr. Irwin raised the point that a change in the strategic concept would at bottom be a budget matter. Two other things that would have to be taken into account were the statement of foreign policy requirements which State had provided to Defense and the Gray tar­ get mix study which is still to come. Mr. Smith said that in his view the Gray study should come after, not before, a decision on the stra­ tegic concept. Mr. Irwin subsequently commented to Mr. Smith that there were two possibilities with respect to language of NSC 5810/1: (1) there might be some change in the language about nuclear weapons being conventional weapons; (2) there might be some virtue in including a definition of limited war. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * On May 25, the Secretary of State commented to Mr. Smith that even if there were no language change in the National Security Policy, State should try to get into the NSC record the State paper on foreign policy requirements and a Department of Defense statement that the currently planned Military Establishment can meet these foreign policy requirements. 160. Presentation by Beale at the 409th NSC Meeting1 Washington, June 4, 1959 TRADE POLICY AND NATIONAL SECURITY The broad objective of US foreign economic policy is identical with that of our general foreign policy: to protect and advance the national interest, to improve the security and well-­being of the US and its people. 1 Source: Trade policy and national security. No classification marking. 9 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File.
