898  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
too far into a period in which the major destruction would come from 
missiles. He thought we were greatly overinsuring our ability to hit an 
enemy. There is no uncertainty that we would be able to hit his cities. 
He asked whether the Soviets would not be able to hit the B–70 with 
rockets. General White said that they would, but the B–70 would cross 
radarscopes so fast as to be a difficult target. The President said he was 
convinced that the age of aircraft for actual use over enemy territory 
is fast coming to a close. General White thought it would be worth 
the money to carry on development of this aircraft for a short while, 
agreeing that it might be dropped later. The President said he finds the 
missile a cheaper, more effective way of doing the same thing. General 
White reverted to the premium we gain from having different systems 
for attack. The President said that in ten years the missile capacity of 
both countries will be such as to be able to destroy each other many 
times over. He thought we are going overboard in different ways to do 
the same thing. General White commented that this is the last aircraft 
under development in the world and that he would, if it were left in the 
program, find money somewhere to hang on to it.
The President said that he questions the bomber having a place 
after we have produced the kind of destructive power that we have. 
He saw no need for it. General White said he simply wanted to keep it 
alive for one more year. The President commented that defensive rock­
etry would be much more effective against the B–70 than against the 
Titan and Atlas. He commented that the X–15 is under development, 
and even it could be used to knock out the B–70. He said that we retired 
the battleship finally long after the contest was over and asked whether 
we are not trying to hang onto the old forms of warfare too long in a 
similar way as regards the bomber. General White thought we were 
looking too far into the future if we did this and the President said he 
feels he can look that far in recommending it. General White said if the 
President would allow him to keep it in the program even on a research 
and development basis, he would put it into the budget and would not 
accept an increase even if the Congress tried to force it on him. General 
Lemnitzer said he was appalled at the estimate of $200 million just to 
carry on a research and development program. The President asked the 
other Chiefs for their views. General White, General Pate and General 
Twining favored continuation of the project. Admiral Burke opposed 
it. General Lemnitzer favored it as a research and development project 
which he thought could be a small fraction of $200 million.
The President reviewed past examples of weapons that had out­
lived their era and said he thought we were talking about bows and 
arrows at the time of gunpowder when we spoke of bombers in the 
missile age.
