730 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Batsanov: When we parted with Ledogar on Friday,3 there was not complete clarity on the results achieved at that time. In particular, there is one formulation in the bilateral agreement, in para 1 of article VI of the draft agreement. It conveys the sense that the multilateral convention may provide other levels than 500 tons. This could provide an incentive to others to press for other levels. Karpov: We would like to avoid creating an impression that the pace of reduction in the CWC could be more leisurely than the US and Soviet agreed solution. There are no substantive changes. But we want another look at that language. Batsanov: Another point to address is the procedure for signing. Bartholomew: We want to begin with CFE, because of both its political and military significance. But we will wait until 5:00–6:00. And let me simply say that you heard more from us in Moscow on CFE than we heard from you. On CW, I suggest we leave that to Batsanov and Lehman to work out, they can arrange to get together to discuss the question you have raised. I take note of your ideas on the START statements, and how to tackle them in a subgroup. (The meeting continued in a smaller group following the departure of Woolsey, Grinevsky, and Batsanov) Bartholomew: On the joint statement on agreed START issues, we have reflected on the question of whether we should have a detailed statement or a shorter version. Our conclusion is that the second approach may be better. All of us appreciate that the Soviet draft4 is a fair-­handed statement. This is not a reaction to your draft. We understand you have prepared a shorter version.5 Perhaps Masterkov and Brooks can look at it. We too have a shorter version.6 We need to look at both drafts for shorter statements and review where we stand. Karpov: We have prepared a shorter four-­page draft, which I could hand over. While we were working on this draft, we did not lose sight of the broader document. Both have a right to exist. They would enable our Presidents to describe concisely what has been achieved, and set the objective of completing the treaty by the end of the year. The longer version would allow those with more interest to get into more detail. That kind of paper would be useful, and help avoid misunderstandings such as in the Smith article in the Washington Post in early April. We do believe we need to weigh this carefully and take a considered decision, taking into account the sort 3 Not found. 4 Not found. 5 Not found. 6 Not found.
