3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1977 37 The same one-sidedness can be discerned in proposals about prohibiting all mobile missiles (meaning also intermediate missiles which have nothing to do with the subject matter of the Soviet-American negotiations), limiting throw weight, on-site inspections. You know better, of course, the reason for presenting all those questions in such an unconstructive way. We, on our part, are in favour of having from the very beginning a business-like talk, for seeking mutually acceptable—I stress mutually acceptable—agreements. The Soviet Union will henceforth defend firmly its own interests in all issues while a realistic and constructive approach by the US side will always be met with our understanding and readiness to reach agreement. It is that balanced approach that we hope to see when Secretary Vance comes to Moscow. It applies both to the problem of the limitation of strategic arms and other questions related to ending the arms race. We definitely expect that the US side will support our appropriate proposals including those on banning the development of new types and systems of weapons of mass annihilation, on banning chemical weapons, on concluding world treaty on non-use of force. Our proposals on those and a number of other questions, including the one of the Indian Ocean were expounded not once and in detail particularly in the UN. We could discuss as well such issues mentioned in your letter as notification of missile test firings, reduction of sales and transfer of conventional weapons to the third world countries etc., being guided by the interests of international security and strengthening peace. We attach great importance to an agreement on reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe without prejudice to the security of any of the sides. However, in your letter a onesided approach is clearly seen with regard to the negotiations in Vienna as well. Only in this way one can judge, for example, the words to the effect that the US side is viewing its position in connection with the negotiations in Vienna in the light of some “concern” about “an excessive increase” in the military strength in Eastern Europe. Not only an objective estimate of the actual situation is absent here, but the constructive proposals of the USSR and other socialist countries—participants in the negotiations aimed at achieving progress at the Vienna negotiations are totally ignored as well. We are also prepared henceforth to seek solutions and decisions, and we are ready for endeavours which do not imply acquiring by anyone unilateral advantages. But if we are expected to reduce unilaterally our defensive capabilities and thus to put ourselves and our allies in an unequal position, then nothing will come out of it. It is impossible to agree with the evaluation given in the letter, of the situation regarding the carrying out of the Quadripartite Agree-
