Eastern Europe Region mum deterrence, but initially it might require an intimidating military posture. If the U.S. is prepared to stand aside and let change within the Soviet Bloc take its course, then military forces are necessary only for preventing disorderly developments from spilling into Western Europe. If, however, the U.S. wants to have some influence on the direction of change in the Bloc, then a larger military backdrop is needed for U.S. policy in Europe, both East and West. For Option 3, a stronger military posture is required if it is to be a serious strategy for loosening the Soviet grip. A large NATO military backdrop during the Czech crisis of 1968 could conceivably have kept the uncertainties for the Politburo sufficiently high to have produced a compromise between Dubcek and Moscow of long-term durability allowing the Prague spring to yield fruit in the fall. The deployment of U.S. forces in Southeast Asia, the general disrepair in the U.S. forces in Europe, and the willingness of the Johnson Administration to reassure Moscow by taking Soviet military observers along the FRG-Czech border so that they could verify the absence of NATO military activities— all of these things contributed to Soviet confidence that the U.S. had neither the military means nor the intention to influence the course of events in Prague. Had the U.S. made even moderate military gestures such as slightly increasing routine military exercises, the Soviet decision to send forces into Czechoslovakia might never have been made. Today there are again signs of change and transformation in East Europe. In particular, we have seen the continuation of the working class movement in Poland, and perhaps surprising to some observers in the West, dissidence in East Germany has reached distressing levels for the SED leadership. In the case of Poland, can the present U.S. policy of economic and diplomatic support for Warsaw turn the processes of change to the purposes of the West? Or are we simply helping the Soviets avoid the price of more open and perhaps violent means of repression? Is it true, as some intelligence analysts recently argued, that Moscow is unaware of the explosive situation in Poland? Or is Moscow aware that we are aware and willing to bail the Poles out with credits? It seems difficult to conclude that the forces of change are necessarily favoring the West. The East German case is not only more complex but of much greater consequence. It is not primarily about a state in Eastern Europe but about Germany as a whole. Moscow seems bent on exploiting Bonn’s Ostpolitik to draw the FRG back into the traditional German “middle” position, ambivalent about both East and West Europe. Without suggesting that a new Rapallo is at hand, it is nonetheless possible to argue that Bonn finds itself uncomfortable with the West and without recompense in the East. This is the result of three interacting developments:
