March 27–December 31, 1979
951
issues—such as Jerusalem, settlements, and a comprehensive settle-
ment. We both need to be forceful, in public and in private. Jews in
America constantly say: why are we tough, when Sadat doesn’t care?
Therefore, there is a need to talk more closely and be more in concert—
not only a part vs. Israel, not one weak and one strong.
Vice President Mubarak said that sometimes Sadat makes easy rela-
tions with Begin, so the President can get a good attitude from Begin in
order for the U.S. to push forward. He does not want to put the U.S. in
the position where it has to be forceful, and is in a corner. Sadat does
not want to put the U.S. in any critical position.
The President agreed, but said that that is the result.
Ambassador Strauss said that Weizman had bragged on the Presi-
dent as a peacemaker, but had greater difficulties with the President
than with Egypt. He (the Ambassador) told the Vice President this
morning that this is a problem, and makes matters difficult. We agree—
Khalil, Israel, the U.S.—on moving the autonomy talks. It is a little diffi-
cult to have no hard push until December, or after November 19. There-
fore no positive results can be had on January first, if the pushing starts
on December 15. Results will only come in the spring, if we are fortu-
nate. The pace started with the Vice President, Sadat, Khalil (?) and him
(the Ambassador). He sold this to Israel, to work at lower levels. This
will take all of us to be successful.
The President said that it wasn’t hard to get the Israelis to delay. He
referred to the Israeli cabinet decision to permit Israelis to buy Arab
land in the West Bank. What is the Egyptian position? We don’t know.
He assumes no Arab will like it.
Vice President Mubarak agreed.
The President said that if we speak, and Egypt is quiet, this will be
difficult for us. If we make this most important, then there may be a
problem with the talks. Therefore, it is important to have more consul-
tation. He told Begin this morning that the settlements are their most
difficult policy. Lebanon, as well. Both hurt Israel throughout the
world.
Secretary Vance said that both cause trouble in the Arab world and
in general. Unless we and Egypt work together, it will be tough to get
our objective of a real truce in Lebanon. It takes time to get progress in
the autonomy talks; if there is a Lebanon truce, that will buy time.
The President said that this discussion had been helpful. Most of the
Egyptian requests we can accommodate, but not all. Vance and Brown
will talk about it. He thinks there will not be much increase in wheat.
We will look at the budget worldwide.
(The meeting ended at 2:30 p.m.)
