818
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
countries. The Fund’s contribution to agricultural investment, while
not impressive in terms of the amounts already being spent, is expected
to act as a catalyst, spurring other financial flows. Another objective of
the Fund is to help the poor and landless by fostering the use of appro-
priate technologies and generating rural employment. So far, however,
the Fund’s executive board has approved only two projects, and it is ex-
pected that less than $100 million will be disbursed in the first year of
operation. IFAD commitments are expected to average less than $350
million a year, at least during the first three years.
World Bank loans for agriculture and rural development increased
from $956 million in 1974 to an estimated $3.3 billion in 1978. This oc-
curred as a part of a World Bank rural development strategy, estab-
lished in 1973, which is aimed at sustaining increases in per capita
output and incomes, expanding productive employment, and achiev-
ing greater equity in the distribution of the benefits of growth. For ex-
ample, about 25 percent of the Mexican rural development program
during 1977–79 is being financed by World Bank and Inter-American
Development Bank loans. Most of this foreign money will go into di-
rectly productive infrastructure, such as irrigation, livestock, and de-
velopment credit.
Another international activity to stimulate food production is the
FAO’s International Fertilizer Supply Scheme to expand fertilizer and
pesticide production in developing countries. In addition, a number of
countries have informed the World Food Council that they are willing
to provide a wide range of technical agricultural assistance, such as irri-
gation, to countries with serious food shortages.
Grain Reserve Negotiations
The most important food-related issue to developing countries
probably is the attempt to establish a multilateral system of grain re-
serves intended to stabilize prices and assure adequate supplies even
during bad crop years. Such reserves were first proposed in the 1940s,
and the FAO revived the idea in 1973 when North American grain
stocks became depleted, and the United States declared its intention
not to build up government stockpiles again. The 1974 World Food
Conference recommended the establishment of food security stocks,
and subsequent meetings of the World Food Council have emphasized
the importance of establishing such a system of reserves.
Extensive discussions of the subject of reserves have taken place in
the International Wheat Council in London, to some extent in the Mul-
tilateral Trade Negotiations in Geneva, and most recently in a United
Nations Negotiating Conference held in February and March 1978 to
try to reach a new agreement to replace the International Wheat Agree-
