1224
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
head. Begin sees that he will either move or fall (?). He (the President)
doesn’t want to make Begin fall, but if Begin sees that he can only keep
Weizman and Dayan (?) by moving, this is a strong incentive. He (the
President) would like to get as much of an agreement as possible—a
reasonable agreement, even if no one loves it. If he goes to Sadat, then
Sadat will accept it. He wants to put forward what Sadat will accept—
and not attempt to assuage Khalil.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he had talked with Sadat, and told
him the substance of his recommendations. He had told Sadat how he
planned to handle water . . .
The President said that Sadat didn’t care about details.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he had told Sadat that there could be
agreement on principles, with the Continuing Committee taking ac-
count of the rest, such as the technical matters. Until there was agree-
ment, then things like the rate of water sharing would continue. Sadat
said that was all right; and he (the Ambassador) thinks this will be all
right with the Israelis.
The President said good.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he had talked about other issues with
Sadat—such as security. Butros and Osama and others find this ap-
proach wrong. On public lands, they will try a formulation, even
though neither Egypt or Israel will like it: it is that, after autonomy is set
up, there can be no settlements by either side without agreement by the
Continuing Committee. Therefore, there would be a freeze.
The President asked on which lands.
Ambassador Linowitz said on public lands. Private lands anyone
could have.
The President said that Begin would not buy this.
Ambassador Linowitz said he wanted to try it out with the President.
If the idea were to leak, we would be pleased.
The President said that it would please him. It is, however, more
generous than our position, since it doesn’t call for dismantling.
Ambassador Linowitz said that it would give Israel a veto over Pales-
tinians settlements, and Egypt wouldn’t like that. It would be good if it
leaked.
The President said good.
Dr. Brzezinski asked what would happen if Begin rejects it.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he would take the issues one at a
time—e.g. water, security, and legislative authority. He can’t see Begin
rejecting all the ideas. Begin would reject land and East Jerusalem
voting rights. If there is enough progress on other issues, then we can
look at what to do with the Continuing Committee with regard to
