1278  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
made prevent Perez Jimenez from returning Dominican Republic as his 
presence here would undoubtedly contribute unresolved Caribbean 
tensions. While it would obviously be preferable if Perez Jimenez 
were away from western hemisphere, this choice may not be avail-
able. Choice may be U.S. or Dominican Republic and of these alterna-
tive evils Embassy submits that peace in Caribbean somewhat more 
favored by his remaining in U.S.
Farland
VE–33.	
Telegram from the Chargé in Venezuela (Burrows) to the 
Department of State1
 
Caracas, August 26, 1959, 6 p.m.
135. Foreign Ministry director international policy and other 
Foreign Ministry officials at reception last night demonstrated open 
pleasure at news Perez Jimenez preventive arrest2 indicating aware-
ness legal procedures could be protracted but assumption eventual 
extradition.
Federal district governor Carrillo Batalla telephoned yesterday 
afternoon to express concern Perez Jimenez’s deportation or flight 
from U.S., now with legal procedures underway would cause serious 
reaction here and throughout LA. Creole President Proudfit also tele-
phoned yesterday to express apprehension about adverse Venezuelan 
reaction which he felt would follow if Perez Jimenez jumps bail and 
escapes. Proudfit had made personal call Monday to voice opinion 
based on conversation with Creole Venezuelan and U.S. executives 
that failure of U.S. to extradite Perez Jimenez would result in serious 
deterioration U.S.-Venezuelan relations with adverse repercussions on 
U.S. business here.
Other reactions to Perez Jimenez arrest as reported in press: 
Presidential Secretary General Velasquez “It is great news but I will 
have to see him here before I believe it.”
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/8–2659. Confidential.
2 Pérez Jiménez was arrested on August 24, 1959, at his Miami Beach, Florida, estate, 
and later released on $25,000 bail. On September 7, 1960, the Government of Venezuela 
entered an extradition petition in Miami’s Federal District Court, charging Pérez with 
embezzlement and murder. Extradition procedures were completed on August 16, 1963.
