Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX exchange of views on ways to remove obstacles to improve relations. The United States and Hungary should have relations appropriate and worthy of the two countries. (C) Turning to the economic area, Huszar stressed that US and Hungarian firms should be encouraged to deal with each other. He hoped that the visit would lead to concrete gains in this regard. He was happy that he had had an opportunity to meet people in the government at the political level as well as the financial and monetary circles. In general, there had been no change since the visit of US officials. Noting that the Hungarian Government was crossing its fingers that SALT would be ratified, he said that Hungary hoped that the ratification would have a beneficial impact on the MBFR discussions in Vienna. (C) Huszar then returned to the subject of bilateral relations. It was a source of great satisfaction to the Hungarian Government that a lot had transpired in relations between the two countries. The trade agreement had brought its first results. Hungarian exports had grown by two thirds over the last year. Imports had increased, but to a lesser extent. Talks at the recent Joint Economic Commission meeting had been useful and constructive. Noting that interest in American firms and markets on the part of Hungarians had increased, he said that the Hungarian Government hoped to see the active involvement of American firms and companies; however, the US occupied only eighth place in Hungarian trade with capitalist countries. (C) In response, Dr. Brzezinski said that he would like to make three points. First, the United States was also prepared to move further on the political level. There were always practical scheduling problems, but he wanted to register the basic point that we were ready to move forward. He suggested that the appropriate authorities in both countries stay in touch in order to find the right moment for announcing this publically. (C) Noting that bilateral relations were moving well, Dr. Brzezinski said he would like to make two additional points on wider issues. The first was in regard to SALT. The United States attached considerable importance to SALT and the impact that this could have on US-Soviet relations and detente. If the Senate were to refuse to ratify SALT it would be a setback for detente. The Senate would not ratify the agreement unless it was sure that it could be verified. In order to verify the agreement, the United States had to engage in verification activities and overflights over Turkey. Whether or not to permit such activities over Turkey was a decision for the Turkish government alone. However, the Turks would not give this permission if the Soviet Union regarded it as an unfriendly act. Therefore, positive Soviet acquiescence was needed. This was not the same as Soviet permission, Dr. Brzezinski emphasized, because it was not the Soviet right. The question was one
