176
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
A cost benefit calculation for these options is not very favorable.
As posed, the financial options involved considerable long-run costs
to the international economic system and to individual countries.
Achieving them will therefore impose great strain on the willingness
of our allies to cooperate along these lines.
At the same time, we doubt they will be immediately understood
by Iranian leaders except insofar as they represent a demonstration of
solidarity among the key industrial countries.
The eventual impact of such actions will not be immediately appar-
ent to those unversed in finance, and their full effects on Iranian trade
will not appear for several months. The disruption will mainly affect
urban dwellers, who are dependent on foreign foodstuffs and on
foreign inputs for industrial and commercial activity.
There are other ways, and probably more effective ways in terms
of their immediate impact on Iranian leaders, to demonstrate solidarity
of other countries with the U.S. One would be a drastic coordinated
reduction in the size of embassies in Tehran. Even stronger collective
action would be a Chapter 7 embargo in the United Nations, on the
grounds that the Iranian behavior represents a threat to the peace.
Chapter 7 action would be a striking demonstration of global solidarity,
it would put much more economic and political pressure on Iran, and
at the same time, by virtue of being a sanctioned collective action, it
would sharply limit both the perceived and actual damage to the
international economic system over the longer run.
None of these actions, including financial options through six, will
be easy to achieve. Tentative contacts suggest it will not be possible
to engage the cooperation of financial officials alone on the financial
measures suggested. Therefore, a high level and perhaps a high pres-
sure political approach, will be required.
Our approach at the SCC meeting should be to clearly distinguish
between our objective—to secure the hostages’ release—and the many
possible means to attain that objective. If it is decided that one of the
means to this end is a demonstration of Western solidarity, then we
should search for actions that will be most effective on the Iranian
leaders and followers.
To the extent that the other financial options are seriously dis-
cussed, our approach should be the same. Several of the remaining
options would have only a marginal impact on events (3a, 7, 8, 9).
Options 3b and 10 would be regarded as a disguised political act.
More generally, they would not impress the Iranian leaders and would
require an unprecedented degree of cooperation from foreign central
and private banks in taking hostile action against a customer. They
would be impossible to enforce and, for the private banks, easy to
evade.
