International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 SUBJECT Our Meeting on the Proposed IMF “Substitution Account,” March 4, 19802 I have requested this meeting because the Substitution Account proposal involves some potentially important obligations as well as benefits for the U.S., and negotiations on the Account are nearing a decision point.3 It will be discussed by finance ministers at a meeting of the IMF’s Interim Committee in late April and, at the request of the French, will also be taken up at the Venice Summit. Outline of the Proposal In brief, the Account would accept dollar deposits by foreign central banks and issue, in exchange, claims denominated in Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), which are valued on the basis of a “basket” of 16 currencies. The Account would invest its dollar holdings in interestearning U.S.G. securities and would pay interest to the holders of the SDR-denominated claims. The claims issued by the Account would be of indefinite maturity, as is the SDR reserve instrument created by the IMF. Initially, the Account might start at $10–20 billion and could rise to $50 billion over 5 years or so. This scheme presents a number of potential advantages for the United States and other countries: —The international monetary system is moving in an uncontrolled way from extremely heavy reliance on the dollar toward greater reliance on other major currencies such as the Deutschemark, the Swiss franc and Japanese yen. The process of diversification, if left to itself, can lead to heavy pressures on the dollar at inopportune times and potentially large costs to the U.S. in terms of dollar support. It can also cause serious economic and financial problems for the countries whose currencies are “targets” of diversification, such as Germany. —While the existence of the Account would not necessarily halt this process, it could provide an attractive and non-disruptive offmarket alternative to diversification through the market, and a “safety valve” that could be made available to potential diversifiers in times of market strain. —From a longer-term perspective, the Account would be supportive of the generally agreed objective of moving away from national currencies and toward the SDR as the principal reserve asset of the international monetary system. If the Account succeeds and the SDR as- 2 No record of the meeting was found. 3 Solomon briefed Miller on the status of the deputy-level negotiations concerning the substitution account in a January 16 memorandum. (National Archives, RG 56, Office of the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs, Subject Files of Anthony Sol-
