to meet the world competition in trade, than a continuing policy of
economy. Of course necessary costs must be met, proper functions of the
Government performed, and constant investments for capital account and
reproductive effort must be carried on by our various departments. But the
people must know that their Government is placing upon them no
unnecessary burden.
 
TAXES
Everyone desires a reduction of taxes, and there is a great preponderance of
sentiment in favor of taxation reform. When I approved the present tax law,
I stated publicly that I did so in spite of certain provisions which I believed
unwise and harmful. One of the most glaring of these was the making
public of the amounts assessed against different income-tax payers.
Although that damage has now been done, I believe its continuation to be
detrimental to the public welfare and bound to decrease public revenues, so
that it ought to be repealed.
Anybody can reduce taxes, but it is not so easy to stand in the gap and resist
the passage of increasing appropriation bills which would make tax
reduction impossible. It will be very easy to measure the strength of the
attachment to reduced taxation by the power with which increased
appropriations are resisted. If at the close of the present session the
Congress has kept within the budget which I proposed to present, it will
then be possible to have a moderate amount of tax reduction and all the tax
reform that the Congress may wish for during the next fiscal year. The
country is now feeling the direct stimulus which came from the passage of
the last revenue bill, and under the assurance of a reasonable system of
taxation there is every prospect of an era of prosperity of unprecedented
proportions. But it would be idle to expect any such results unless business
can continue free from excess profits taxation and be accorded a system of
surtaxes at rates which have for their object not the punishment of success
or the discouragement of business, but the production of the greatest
amount of revenue from large incomes. I am convinced that the larger
incomes of the country would actually yield more revenue to the
Government if the basis of taxation were scientifically revised downward.
