13. I cannot conceive that any body of men who have the welfare of commerce at heart and who have given the labor that you, my colleagues, have given to this convention are willing to see it vitiated by a legalistic interpretation which makes it not worth the paper it is written on. If it should be decided that our convention has to do with the mere crossing of frontiers for articles of trade but leaves foreign nations free to prevent the disposal of these articles within their frontiers, then what, I ask you, is left of this convention? 14. The word films was not mentioned through our debates in October. No nation having similar restrictions brought up this question. I wish this conference would consider this point—it is an important one—that is, why was this question not raised in the [first] conference? Gentlemen, I have made careful inquiry among the representatives of states having [similar] restrictions and I have ascertained from at least two of these representatives that they did not raise the question because they assumed that once this convention was put in force those questions [restrictions] must automatically be dissolved by the states or at least after six months as provided by article 1 of this convention. There was no question in their minds as to whether a restriction on importation meant only the crossing of the frontier or meant crossing the frontier for a useful purpose. 15. The point may be brought out that large film interests of the United States have dealt with the French Government on the basis of these regulations and have reached a satisfactory agreement and therefore why should the Government of the United States enter into this question. 16. I should like to deal with this phase of the question now. In the first place, such film interests as have dealt with the French Government have acquiesced [in] and not agreed to the procedure of that Government. They have so acquiesced because they were faced with a condition in which they stood to lose heavily. They were confronted with a state of facts with which they had to deal and under force majeure they took the best they could get in order to enable them to continue to do business temporarily. It obviously does not mean that the case of the United States Government is in any way prejudiced in dealing with the convention, which has not yet come into
