February 1951–February 1952
151
[name not declassified] asked what would happen should the situation
further deteriorate, perhaps a coup that would put the Tudeh party in
the government. [name not declassified] said that for all intents and pur-
poses that would become a stay-behind situation and there would be
British-U.S. co-operation. We would probably support a rump gov-
ernment of the Shah. U.S. is fairly well committed to give military sup-
port to the British if it becomes necessary. [name not declassified] asked
about the possibility of writing off the country if we could insure get-
ting the oil. [name not declassified] replied that oil was not the issue. If we
lose Iran, it is very likely that one by one the other Near East countries
would collapse in turn.
[name not declassified]
54.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, November 16, 1951.
1829. This shld not be shown Brit altho parts re Iranian pol situa-
tion can be used as basis for discussion.
1. Campaign to replace Mosadeq by Qavam has recd setback
during last two days. Yesterday afternoon Middleton, Brit Charge´
d’ Affaires, told me he had learned thru quite good channels that Shah
has again changed his mind and desires no one except Ala, MinCourt,
as next Primin. He asked where our Emb stood re Mosadeq, Qavam
and Ala.
2. I said we had no instructions and expected none on this subject.
Our present position was that Emb shld neither back nor oppose any
candidate. It might look like weakness for it to lean over backwards in
this matter. Nevertheless we preferred appearance of weakness to
policy which might well boomerang. We still were not convinced that
in general interference in Iranian internal affairs was likely in long run
to pay. Of course if any PM shld be clearly leading country down path
towards Communism we wld not hesitate as exception to take moves
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 32. Secret; Priority. Drafted and initialed by Henderson. Repeated to
London and Paris. The telegram is the Embassy copy as approved and there is no time of
transmission.
