September 1953–December 1954
799
333.
Memorandum From the Second Secretary of Embassy in Iran
(Cuomo) to the First Secretary of Embassy in Iran
(Melbourne)1
Tehran, October 19, 1953.
SUBJECT
Suggested Program for Combatting Communism in Iran
General Considerations
To be effective, any program to combat communism in Iran must
be based on the assumption that there is a sincere desire to do so. The
events immediately preceding the August 19 uprising, the full-scale at-
tack against the monarchy on the part of the communist organization,
leave little doubt that the Shah, at least, is thoroughly aware of the
danger and willing to cooperate in such effort.2 However, there is a
constant danger in a country such as Iran that its governments sooner
or later come to the conclusion that a little communism is a good thing
in international affairs to help pry concessions from the Western
powers. Mosadeq played this game and failed, and perhaps the policy
is sufficiently discredited for it to remain so for some time to come.
On the assumption that there is a sincere desire at this time to insti-
tute and carry through a program designed to keep communism within
manageable proportions, it seems logical to suggest that those in
charge of such a program be familiar with the nature of the problem—
the communist doctrine, its dynamics and its appeal. The education of
the Government leadership, not excluding the Shah, might well be a
first step. A program of this type in a setting such as Iran will require
constant vigilance and prodding from above if it is not to be completely
emasculated in administration. Consideration should be given to the
strong likelihood that measures will be progressively weakened as ac-
tion is taken on them by the lower echelons.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/10–2153. Secret;
Security Information. Drafted by Cuomo. The memorandum is an enclosure to a letter
from Henderson to Richards, October 21, which reads in part: “In the past few weeks it
seemed advisable to us here to attempt to put down on paper for our private use, and not
for general distribution, an outline program for combating Communism in Iran which
we could use in our day-to-day operations and in conversations with Iranians in a posi-
tion to do something about the question. Roy Melbourne suggested to Cuomo, in view of
Communism being his field of reporting, that he evolve an outline draft. After some
amendment and rewriting, the attached memorandum of October 19 is the result.”
2 See Embassy Despatch No. 155, dated September 11, 1953, entitled “Comment
Upon Tudeh Party Prospects.” [Footnote is in the original. Despatch 155 from Tehran is
ibid., 788.00/9–1153.]
