3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
750
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Finally, there is the decision to deploy new US missiles on the soil
of Western Europe,4 which creates a serious threat to the security of the
USSR and its allies.
And what has become of the SALT II Treaty? Incidentally, in
taking the decision to develop and deploy MX missiles the US Govern-
ment stated that this decision would promote the ratification of SALT
II. Without addressing now the substance of the MX missile question—
which is a subject for a special discussion—one cannot fail to observe
that in fact the decision on the MX missile is being implemented while
the SALT II Treaty has not been ratified. In pressing its NATO allies to
agree to the deployment on their soil of new American missiles, the US
was also saying that this would facilitate the ratification of the SALT II
Treaty. Even putting aside, once again, the question of the invalidity of
such linkage, the picture remains the same: the decision on the deploy-
ment of new missiles in Western Europe has been adopted and is being
implemented, but the Treaty has not been ratified.
Try to see all this through our eyes. Can these facts be seen in any
way other than as a departure by the US from the principle of equality
and equal security which was reconfirmed in Vienna, as evidence of a
policy line now pursued by the US to break out of the existing military
and strategic parity between the USSR and the US, to rush ahead in an
effort to gain military superiority for itself?
No references to events in Afghanistan can conceal this turn in US
policy—a turn from detente to a new aggravation of international ten-
sions, to a new round of the arms race.
In your letter you mention the need for our two states to show re-
straint and moderation in international affairs and in relations with
each other. Well, the thought itself is correct. We, on our part, are also
in favor of this. It is important, however, for the United States also to
adhere to such a course in international affairs and not treat them with
such astonishing light-mindedness as it now does.
As for Afghanistan, our position on this question has been set forth
more than once with utmost clarity, specifically as you know in the an-
swers by L.I. Brezhnev to the questions of the Pravda correspondent as
well as in our contacts with the US side.
Facts do not cease to be facts because the US side does not want to
admit that acts of aggression against Afghanistan have been and con-
tinue to be committed from the territory of Pakistan. Also indisputable
is the fact that in providing assistance to Afghanistan in repelling ex-
4 In December 1979 the United States committed itself to the basing of Pershing II
and Tomahawk cruise missiles in Western Europe in an attempt to counter the Soviets’
enhanced force of SS–20 missiles. The Pershing II was outfitted with an improved nuclear
warhead, which could strike up to 2,000 km away.
