42
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
cedure. Israel is quite experienced in this and is certainly aware of the
problems involved. Nevertheless, the Christian militias are an available
tool with which to bring pressure to bear on the Syrians, and Israel may
believe that if this leads to a showdown with Damascus, the Syrians
will back down in the face of Israeli threats.
Outlook
(S/NOFORN) There is a real possibility of a miscalculation by one
side or the other in this situation. While not seeking a confrontation
with Syria, Israel’s actions risk it. The future status of Lebanon is, how-
ever, a strategic problem for Israel and not merely a sideshow in the se-
curity and foreign affairs arena. Hence, Israel is probably willing to run
even major risks. For its part, Syria appears more likely than ever be-
fore to probe Israel’s will in Lebanon. The implication of these respec-
tive policies is that both powers are seemingly embarked on courses of
action that risk a major confrontation in the Middle East, perhaps not in
the immediate, but almost certainly within the foreseeable future.
16.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Ismailia, August 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Meeting with President Sadat re Camp David
PARTICIPANTS
President Anwar al-Sadat
Vice President Mohamed Husni Mubarak
Ambassador Hermann Fr. Eilts
I met with Sadat for one and a half hours in Ismailia. Vice Presi-
dent Mubarak was also present.
I first briefed Sadat on our current thinking on the scenario for the
Camp David talks. I told him the thought is to devote part of the first
day to bilaterals between President Carter and each of the two visiting
leaders. Thereafter, the scenario might develop depending upon how
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-
fairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 5, Preparations for Camp David
Summit—August 1978. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Eilts. The memorandum of conversa-
tion was found attached to an August 28 covering memorandum from Eilts to Vance, sent
through Atherton, in which Eilts summarized Sadat’s main points. (Ibid.)
