September 18–December 16, 1978
343
back away from the minimal agreed linkage established at Camp
David.
Barak said that Israel would reaffirm in a joint declaration or some
other means the commitment to the Camp David agreement. But Sadat
wants this in the preamble to the peace treaty. The President reminded
Barak that Egypt had earlier wanted references made throughout the
treaty and now they were prepared to accept a reference only in the
preamble. If the Israelis can persuade Sadat otherwise, let them try.
Barak insisted again that they do not want a legal link. A letter from
them saying that there was no legal link would be all right.
The President asked whether the Israelis could accept the preamble
as it now stands, with only minor deletions. Would Israel then refuse to
sign the treaty? The President will try to get Israel the settlement in
Sinai, as well as an exchange of ambassadors after one month. He
cannot imagine that the Israelis would then reject the treaty because of
a reaffirmation of the commitment to the Camp David framework. If
that is a problem, we should simply stop the negotiations. Sadat will
not renounce any linkage at all between the two frameworks. This was
the whole basis for Sadat’s willingness to sign the Camp David agree-
ments. If it is so important to Israel that they cannot reaffirm their com-
mitment to the Camp David frameworks, then Sadat and Begin should
just meet again to try to work this out. The President would drop out of
the negotiations. The Israelis seem to be going back into Camp David.
Rosenne said once again that if mention were made of the frame-
work in the preamble some reference had to be made in the treaty that
the treaty itself would stand on its own. There had to be some refer-
ence. Events outside the control of the parties might hinder the imple-
mentation of the broader framework. Rosenne suggested adding lan-
guage to the article on the priority of obligations which would say that
this treaty was binding and was independent of any other agreement
that might exist. Rosenne suggested that reference be made to the
second framework agreement between Egypt and Israel at the end of
the preamble.
Dayan suggested that these suggestions be put in writing. He said
that he felt bad about the discussion. Israel has tried to explain its posi-
tion and its honest feelings. Israel wants a peace treaty and it is com-
mitted to the Camp David agreements. He would be prepared to ask
the Prime Minister if he could accept the preamble as it now stands, but
the political decisions would have to be made by the Prime Minister
and the Cabinet.
The President said that what Egypt wants goes into the preamble or
in an exchange of letters. What Israel wants always has to be in the text.
He suggested including the reaffirmation of the commitment to the
framework in the preamble. He does not see that this causes any
