866
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Baqai let it be understood that he felt the American Government if
it so wished, could very well apply pressure on the large oil companies
to come to terms. In answer to this argument, the Ambassador strongly
emphasized the feeling of the American people against nationalization
without compensation and stated that, were the Government ever to
give such advice to the oil companies, there would be a wide outcry
throughout the country which would be echoed in Congress.
Dr. Baqai made a final point by stating that one of the principal
reasons why he felt it important that the British give proof of their good
intentions was that the speech delivered in the House of Commons by
Foreign Minister Eden a few days ago was a complete about-face of the
previous position of the British Government. Eden declared that it
would recognize the Iranian nationalization law on certain conditions.
Previously, on two occasions at least—once following the Harriman
mission, and another which he described as the “Middleton letter,”—
the British had formally declared that they recognized the nationaliza-
tion law and placed no conditions on this recognition. Now, Eden’s
statement was a definite reversal of policy and this action inspired se-
rious doubts as to the British professions of good faith.
The Ambassador disagreed with Baqai’s interpretation of the
former British position and pointed out that the British position was
that they had accepted nationalization only “in principle”, that they
had always qualified their recognition with certain reservations.
In conclusion, Dr. Baqai said that he could see that nothing could
be done to prevent the resumption of diplomatic relations, but he
wished to make a prognostication of what would follow. He could
foresee two consequences: one, politico-economic which he termed
“ordinary”, and about which he did not elaborate, and another which
he considered much graver. In view of the popular discontent which
would follow the resumption of diplomatic relations under present cir-
cumstances, General Zahedi would have to call for new elections to the
Majlis and to ensure a strong majority for the Government. He would
be impelled to control these elections. And, Baqai added, Zahedi is al-
ready half a mind to do just this now and is being urged to do so by his
advisers. Such a maneuver would increase the general discontent,
leading in turn to a strengthening of the Tudeh Party and a dangerous
increase in agitation. He was sorry United States diplomacy was again
making a grave mistake in Iran. Although he did not specifically so
state, he left the impression that he might, with regret, begin attacking
the United States as well as Great Britain during the course of his polit-
ical activities.
Salient Points of Conversation:
1. Dr. Baqai’s opinion of himself as a philosopher-politician, driven
to the dirty game of politic in pursuit of the “sublime”.
