Arms Control and Disarmament 1455 385. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, October 7, 1958, 9:15 a.m. OTHERS PRESENT Chairman McCone General Goodpaster Mr. McCone said he wanted to report to the President on a few mat­ ters of recent interest in his field of responsibility. The Atoms for Peace meeting at Geneva had gone extremely well. Following this Mr. McCone had visited AEC installations within the United States. He then returned to Vienna for the IAEA discussions. These had gone well until the Soviet representative delivered a diatribe against the United States—apparently entirely for propaganda effect, and to obscure the generous support by the United States for this project, and the total lack of Soviet support. Mr. McCone said the IAEA had experienced growing pains in its first year. In his judgment it should now be drawn much closer to the United Nations. There had been an idea that it could keep free from political overtones by being more independent; this has not, however, proven true. Our representative, Mr. Cole, has had his problems and has been under fire by the Canadians, British and Indians, among others. Also the Deputy, Mr. McKinney, has probably not given as much help as was needed. He is now resigning. The President asked Mr. McCone to work out with State very quickly a successor for McKinney. Mr. McCone said that the current test series in Nevada is going forward very successfully. He said that some of these tests are show­ ing great potentialities in the field of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes. The President asked whether the AEC is making prepara­ tions for the experimental explosion in the Athabasca oil sands, aimed at releasing the oil now locked in the sands. Mr. McCone said he is trying to see if it can be gotten ready this winter; probably the hole can be drilled this winter, with the explosion more likely in 1960. He stressed the tremendous importance of these oil sands in international affairs—the reserves are apparently equal in magnitude to the total proven reserves in the Middle East. He said he was very anxious that the “plow-­share” program go forward, and wants to be sure that the test suspension agreement does not prejudice it. The President commented that if the heat of these tremendously big explosions could be captured, it was evident that it could bring the oil sands to a very high temperature. Mr. McCone also mentioned the 1 Source: IAEA problems, Plowshare, uranium requirements. Secret. 2 pp. Eisen­ hower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
