Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1163
(i) for the United States of America, the types of long-range nuclear 
ALCMs designated by the United States of America as, and known 
to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as, AGM–86B and 
AGM–129;
(ii) for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the types of long-
range nuclear ALCMs designated by the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics as RKV–500A and RKV–500B, which are known to the 
United States of America as AS–15 A and AS–15 B, respectively.
ARTICLE IV
1. For ICBMs and SLBMs:
(a) Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of non-deployed 
ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs to no more than 250. Within this 
limit, the number of non-deployed ICBMs for rail-mobile launchers of 
ICBMs shall not exceed 125.
(b) Each Party shall limit the number of non-deployed ICBMs at 
a maintenance facility of an ICBM base for mobile launchers of ICBMs 
to no more than two ICBMs of each type specified for that ICBM base. 
Non-deployed ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs located at a main-
tenance facility shall be stored separately from non-deployed mobile 
launchers of ICBMs located at that maintenance facility.
(c) Each Party shall limit the number of non-deployed ICBMs and 
sets of ICBM emplacement equipment at an ICBM base for silo launch-
ers of ICBMs to no more than:
(i) two ICBMs of each type specified for that ICBM base and six 
sets of ICBM emplacement equipment for each type of ICBM spec-
ified for that ICBM base; or
(ii) four ICBMs of each type specified for that ICBM base and two 
sets of ICBM emplacement equipment for each type of ICBM spec-
ified for that ICBM base.
(d) Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of ICBMs and 
SLBMs located at test ranges to no more than 35 during the seven-year 
period after entry into force of this Treaty. Thereafter, the aggregate 
number of ICBMs and SLBMs located at test ranges shall not exceed 25.
2. For ICBM launchers and SLBM launchers:
(a) Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of non-deployed 
mobile launchers of ICBMs to no more than 110. Within this limit, the 
number of non-deployed rail-mobile launchers of ICBMs shall not 
exceed 18.
(b) Each Party shall limit the number of non-deployed mobile 
launchers of ICBMs located at the maintenance facility of each ICBM 
base for mobile launchers of ICBMs to no more than two such ICBM 
launchers of each type of ICBM specified for that ICBM base.
