will be impossible to move the French [and the] majority of other European
Governments from the attitude which they have consistently adopted on this
question and that in [present] conditions no further progress in regard to
land disarmament will be possible as long as this stumbling block remains
in the way. They do not therefore propose to offer any further resistance to
the French contention at the present time. It is not believed that any
American interest can be prejudiced by withdrawal of His Majesty’s
Government’s opposition on the military reservist question. An agreement
on land disarmament, even if it is in our view not entirely satisfactory in the
matter of military reservists would represent an important stage in the
general progress of disarmament and would be far better than no agreement
at all. Moreover acceptance of the French Government’s thesis on reservists
question will have important effect on [of?] winning French Government
over to British and American side in the matter of classification to be
adopted as a basis for naval limitation.
A reply before September 3rd was suggested in my telegram of July 30th
because it was feared at that time that a meeting of the Preparatory
Commission might be called before meeting of the Assembly. We ourselves
should have much regretted premature summoning of Commission but
might have been powerless to prevent it. There now seems little further risk
of a meeting being summoned at that time. In the circumstances United
States Government will no doubt prefer to defer replying until there has
been time for a full consideration of the new proposal in all its bearings. It
is of course feasible [desirable] that a meeting of the Preparatory
Commission should not be summoned until Powers principally concerned
have had sufficient time for reflection.
You should read this telegram to Mr. Kellogg at earliest opportunity.
[File copy not signed]
44 Copy apparently left with the Secretary of State; date of receipt not
indicated.
