3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
6
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
rights movement in this country. I ask you to take some steps on the In-
ternational level in connection with this.
For the urgent circumstances it is very important that I should
have an channel to contact your country and your close advisers. I’m
not going to abuse it, but one can imagine the situation when such line
could be the most decisive—not only for us but also for your country. It
is not unmodesty from me.
With Deep Respect
Andrey Sakharov9
9 Printed from a copy that indicates Sakharov signed the original.
3.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, February 1, 1977, 11:30 a.m.–12:30 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Anatoliy Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Affairs Assistant
Strategic Issues
President Carter began by stating he would like to move rapidly—
aggressively—on arms control issues with the Soviet Union. He men-
tioned that he had been encouraged by the messages he received this
summer from Secretary General Brezhnev. He would like to see
Brezhnev’s good wishes translated into positive results. The President
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 47, Chron: 2/77. Top Secret. Brackets in the original. The meeting
took place in the Oval Office. In his memoirs, Dobrynin described Carter: “American his-
torians describe his presidency as erratic, and in my country it is considered one of the
unfortunate pages in Soviet-American relations, an assessment with which I am inclined
to agree, although at the start he had had good intentions and wanted to develop stable
relations with the Soviet Union. One of the main reasons for his failure was the incompa-
tibility between his ideas, some of which were very good, and his ability to put them into
practice. He lacked flexibility. Seeking to achieve the best, he would underestimate tan-
gible assets. The most egregious example was in the field of disarmament. As he pursued
the wonderful bird of his dream—a drastic reduction in nuclear weapons—he let go of
the bird in his hand, the ratification of the SALT II treaty.” (In Confidence, pp. 374–375)
