August 8–September 17, 1978 149 Bank, the settlements should be frozen until such time as the Palestinians and the Jordanians can negotiate their future. Kamel said Egypt had understood the American position to be that all Israeli settlements in occupied territories are illegal. Freezing is a practical solution and this should be begun. It is up to the Palestinians and the Jordanians to negotiate the future of the settlements. But some way should be found to dismantle some of the new settlements and have others transferred to “encampments.” The Secretary asked if this is not something for the Palestinians to work out. Boutros Ghali agreed that freezing is a good idea, but suggested some way should be found to begin a dismantling process. El-Reedy echoed this view, contending that the Egyptian idea is to dismantle the settlements. The Secretary said that in Egypt this can be done, but not in the West Bank. Boutros Ghali observed that if the United States accepts withdrawal, then this should also apply to the settlements. Cannot a “certain number” of settlements be dismantled in the withdrawal process? El-Baz asked if we consider the settlements in the West Bank to be different from those in Sinai and Golan. Dr. Brzezinski responded in the affirmative. Sinai, he noted, is on the other side of a recognized frontier. El-Baz asked about the armistice lines as they pertain to settlements. El-Reedy said that all settlements on the West Bank have the same “quality.” One of the arguments that the Israelis have sometimes used is that the settlements are necessary for security reasons. At least some settlements should be abolished in the context of a general principle of withdrawal. El-Araby asked whether by freezing, we are thinking of the number of settlements or the number of people. The Egyptian Delegation chorused that both should be limited. Dr. Brzezinski pointed out that the problem of the West Bank settlements is more difficult to solve than that of Sinai. Refugees: El-Reedy asked about the United States’ view on refugees. Saunders said we agree with Egypt that an agreement must deal with displaced persons and with refugees. The latter will involve a larger group to help work it out. El-Reedy recalled that in the Rogers Plan,11 the United States had been clear on this issue. The refugees should go back or there should be compensation. Why should not some of the refugees go back under the United States proposal? Atherton observed that the solution of the refugee problem must be an international effort. El-Reedy reiterated the need to restate the right of return. Atherton recalled that we have regularly voted for this. It is a principle. 11 Reference is to a series of formulas for the resolution of the Arab-Israeli dispute first articulated by Secretary of State William P. Rogers in an address he gave on December 9, 1969. For the text of Rogers’s speech, see the Department of State Bulletin, January 5, 1970, pp. 7–11.
