136
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
In the light of these changes, a single United States policy toward
Latin America and the Caribbean makes little sense. What we need is a
wider and a more flexible approach, worked out in close consultation
with you. Together, we will develop policies more suited to each na-
tion’s variety and potential. In this process, I will be particularly con-
cerned that we not seek to divide the nations of Latin America one from
another or to set Latin America apart from the rest of the world. Our
own goal is to address problems in a way which will lead to productive
solutions—globally, regionally, and bilaterally.
Our new approach will be based on three basic elements:
First of all is a high regard for the individuality and the sover-
eignty of each Latin American and Caribbean nation. We will not act
abroad in ways that we would not tolerate at home in our own country.
Second is our respect for human rights, a respect which is also so
much a part of your own tradition. Our values and yours require us to
combat abuses of individual freedom, including those caused by polit-
ical, social, and economic injustice. Our own concern for these values
will naturally influence our relations with the countries of this hemi-
sphere and throughout the world. You will find this country, the
United States of America, eager to stand beside those nations which re-
spect human rights and which promote democratic ideals.
Third is our desire to press forward on the great issues which af-
fect the relations between the developed and the developing nations.
Your economic problems are also global in character and cannot be
dealt with solely on regional terms.
However, some of our own global policies are of particular interest
to other American States. When major decisions are made in these
areas, we will consult with you.
The United States will take a positive and an open attitude toward
the negotiation of agreements to stabilize commodity prices, includ-
ing the establishment of a common funding arrangement for financ-
ing buffer stocks where they are a part of individual and negotiated
agreements.
We will actively pursue the multilateral trade negotiations with
your governments in Geneva, Switzerland. We are committed to mini-
mize trade restrictions and to take into account the specific trade
problems of developing countries and to provide special and more fa-
vorable treatment where feasible and appropriate. We believe that this
is in our mutual interest and that it will create important new opportu-
nities for Latin American trade.
Our own science and technology can be useful to many of your
countries. For instance, we are ready to train your technicians to use
more information gathered by our own satellites, so that you can make
