72
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
aiming to do in the south what the left intends to do in northern urban
arenas.
POSSIBLE U.S. COURSES OF ACTION
[1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified]
a. Provide secret encouragement and give material assistance to
Bakhtiar as the moderate opposition figure who seems to have the
most momentum. But this course of action must presuppose that he
can overthrow Khomeini and form a viable alternative government. I
believe he may be able to upset Khomeini, providing two things: (a) he
can rally some kind of viable military underground which can seize
street power in the face of both leftist and pro-Khomeini street machin-
ery, and (b) he can somehow get Khomeini personally out of the pic-
ture—[less than 1 line not declassified]. But, I doubt if Bakhtiar could last
long if he did overcome the odds and take power. Either resurgent
Islamic mass protest or leftist street disruption could prevent him from
effectively ruling. He might well be assassinated by one fanatic or
another. In sum, Bakhtiar, bearing an intolerable burden of ousting a
saint, ill-equipped to contest on the street and with the best of luck
armed only by an uncertain military force, and with no provincial
backing (except the Bakhtiar tribe between Tehran and Isfahan) is not
a good bet, in my opinion. [2 lines not declassified]
b. Let nature take its course in Tehran—monitor it but not influence
it—until someone else rids Iran of Khomeini, [3½ lines not declassified].
The purpose of the following analysis is to explore in outline how
we could achieve this latter alternative:
[heading (1 line) not declassified]
The Saudi Arabian Government must be assumed to be concerned
and worried by events in Iran as:
a. A breakdown of Iran would lead to leftist, pro-Soviet control
or, at a minimum, a feudal chaos in Iran. Geopolitically, either possibil-
ity must be frightening to the Saudis.
b. Evidence of Shia missionary zeal could pose a direct threat
to Gulf Sheikhdoms who have significant Shia populations (Bahrain,
particularly) and, more importantly, pose a possible—at least, theoreti-
cal—threat to the Saudi Shia population which dominates Saudi Ara-
bia’s oil producing and refining regions near Dhahran.
c. Apparent U.S. impotence and inability to do anything once again
underscores how little hope Saudi Arabia can put in the U.S. as its
protector.
d. As a provincial vacuum in Iran provides its prime rival, Iraq, with
a happy hunting ground for intrigue amongst the Arabs of Khuzistan
(possibly also amongst the Kurds, although the Iraqis must view the
Kurds as a double-edged sword).
e. As a situation in which an irresponsible clerical, nationalist gov-
ernment might revive irredentist agitation for the return of Bahrain.
