982  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
48. I said I would move [hope?] he would be able do more than been 
done in past in impressing his authorities overriding importance this. 
I would say no more on this this morning.
49. Wang said he also hoped I would be able give him information 
about Chinese imprisoned US so as improve relations between us. They 
hoped US Government would give serious attention this question. This 
also undertaken by US in our agreement.
50. I asked if next Thursday, May 4 satisfactory. Wang agreed.
Gowen
612.	 Letter 43 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 43
Washington, May 21, 1956
Dear Alex:
As we stated in our telegram to you, we consider Wang’s new draft 
a retrogression from his December 1 draft and extremely dangerous. 
Judge Phleger is of the opinion that the Communists now realize that 
they came within an ace of agreeing to a formula that would have tied 
their hands. They are now taking care to protect themselves more fully.
It is noteworthy that the Communists worked into the first para­
graph of their new draft two of their five “principles of peaceful 
coexistence” which have formed the basis of joint declarations with 
India, Burma and other states. Judging from Wang’s efforts at the last 
meeting to get you to comment on this paragraph, they are hoping to 
demonstrate that we reject these principles and thus harbor the inten­
tion of interfering in their internal affairs and encroaching on their 
territorial integrity. This would strengthen their position vis-­a-­vis the 
neutralist states. Of course, we cannot accept paragraph one without, 
in effect, recognizing the PRC. It was for this reason that we asked you 
to try to get back to our April 19 draft as a basis for discussion, rather 
than comment in detail on the Communist draft.
It may be significant that the Communists selected two months as 
the period during which arrangements for a foreign ministers’ confer­
ence should be completed. Allowing a few weeks to reach agreement 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy.
