930 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV them. They do not want to risk war with the Soviets outside of NATO in support of our Southwest Asian operations. (S) The President said he did not want to throw cold water on this idea, but his experience in the past four years leaves doubt about our depending on our allies. To predicate the use of Turkish bases for cross-­ border operations against the Soviet Union is not a safe assumption. The Turks may never have the temerity to permit us to attack their neighbors from their soil. (S) Brown said that the Turks have some capability to let us operate early, i.e. before the outbreak of hostilities from their bases. (S) Dr. Brzezinski agreed with the President that the allies will not be dependable except in the event that their vital interests are directly at stake. He went on to argue, however, that the size of the forces, whether they be six and a half divisions or four divisions, may be less critical to convince the Soviets that we are serious than our unwillingness to commit some divisions. The President said he could not agree with this. (S) Brown explained that more lift is needed, not more divisions. If we had more divisions today we could not get them there in time to make a difference. Added lift is the critical need. (S) The President said then that he wanted to think out loud and to clear up in his own mind the strategic challenges to be met. He said that because he does not work with these questions daily, he does not have it as firmly in his control as the other members of the NSC who devote more time to the details. He believes we should proceed with the assumption that we will get little help from Turkey and Saudi Arabia. The allies won’t help much either, even if the Persian Gulf region is attacked. [2 lines not declassified] Brown said that lift from Europe requires about the same as lift is required for forces from the United States. If we draw from our forces in Europe for Southwest Asia, it should be a second and later deployment. (S) Dr. Brzezinski said why not say to the Europeans that X plus Y forces are needed for the Persian Gulf. We are providing X and you, therefore, should provide Y for that contingency. If you do not, we will have to take Y from Europe. (S) Brown said that he feels assured that we might have some French and British ground forces in the Persian Gulf contingency, but we will get nothing from the Germans. If we say we are unwilling to put our ground forces in Southwest Asia without German forces as well, this would not work. (S) The President asked about including Israeli forces. Brown said maybe, but is it worth the political liability? Israeli forces would not help much against the Soviets. (S)
