856 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX as described above, he will probably stay in Israel long enough to talk with Burg after his return from Cairo. Then he will move to Cairo and go the rounds with the important Egyptian participants and then will be ready to participate in the first substantive negotiating session. We may begin to see how the negotiations will work more clearly after the Burg-Khalil talks, but by the time the first session is completed, it should be possible to begin to see how each of the issues will be tackled and to see more clearly what approach to the issues makes most sense for us. 11. The strategy we have already set for ourselves of letting Egypt and Israel take the lead in organizing these negotiations is a valid one. Although they have been slow in pulling their acts together, they now seem to be getting together with hopes of having a sense of how to proceed by the second week in June. Newlin 258. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, June 6, 1979 SUBJECT Situation in Lebanon (C) The situation in Lebanon appears to be deteriorating.2 Specifically, there appears to be a growing risk of renewed internal conflict which could trigger external involvement. (S) The President would appreciate your analysis of the present situation and your suggestions of concrete steps we might take to minimize 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 58, Lebanon: 11/78–7/79. Secret. Copies were sent to Brown and Turner. 2 In a June 1 memorandum to Brzezinski, Sick observed that there was “growing evidence of a purposefulness in Israeli and Christian policy in Lebanon which could create a major crisis as early as this summer” and outlined a “worst case but plausible interpretation of present intentions and possible outcomes” of the situation. Sick concluded that the implications of the escalation of violence in Lebanon, including the continued shelling of UNIFIL positions by Haddad’s forces and the bombardment of Palestinian encampments, for U.S. policy in the region were “sufficiently grave to demand more systematic, high-level consideration that has been the case to date.” (Ibid.)
