278  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
funding. Though I suspect we might see some reduction in near-­term 
naval capability as a result, the full effects would manifest themselves 
only a decade or more from now when deliveries of the relatively small 
number of ships we can fund today will prove inadequate to replace 
the ships that will have to be retired then, and force levels will have to 
drop.
On the other hand, we could fund the Navy at a higher level—­
perhaps $3 billion higher annually just to meet the Navy’s desired ship-
building program—­today. If that were done within the current DoD 
budget by transferring funds from the other Services, I have no doubt 
it would jeopardize our efforts to improve our capability (and partic-
ularly our early capability) in the Central Front of NATO—­one of our 
most important objectives, and a key thrust of the CG (which I will 
discuss further below). If it were done not by transferring funds from 
the other Services, but by adding to the DoD budget, we would still 
be faced with the question of whether we would rather spend that $3 
billion that way—­to maintain the Navy’s capabilities a decade or more 
from now—­or whether those funds should not also be applied to our 
immediate, pressing needs for the Central Front or to ground and air 
forces for contingencies elsewhere.
That, of course, is a classic problem of balancing near-­term against 
long-­term goals. Though I can describe the alternatives for you, the 
judgment has to be subjective, and you should be aware of the problem.
I would like to turn next from the general subject of the level of 
the Defense budget to some other fundamental issues, starting in the 
strategic nuclear field with the perennial question of how much is 
enough. By any reasonable calculation, we are able today, and will be 
able tomorrow, to absorb a Soviet nuclear strike and still inflict damage 
in retaliation that we would consider catastrophic and intolerable for 
the Soviet Union. That should be enough to accomplish our ends if we 
have bought sufficient insurance to offset Soviet ASW, air defense, civil 
defense, attacks on our command and control, etc., and if the Soviet 
leadership viewed the world precisely as we do. But the evidence, such 
as it is, is that they do not. We therefore simply cannot be sure that dam-
age predictions that we may view as awesome would, in fact, deter the 
Soviet leadership from nuclear attacks.
I noted above the importance of how the Soviets, our allies, the 
third world, and even we perceive the overall balance of military 
power. That applies as well—­indeed particularly—­to the strategic bal-
ance. Should that balance be perceived as significantly in favor of the 
Soviets, it is conceivable that they would be emboldened to attempt 
political coercion, not only of us, but of our allies, whose will to resist 
could well be undermined should they perceive our strategic forces to 
be markedly inferior to those of the Soviets.
