520  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Assuming that Trujillo’s departure from the country is necessary 
before we can progress further toward our objectives, how is this to 
be brought about? I do not believe he can be persuaded to leave under pres-
ent circumstances by any U.S. citizen. In his mind he built this country 
out of nothing. The creditable physical plant which exists here, the 
high degree of sanitation, the law and order, the hundreds of Trujillo 
­statues – all these things he sees as monuments to his glory. He con-
ceives of all this as built up by his own tireless efforts day by day for 
thirty years. In addition to all this he is a tough, ruthless old tyrant who 
has weathered many a storm when all around him thought his ship 
was sinking. As of this moment I believe he expects to weather this 
storm also. It would be against this background that some one sent by 
us would have to persuade him to step out and I agree with you that 
success in this venture is doubtful.
Not only do I believe our agent could not persuade him at this time, but 
I also believe Trujillo would use our move against us. In my view he would 
inform the UN and the OAS that we were threatening him and that it 
was not the first time. He would refer to the attempt of General Clark, 
who called on him as a result of an appointment made by Ambassador 
Farland, and say here was another example of our intervention. The 
Foreign Minister has already referred to the Clark approach to me as 
intervention, as I reported at the time. [text not declassified] One of our 
dilemmas is that for an agent to be impressive he would have to be some 
one who could convince the Generalissimo that he spoke with author-
ity. Yet if he spoke with authority, this would give the Generalissimo 
the weapon he needs to charge us with intervention. I believe that 
Trujillo might (but only might) leave the D. R. today if he could be per-
suaded that he was about to be killed, but this is obviously no job for 
an American.
You asked who I thought would be the best intermediary in case 
we decided to approach Trujillo. Although I have said I do not believe 
any American can persuade him to leave, I shall go on to say why I 
do not think that certain persons who have been mentioned would be 
good choices. In this same mail, I have written a letter to Frank Devine 
stating at some length why I do not think Bill Pawley should be considered. 
Please ask Frank3 to show you that letter. The Papal Nuncio is out of the 
question. He is anathema to the Generalissimo and has not been in 
the country since last May owing to strained Vatican relations. Trujillo 
is presently conducting a war of nerves against the Catholic Church 
here and Church policy seems to be to try to ride out the storm in the 
hope of avoiding violence against it. The Church took courageous and 
3 Frank J. Devine, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs.
