Afghanistan that much closer to the Indian Ocean and we cannot be certain of what are the Soviet intentions. Would the Soviets accept a non-aligned government in Afghanistan? Dobrynin said yes, but it must not be hostile to the Soviets. The Secretary again questioned, do you accept the concept of a buffer state in Afghanistan? Dobrynin said yes, but remember that over the past 15 years there have been changes in the social structure and land reforms so that a buffer state would not be simply a reversion to the period of Daoud. The Secretary asked whether the 3-step proposal of Dobrynin had to take place step by step, or if some could take place at the same time. Dobrynin replied that it is probably simpler to proceed step by step, but there was no objection to a mixture. Sticking to his primary point, he repeated that the Afghanistanese are interested in the first step and the Soviets therefore support him. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] 256. Special Analysis Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, April 22, 1980 PAKISTAN: The Afghanistan Debate Pakistan continues to insist that the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan is a precondition for any improvement in its relations with either country. Islamabad’s position is under constant review, however, and President Zia is subject to conflicting pressures from within his government. Some officials favor opposing the Soviets more strongly; others want to appease Moscow. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]) Zia and his advisers are worried about Moscow’s long-term objectives in the subcontinent and about the serious problems Pakistan faces in the short term as the Soviets try to pacify Afghanistan. Some advisers believe that a continued influx of refugees could soon lead to a serious breakdown of law and order along the frontier. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
