94 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV agreement with the Allies to maintain 3 percent real growth in spending, better Allied reserves, etc. Dr. Brzezinski: You say that we can pursue H at the cost of F. I’m pleased. General Brown: I’m optimistic that we can do much better than today if we stick with the 3 percent growth. Secretary Brown: All these arguments rest on the premise that Bob Bowie has challenged: that the defense has an advantage. Mr. Bowie: This takes us back to yesterday’s discussion; we have a technological advantage. Let’s be inventive and see if we can’t counter the Soviets militarily without maximizing forces. Mr. Jayne: How long can the Soviets sustain conflict? Admiral Turner: [2 lines not declassified] It is obvious from this paper that we need to do a good deal more work here. I don’t know how much we have done in the past. Mr. Duncan: We need to move toward the 90-­day goal in lock step with NATO. We must increase conventional capability. If we move from the goal of improved conventional capability, we will have political problems; and we will harm our deterrent, too. Dr. Brzezinski: Are we talking about constructing a wish list for the President, or are we going to devise a strategy that we can accomplish? Mr. Jayne: We already went to the President with a wish list. We can’t do that again. The President said he wanted to get into the details, but the study’s cover memo implies that we want to go over the generalities again. Secretary Brown: But we need costs to be able to do what you propose, and the ones in the report aren’t good enough. Mr. Duncan: I wanted earlier to emphasize the importance of the first 7 to 14 days of a conflict. That means that improvements in readiness and early reinforcement come before sustaining capability. Mr. Aaron: I endorse that. Mr. Christopher: I want to focus on foreign policy. First, it’s desirable to confirm NATO strategy as it exists today. We can’t talk about giving away the FRG. But we can’t talk about holding out for a year, either. I’m one of David’s Victorians. It is also important not to overstate the threat. Otherwise, the analysis creates a high level of demand that appears to make the strategy unattainable. We need to keep working on the conventional deterrent. Secretary Brown: Let’s turn now to areas outside of Europe. Is it possible to hurt the USSR outside of Europe? Mr. Christopher: We want to emphasize ambiguity. Make the Soviets think that we might do something to them.
