302
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Recommendation
That you sign the memorandum at Tab A.
That you approve a 10–12 minute speech rather than a short state-
ment for Human Rights Week.5
Tab B
Memorandum From the Director of the United States
Information Agency (Reinhardt) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)6
Washington, November 16, 1977
As the end of the Carter Administration’s first year in office ap-
proaches, I have engaged in some preliminary New Year’s ruminations
and reflections on the experiences of several months at USIA. The
Agency’s Deputy Director, Charles Bray, has just returned from a
two-week visit to the Federal Republic of Germany, Nigeria, Egypt,
Jordan and Israel, and the impressions he gathered in discussions with
intellectuals, academics, media, government and opposition leaders in
these countries furnished more material for thought. Several common
themes concerning the atmospherics within which we operate abroad
emerged from our analysis.
—In much of the world, the intellectual discourse appears to pro-
ceed not from firmly held tenets about the future of a given society, but
rather from questions about the direction in which societies are headed,
questions about the place of any society in the community of nations
and about the place and role of individuals within societies. Perhaps it
has always been thus, but questions surely outnumber answers in
today’s world. In this psychological climate, the President’s emphasis
on human rights has struck a responsive chord with peoples, if not
always with governments. Their interest appears to lie less in the policy
implications of the President’s views than in what is perceived as a
powerful affirmation of basic human values.
5 Brzezinski placed a check mark on the approval lines of both recommendations.
His handwritten comment on a line for “Further Action” is illegible. The President did
not deliver a human rights speech as requested but offered comments regarding human
rights policy at a December 15 news conference. For additional information, see Docu-
ment 99.
6 No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the memorandum.
Brzezinski wrote the following handwritten notation on the first page of the memo-
randum: “Ri [Rick Inderfurth] Give me rest. WR [Weekly Report] idea?” A November 21
covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Tuchman transmitting Reinhardt’s memo-
randum and requesting that Tuchman provide him with a “quick reaction” to the pro-
posal is not printed. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1977)
