724
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
228.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee and Robert Kimmitt
of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 10, 1980
SUBJECT
VBB: Military Supply Relationship with Romania (S)
As you know, the Romanians recently raised with our Air Attache
in Bucharest the question of establishing a military supply relationship
with us.2 Both State and Defense have completed internal studies of
the issue. Defense favors moving ahead with a modest relationship,
while State is divided. Nimetz and EUR feel we should let the Romani-
ans down gently;3 PM agrees with Defense. Christopher also feels we
should consult with the allies before making any decision.4 Defense,
however, argues we should make our own decision and then talk to
the allies. (S)
There are thus two issues:
—do we wish to initiate a military supply relationship with the
Romanians
—do we consult with the allies before or after making our
decision (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Freedom of Infor-
mation/Legal, Arms Transfers/Country File, Box 29, Romania: 6/77–10/80. Secret. Sent
for action.
2 See Document 223 and footnote 3 thereto.
3 In a May 12 memorandum to Christopher, Nimetz recommended that the United
States consult with its Western Allies before making a decision on establishing a military
supply relationship with Romania. Nimetz cautioned that congressional opposition
would be fierce given Romania’s human rights record and that establishing such a
relationship with a Warsaw Pact country would “send very strange signals to the Western
Europeans whom we continually exhort to increase their defense efforts to meet the
Warsaw Pact buildup.” Nimetz cautioned that “Romania doesn’t have the dollars to
buy very much; nothing we provide will change the scenario if the Soviets invade”
and that “a Western European supply relationship might be more effective and less
controversial for a start.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for
Security Assistance, Science and Technology, Chron Files, Speeches, and Papers of Lucy
W. Benson (1979) and Matthew Nimetz (1980), Lot 81D321, Box 6, Matthew Nimetz,
Chron, May 1980)
4 In a May 6 memorandum to Christopher, Vest and Bartholomew sought a decision
on the Department’s position. Stating that Romanian motives for seeking a military
supply relationship remained unclear, Vest and Bartholomew estimated that the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan and tension in the Warsaw Pact toward Bucharest might have
increased Romanian anxiety. (Ibid.) Christopher decided on Allied consultations prior
to responding to Bucharest.
