North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 849 The purpose of this issues paper is to set out for PRC review the principal options for the orientation of US foreign assistance which emerge from the studies. The need for the presentation of sharply defined policy options to the President and for a Presidential Directive on the purpose and size of US foreign assistance underlie the concentration of this paper on the main foreign assistance policy options. It is suggested that, after its review of the various development assistance strategies, the PRC establish a high-level interagency working group to prepare a final options paper for Presidential review. If established, the PRC working group should examine the relationships of the different strategies to alternative funding levels, as well as the implications of each strategy for the organization of US assistance programs, achievement of US foreign policy objectives, Congressional attitudes and possible changes in legislation, the relative emphasis given to bilateral and multilateral assistance, and ways of evaluating the effectiveness of US development assistance. The working group should complete the options paper and circulate it for PRC comment in time for its transmittal to the President by October 31. Submission of the paper by that date would enable the President to take decisions which could then be fully reflected in the budget review process. The Effectiveness of Development Assistance There is growing concern over whether bilateral and multilateral assistance programs effectively meet the needs of poor individuals. The basic human needs strategy—which by general consensus will be a major part of any strategy for US foreign assistance—is in essence a response to the judgment that development assistance can reach poor people more effectively. PRM 8-Track III (pp. 14–23), the DCC study (Part III, pp. 12–19), and the Brookings report (pp. 1–16) review BHN issues and policy choices which are relevant to the PRC’s consideration of the alternative strategies for US assistance. The problems affecting the administration of US aid programs cited by the DCC and the critique found in the Brookings Institution report amount to a judgment that the current US bilateral program and its legislative framework as well as multilateral programs need improvement. For example, the DCC’s study suggests that administrative changes within AID and improvements in the Foreign Assistance Act would make the US bilateral program more effective. The Brookings report argues for a major reorganization and restructuring of the US development assistance effort. meeting. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 26, PRM–08 3 of 3 [1])
