Human Rights 577 184. Telegram From the Mission at Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, March 17, 1979, 1225Z 4619. Subject: (C) Human Rights Commission—35th Session Wrap-up. 1. (C—Entire text). 2. Summary: In comparison with sessions of the past few years, this session was more confrontational and political, but it must be judged against the background of unsettling events occurring simultaneously in the Middle East, Southeast Asia and Southern Africa. The Arab group became more militant, the Non-Aligned wanted to avoid an airing of the Southeast Asian situation, and the Africans remained silent as one of their worst human rights violators, Uganda, was invaded by a neighbor. From our perspective, a larger number of cases were handled under the confidential 1503 procedures, with Equatorial Guinea later being discussed publicly. Progress was made on the drafting of legal instruments such as the torture convention, draft declaration on religious intolerance, and a good airing by many countries of the Genocide Report took place. Helsinki monitors were specifically mentioned by name, and countries were encouraged to set up national institutions dealing with human rights. Negative aspects of the Commission’s work were the sad spectacle of cutting off debate on flagrant human rights violations in Cambodia, and the disheartening failure that no action was taken on missing persons and on the mass exodus of refugees. The consideration of overall analysis of human rights in the UN system led to adoption of a text which will hopefully strengthen the UN human rights sector and promote the objectives as the establishment of the post of High Commissioner. End summary. 3. General overview: The first two weeks of the Commission session saw more aggressive actions by Arab members on Middle East issues than in the past and a less polemical treatment of Southern Africa issues. In the succeeding three weeks the atmosphere heated up considerably as the Commission went into confidential session to deal with violations in individual countries under the 1503 procedures. The confidential sessions were followed by a final week of widespread name calling as most of the political conflicts of the moment, and some from the past, were aired and reflected in resolutions. At mid-session the Latin states seemed to be suffering the heaviest criticism and were 1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, PORG 1979 35th UNHCR. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated for information to USUN.
