Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Mr. Claytor wondered about the effect on the U.S. priests and others who had been going back and forth to Tehran. Secretary Vance said that in terms of international practice, it would make no difference. However, psychologically it would make them less willing to continue their efforts. Mr. Powell said the psychological effect of a break in relations would be to send a signal that this is the first step. The average citizen would see this as the possible prior step to some kind of military action. The Vice President said that if they break first, we will look weak and reactive. He would like to get ourselves out of the position of being seen as trying to get the Allies always to go along. Mr. Powell said it was important for us to signal that while we want the support of our Allies, we intend to do what we have to do. Maybe this is the most encouraging thing we could say to the Allies. Dr. Brzezinski said it would also tell the Iranians that we have exhausted all steps available to us. He recommended that we say that explicitly and privately to the Iranians. We should also indicate that we will wait 2–3 more weeks, then take more severe action. They may threaten the lives of the hostages. It is necessary for the views of Khomeini, the Revolutionary Council, the President and the students to coalesce. Mr. Christopher said he thought we should go ahead with the break in relations. Otherwise we are left with the problem of trying to explain the metaphysics of why this is different from a break in relations. The President asked for views, then noted that the group was unanimous in their views, “Just like the Revolutionary Council.” He did not support cutting off financial support for the students, but we should cut off all visas. With regard to the “refugees from injustice,” phrase in the announcement, he thought that our interpretation of exceptions should be very narrow. We should not let them into the country. If they are truly escaping from persecution, that is acceptable. Mr. Aaron suggested changing the wording to say that Consular officers will not let them in unless there are compelling reasons. The President added unless there are compelling and proven reasons. The impression is that we have not done a damned thing. Just as the expulsion of 65 diplomats who then “vanished.” The Attorney General said that nearly 1,400 Iranian students have left and we are pretty certain of that although we do not have a signed piece of paper to prove it in each case. The President said that we are making tough statements, then when the evidence dribbles in . . . Dr. Brzezinski suggested “compelling and convincing reasons . . .”
