834 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX international terrorism and that we supported efforts in the UN and elsewhere to find effective measures to combat it. We hope that we can work together with Yugoslavia to put teeth into these measures. Minic said he agreed on the problem, and in the UN there had been some efforts. But there were differing views. The main issue concerned the “national liberation” movements. It is difficult among the nonaligned to get agreement if the effect is to inhibit the struggle by those involved in “national liberation” movements. If the political causes which give rise to these kinds of disturbances were resolved the broader issue could also be resolved. In that case, we would be left with the other problem, which is a common threat to mankind. He suggested that the U.S. talk with other nonaligned countries, and offered to be of assistance in arranging these contacts. Secretary Vance said we agreed that such consultations would be useful and we will seek them with other nonaligned countries as well as with Yugoslavia. Minic said that he thought all bilateral matters had been covered and that the two secretaries should tell the two Presidents that they need not deal with them, but could go on to other international questions. Secretary Vance agreed. Horn of Africa. Noting that there were some additional time remaining, Secretary Minic said that he would like to follow up on some of the topics discussed the previous day by the two Presidents. On the Horn of Africa, he said that he would be received by both Mengistu (of Ethiopia) and Siad Barre (of Somalia) on his forthcoming visit. He said he hoped both would not be angry because of President Tito’s comments in his interview with James Reston. Regardless of this, Yugoslavia has very good relations with both, and both want Yugoslavia’s full support in their dispute. The Yugoslavs have told them that they cannot agree that war can solve their problems, and that these and similar questions must be resolved by peaceful means. The Yugoslavs had thought much about this question, and others including President Carter had also expressed their concern. Yugoslavia has a diplomatic dialogue with both countries, but feels that no solution is possible until the military situation changes. It now appears that the military situation is changing so a solution may be closer. It should be on the basis on the principles outlined by the two Presidents in their previous meeting. It is best that neither side be victor nor vanquished but resolve the matter fairly through negotiations. Yugoslavia has informed five or six countries about its plan and has asked for parallel approaches. All would be informed of the results. Concerning the U.S., it would be very good to implement the understanding between Mr. Aaron and President Mengistu and send a new Ambassador to Ethiopia as soon as possible. This should go together with further efforts to bring about the withdrawal of Soviet and Cuban forces. Minic asked that we con-
