638 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX The discussion of human rights was useful. Although the two countries have different perspectives, they share similar goals. President Ceausescu expressed thanks for the talks and the visit and hoped that relations will further develop. Other questions remain to be discussed, but they can be tackled when the President accepts the invitation to visit Romania. Following the talks at 12:00 the two presidents were joined by their wives for the signing of the Joint Declaration.3 3 See Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 743–745. 205. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Vest) to Acting Secretary of State Christopher1 Washington, August 18, 1978 SUBJECT US-Romanian Relations: Next Steps The Romanians will be upset over the Pacepa case for some time.2 It will affect the tone and frequency of their contacts and exchanges with us. Ceausescu’s image as a man in control of his internal affairs is shaken and his natural paranoia about his advisers is heightened. As unfortunate as this event surely is, Ceausescu is now in a phase of high international posture with his recent speech once again declaring Romania’s independent foreign policy line, his cool meeting with 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Office of the Deputy Secretary, Warren Christopher, Lot 81D113, Box 5, WC—Official Chron—1978. Secret; Roger Channel. Luers initialed the memorandum for Vest. Drafted by Schmidt; cleared by Luers. The date is handwritten at the top of the first page. The word “Acting” is inserted by hand before Secretary. 2 Lieutenant-General Ion Mihai Pacepa, First Deputy of the Director of Foreign Intelligence Branch of the Securitate, State Secretary in the Ministry of Interior, and Ceausescu’s counselor for National Security and Economic Development, defected to the United States on an official trip to West Germany in August. He was the highestranking Eastern European defector during the cold war. In September 1978, the Romanian Government indicted Pacepa for high treason, condemned him to death, and placed a $2 million bounty on his head. The death sentence was overturned in 1999 by the Romanian Supreme Court.
