1242  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
inevitable if we continue on the present course. It would also deprive 
the Soviets of an issue which has been skillfully used by them as a 
diversionary one in disarmament negotiations, serving, in effect, as a 
“put up or shut up” proposition.
We do not believe, however, that we should completely abandon 
the linkage between test suspension and other disarmament measures. 
Accordingly, we propose making continuation of the test ban beyond 
three years conditional upon agreement on the cut-­off. The advantage 
of retaining this linkage is that it would put additional pressure on the 
USSR to accept further disarmament measures, since we anticipate that 
our position, which would be in line with those expressed by Japan and 
by Yugoslavia, would gain worldwide support.
The statement that testing, if it is resumed, would take place only 
underground would help us meet the health hazard argument against 
testing, since underground testing (which has been proved technically fea­
sible) would not put any further radioactive material into the atmosphere.
Probable reaction of our allies
UK—could be persuaded to support and will view with relief any 
moves which will make the cut-­off less imminent. The U.K. has recently 
reminded us of our Bermuda agreement to consult with them on any 
proposed changes in testing policy.
France—would probably oppose privately, but may be persuaded 
to support rather than be the only testing power. Also possible, in view 
of the fact that suspension would not take effect until January 1, 1959, 
that France may have completed its first test by then.
Canada—would support strongly.
Provision should be made in any agreement on testing for con­
tinued experimentation with nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 
under international auspices.
Tab B
CUT-­OFF OF FISSIONABLE MATERIAL PRODUCTION
PROPOSED POLICY
A. Suspension of production of fissionable materials for use in 
nuclear weapons as soon as an effective inspection system is agreed 
and installed.
B. Agreement on schedule for transfer of materials from weapons 
to peaceful uses to go into effect simultaneously with A.
C. Immediate convening of a technical working group to design an 
inspection system capable of accomplishing this cut-­off.
DISCUSSION
August 29 Proposals—Cessation of production of fissionable mate­
rial for weapons purposes is a key element of this proposal, but imple­
mentation was conditional upon acceptance of all other elements.
