1977 93 Dr. Brzezinski: Is that orderly withdrawal? General Brown: Between just us and the Germans we could do ­better than that. Secretary Brown: Essentially it’s the “limit loss” strategy. Look at the chart on page III-3. General Brown: But we don’t have 90 days of sustaining capability. Secretary Brown: But we have more than 30. We plan to keep 30 in the theater. Admiral Turner: I want to re-­emphasize David Aaron’s point. The Allies can’t even last for 30 days. Mr. Aaron: NATO is like Victorian society: it’s built on hypocrisy. We say we want to do one thing but we all know we can only do another. But we can’t go back to a 30-­day sustaining capability, nor can we talk about territorial loss because of the consequences for Germany. We might want to look at other options. For example, maybe we want to have nuclear forces in the theater that can strike the USSR. With the conventional situation being what it is, should we not put GLCM in the theater? General Brown: That’s going the other way. We want to improve conventional forces and raise the nuclear threshold. Mr. Aaron: We are faced with a choice: more theater nuclear forces, or more conventional capability. Mr. McGiffert: You are not describing alternatives; we can do both. Secretary Brown: Yes. You can continue to try to improve conventional capability. Stan, what about the warning question? Admiral Turner: We are working now on an estimate on warning, so I don’t want to say more about that now, [2 lines not declassified]. Also, I worry from an historical standpoint about the idea of a short war. That’s what everyone thought before World War I and World War II. Secretary Brown: But, if you know that the other guy is going to run out of materiel, all you need to do is outlast him. Mr. Bowie: I do not understand how a stalemate strategy will deter him. Secretary Brown: That’s what we do in Korea. Mr. Bowie: Korea is a situation where the forces on both sides are equal. The stalemate strategy postulates weakness, however. Secretary Brown: Because it is widely held that the defense has an advantage. Dr. Brzezinski: George, what would it cost to do what you want to do in Europe? General Brown: We can move toward what we want to accomplish with actions such as our current initiatives program in NATO. The
