It is clear that an increase in the elevation of turret guns of capital ships
cannot be intended for the purpose of providing means of defence against
air and submarine attack.
As regards the question whether such increase in the elevation involves any
“reconstruction”, the increase of the elevation of guns together with
consequential alterations such as scrapping or replacement of existing fire-
control systems, etc., involves considerable “reconstruction” in the fullest
sense of that term. It is, therefore, the view of His Majesty’s Government
that an increase in the elevation of turret guns is not permissible under the
terms of the treaty.
There is, however, a larger aspect of the question, and it is on this that His
Majesty’s Government desire to lay particular stress. One of the objects of
the treaty, as expressed in the Preamble, is to reduce the burdens of
competition in armament; and His Majesty’s Government cannot but feel
that the inevitable result of the action proposed by the United States naval
authorities will be to defeat this object to a considerable extent. The
proposal is to increase the elevation of the turret guns of 13 capital ships.
His Majesty’s Government are, of course, not aware of the exact amount of
expenditure which this proposal would involve, but they note that the sum
of $6,500,000 is proposed for that purpose, in addition presumably to any
portion of the sum of $300,000 per ship per annum, regularly available for
repairs without express congressional sanction, which may be employed. If,
however, the proposal is carried! out, it can hardly be doubted that public
opinion in the United Kingdom will demand a corresponding increase in the
elevation of guns of the retained British capital ships, which will involve
dealing with 17 or 18 ships, at an approximate cost of £116,000 per ship.
The Japanese Government would probably feel compelled to take similar
action, and the peoples of the three countries concerned would have to
support the great expenditure involved, while the relative position of the
three fleets would not be materially affected by the alterations. His
Majesty’s Government cannot doubt that the Government of the United
States will agree that such a result would not only be deplorable in itself,
but inconsistent with the objects of the Naval Treaty and the hopes which its
conclusion inspired.
