Afghanistan tional elements needed to be added: (1) Transitional arrangements on how stability would be maintained in Afghanistan during the turnover period if the Soviets should in fact agree to withdraw; and (2) Graduated steps spelling out how we get from here to there, i.e., how would we present this to the allies and to the Soviets, and how would we avoid getting involved in a negotiating situation on issues we would prefer to avoid. (S) Dr. Brzezinski noted that when he had presented some ideas along this line to Dobrynin, Dobrynin had remarked several times that that was not what they were hearing from America’s allies.3 Who was taking a different view? Mr. Aaron suggested that the original German paper, which had focused on possible concessions to the Soviets to get out of Afghanistan, may have been the source of these reports.4 The French, Warren Christopher noted, had contributed to that paper. (S) The SCC agreed that the word “prompt” should be added to the first element in the paper (“Prompt withdrawal of all Soviet military Mr. Christopher explained that the preparation of the attached paper had focused on the basic elements of a policy, and had not addressed a negotiating strategy. That was the reason why the two additional elements identified by Dr. Brzezinski were not included. The objective was to put together a reasonable policy package which would put the onus on the USSR. (C) Secretary Brown noted that the seventh point was the most dangerous since it opened the possibility of negotiating with the USSR about security arrangements in the region outside Afghanistan. The SCC agreed that we should not initially raise this point with the USSR—at least not in this form—but that the principle was essential. It would be preferable either to redraft the statement or to hold it back for use if and when the Soviets introduced the idea of negotiating rights for themselves in the region outside Afghanistan. Warren Christopher thought it important to include this point in case the package leaked Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the sixth element did not get us involved in a negotiation about the location of the Afghan border. the page, he wrote: “Presumption must be that Soviets will not withdraw under any circumstances, therefore, how to keep allies with us & win propaganda points.” These notations were also conveyed in a memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance, March 19. (Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensitive File, 1979–
