September 18–December 16, 1978
389
1. Met with PriMin Moustafa Khalil for two and a half hours this
evening. On instructions, he was busy preparing a letter from President
Sadat to President Carter. Khalil said the purpose of the letter is to em-
phasize to President Carter the importance of resolving satisfactorily
the three “major” points that Sadat needs in order to sign the treaty (ref
B) and to convey Sadat’s deep concern about Israeli statements on set-
tlement expansion and East Jerusalem.4 The letter had first to be typed
and then cleared with Sadat before it could be given to me.
2. Text of letter follows:
Quote:
Dear Mr. President:
I would like to thank you for your great personal efforts for the
progress which has thus far been achieved in the Egyptian-Israeli peace
negotiations. I appreciate very much what has been done concerning
solving many problems to make the signature of the peace treaty very
much anticipated in the near future.
There are essentially three main points that must be met before the
treaty is signed by Egypt, namely:
1—the duration of the treaty.
The nature of peace and peaceful relations may be of a lasting na-
ture. But the specific obligations contained in the treaty of the Egyptian
land should be limited in time.
Therefore, making the duration of the treaty 25 years pertains es-
sentially to the obligations contained in the treaty.
2—Egyptian sovereignty over the Sinai.
The treaty must emphasize the full sovereignty of Egypt over the
Sinai. The exercise of this sovereignty will be linked to the withdrawal
of Israeli forces in the two stages.
3—No preferential treatment should be accorded to Israel. There-
fore no priority of obligations should be stipulated in the treaty.
I would also like to bring to your attention my deep concern about
the statement made today by Minister Dayan about strengthening the
settlements on the West Bank, and equally so the statement made by
Prime Minister Begin about moving the Prime Minister’s office and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs to East Jerusalem. These statements are not
treaty. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850067–2731) In telegram
272016 to Cairo, October 26, Vance acknowledged that Carter received Sadat’s oral mes-
sage. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State
Department Out, Box 113, 10/23–31/78)
4 See footnote 2, Document 100. Dayan informed Viets, in a conversation at the air-
port before the former’s departure for Washington, that Begin was “seriously consid-
ering” moving the two Ministries to East Jerusalem. (Telegram 15650 from Tel Aviv, Oc-
tober 26; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780440–0215)
