Considerable correspondence later passed between the Public Trustee and
the Alien Property Custodian, the details of which are not essential to an
understanding of the present situation. It would seem to be sufficient to say
that there was entire agreement between the Public Trustee and the Alien
Property Custodian with respect to the securities here in question, as is
shown by the fact that large quantities of certificates falling within the
category mentioned were subsequently turned over by the British Public
Trustee and his successor, the Comptroller of the Clearing House (Enemy
Debts) London, on the basis of a list furnished by the Alien Property
Custodian of the securities with respect to which demands had been
registered by him on the books of the American companies.
On his part the Alien Property Custodian assisted the Public Trustee in
perfecting his claim to stock with respect to which no demand had been
made by the Alien Property Custodian on the books of the companies. He
also turned over to the Public Trustee certificates issued by a British
corporation where demand for the stock had been made by the Public
Trustee on the company.
The Public Trustee has now filed three Bills of Complaint (February 24,
February 29, and March 2, 1928,) in the Supreme Court of the District of
Columbia against Howard Sutherland, Alien Property Custodian, et al., to
recover securities turned over by him pursuant to the above-mentioned
arrangement. The court actions are understood to be based on the theory
that the Public Trustee was under a misapprehension as to his rights under
the law with respect to these securities. It apparently is now his intention to
contest the principle formerly accepted by him, namely, that by demanding
the beneficial interests on the books of the companies, the Alien Property
Custodian acquired all interest in the shares as against the Public Trustee
who held the certificates. The British Public Trustee apparently regards as
favorable to his contention that he is entitled to have the securities returned
to him the decision of the Supreme Court in 1925 in the case of the
Disconto-Gesellschaft v. U. S. Steel Go. (267 U. S. 22), which had to do
with certificates of shares in the U. S. Steel Corporation, endorsed in blank
and owned and held by German corporations, which were seized in London
during the war by the British Public Trustee. While the court held in that
case that, under the laws of New Jersey, under which the corporation was
