542 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II being made by the Ad Hoc Committee for Ratification of the Genocide Convention (a group of NGO organizations). The count is 47 certain, 16 probable, and 8 undecided. A list is attached.3 We cannot expect an absolutely firm count until the decision is made to go ahead, since there is a chicken-and-egg problem for many Senators—they will not make a commitment until they are sure that the Administration is committed, and vice versa. Nevertheless, if this count holds up in the preliminary contacts, I would argue that there is no question but that we should try for ratification early next session. With cloture in hand, the remaining four or five votes will come easily. The issue may require a half dozen phone calls by the President, but no more. What is most often forgotten in the debate on this subject is that a win on Genocide will be an important victory for the President, and will therefore strengthen his position on SALT, and help to erase the press view that this is a much more conservative Congress than the last. If he wins on this, Carter will have achieved something that 5 previous Presidents have tried and failed to do, and that’s a powerful argument. Thirtieth Anniversary Speech Our thinking on the speech has been that it should announce the Genocide effort as its primary press hook. It could also reiterate the importance of the other international human rights treaties—the UN Covenants, the American Convention and the Helsinki accords, among others—and from there naturally lead into a discussion of the importance of the international fora in promoting human rights, and a brief review of the significant steps that have been taken in this area in the past year. State has suggested two other initiatives that might be mentioned. The first is to propose that the jurisdiction of the US Civil Rights Commission be expanded to include human rights obligations, including those stemming from international commitments. The name of the Commission would be changed to the Human Rights Commission. This linkage of human rights to civil rights will strengthen the already existing ties between human rights and civil rights groups, and should increase domestic support for the human rights policy. State discussed this proposal with the Commission last year. They reacted positively, but urged that it be put off until this year, after their authorization was extended by Congress. The extension was successfully acted on last session. 3 Attached but not printed is the list entitled “GENOCIDE VOTE COUNT As of November 16, 1978.”
