3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
608
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
the entire world. It was the chief concern of the Soviet leadership that
neither the Soviet people nor any other people in Europe ever live
through what the Soviet people had experienced in the years of World
War II as a result of the Hitlerite aggression. That was the firm resolve
of the Soviet people and the Soviet leaders. Brezhnev was able to say
with satisfaction that the political situation in Europe today was better
than ever in the past and that the normalization of relations between
our two states has played a role in that process.
Brezhnev continued that naturally, the Soviet Union, as well as the
U.S., had to take into account reality. This reality was that Europe in-
cluded neighboring countries with different social systems and that
both the Soviet Union and the U.S. had allies and friends in Europe.
Brezhnev could say for his part that the Soviet Union accepted this situ-
ation as constituting reality. Whether within the framework of the so-
cialist commonwealth or in its relations with Western countries or in
terms of its European policy in general, the Soviet Union did not
pursue an anti-American course or try to prejudice legitimate interests
of the United States. And certainly the Soviet Union was not spreading
among the public the thought that the United States was an adversary
or an enemy of the Soviet Union. Brezhnev wanted to expect a similar
approach on the part of the U.S. with respect to the Soviet Union and its
interests.
Brezhnev continued that the European situation did, of course, in-
clude elements which raised concern, such as efforts aimed at lop-
sided, Brezhnev would even say self-serving, interpretations of the
provisions of the Final Act of the European Security Conference, when
some provisions were emphasized more than others in order to use
them as part of an effort to interfere in the internal affairs of other
states. In Brezhnev’s view, it was in our mutual interest to implement
all the provisions of the Final Act and to do so in a spirit of constructive
cooperation and good will. After all, that was the very essence of the
Helsinki conference and of the document adopted at that conference. It
was in this spirit that the Soviet side planned to approach next year’s
Madrid meeting. He trusted that the U.S. would pursue a similar ap-
proach and that there would be no repetition of the negative experience
of the Belgrade meeting.
Today the climate in Europe was quite healthy, but such a climate
could hardly be imagined in the absence of military detente on the con-
tinent. The Soviet Union saw the situation as follows. There long since
has taken shape an appropriate balance of forces between the two mili-
tary groupings. The Soviet Union accepted that balance, did not upset it
and did not intend to upset it. However, of late, NATO countries have
accelerated their military preparations to such an extent that questions
arise about these military preparations. Could it be that the United
