1352  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
could be made between testing of small bombs and those of a megaton 
or more. The Secretary had then suggested the possibility that the ter­
mination of atomic testing might be approached in two phases. Detec­
tion of megaton explosions would be relatively easy. Smaller weapons 
required more refined and elaborate methods of detection and this 
might be developed in the second phase. Thus there would be more 
time for the testing of smaller weapons. The Secretary said he had 
mentioned this idea to Dr. Killian whose preliminary reaction was that 
some such gradual approach might be practical.
The Secretary agreed with the Ambassador that we should concert 
our views on the subject. While a meeting with the Soviets should be defi­
nitely scientific and technical in nature, the experts should of course not 
be left without guidance of experienced political advisers. In this connec­
tion he cited the experience of the Japanese trade negotiations with the 
Chinese Communists in which the Japanese trade experts had innocently 
agreed that the Chinese Communist trade representatives in Japan should 
be allowed to fly their flag. This had led to all kinds of complications. 
The proposed technical talks on methods of detecting tests would be full 
of political booby traps, e.g., the problem of placing control installations 
possibly in Communist China or Russian attempts to have such instal­
lations placed on Taiwan or in Vietnam. Certainly the head of the dele­
gation should be technical, but must have competent political guidance.
The Secretary then went on to say that he thought it imperative 
that we should reply quickly, mentioning in this connection that the US 
draft had been acted upon rapidly following his own return to Washing­
ton and had been approved by the President, Defense Secretary McEl­
roy, Atomic Energy Director Strauss, and Dr. Killian. Following British 
agreement we would propose to advise the French and the Canadians 
of our plans and then lay the matter before the North Atlantic Council.
Ambassador Caccia said he felt the Canadians would be quite 
agreeable though he feared that the French would be sensitive on the 
subject. In this connection he referred to a conversation of UN Secretary 
General Hammarskjold with the Russian UN Ambassador. Sobolev had 
interpreted the Khrushchev letter as meaning bilateral US–UK talks 
which Mr. Hammarskjold had said would be completely unacceptable. 
If the talks were to be convened within three weeks the Ambassador 
thought US and UK experts should be brought together almost imme­
diately, probably next week. It would be useful, he said, to have an 
early indication of our thinking. In this connection Mr. Farley said that 
he would try to get the Killian study on the subject to the British tomor­
row and follow up later with a fuller statement.
Ambassador Caccia remarked that action regarding a test suspen­
sion from the British point of view would be dependent upon the fate 
of the amendments to the Atomic Energy Act. The Secretary recognized 
that while it would be clearly stated that these technical talks were
