1338  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
effort both sides. If my govt kept demanding one thing from his govt 
one day and raising another the next, it is simply wishful thinking. He 
would refer to saying in his country that if person treats me well, I will 
go one better but if he treats me ill, let him beware of consequences. 
With respect other points I raised my statement he had at last meeting 
and also this morning expressed position and would not take time go 
over them.
27. I said I had not asked him take any action with regard those 
remaining Americans other than what he had taken with regard eleven 
airmen and ten civilians. Not asked to take any action other than what 
we had taken in regard Chinese in US.
28. Wang rejoined, he had made it clear time and again progress 
talks depend concerted efforts two sides.
29. Wang suggested next meeting March 14. I agreed.
Gowen
791.	 Letter 66 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 66
Washington, March 8, 1957
Dear Alex:
1. Dave Osborn returned on March 4 and received a warm wel­
come. His ringside report on recent developments has been illuminat­
ing and has given us a better feel of the atmosphere. He reported to 
Mr. Robertson briefly on March 5. Unfortunately Mr. Phleger could not 
attend that session. Mr. Robertson left with the Secretary March 6 for 
the SEATO meeting at Canberra. Mr. Robertson will visit several of our 
SEA and SPA posts after the Canberra meeting and will not return to 
Washington until March 25. A copy of his itinerary is enclosed.
2. The Secretary on March 5 personally authorized your home 
leave following the next meeting on March 14. He agreed that you 
should take your full home leave, passing up the April meeting as far as 
you are concerned. We will have something to say in our guidance tele­
gram which is to go out on March 11 regarding the way you will handle 
the announcement of your home leave plans with Wang at the next 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal.
