938 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement (C) Mixes international dispute and domestic matter; and (D) Failure couple Taiwan with FMC. 3. In rebuttal I made points contained paras 1 and 3 Deptel 1912, avoiding any invitation to Wang to produce new alternative. At close of considerable give and take in reply his statement our draft had not met their objections I stated their objections appeared to have two aspects. First was whether draft prejudiced their position and second whether declaration was to constitute unqualified renunciation of force all our disputes including dispute Taiwan area. Satisfied my draft fully met all objections based on first aspect. However, with regard second aspect, if PRC purpose is to retain ability use threat initiate force Taiwan area I agreed draft does not meet PRC position and US never would meet that position. To do so would be complete perversion of whole purpose of declaration. Wang made no direct reply. 4. I made very strong statement on implementation along lines para 4 Deptel 1912. Wang replied along usual lines stressing “growing dissatisfaction Chinese people” with US implementation and during the exchange, in which I made points contained para 5 ­Deptel 1912 stressing Indian Embassy has not brought our attention single case obstruction. He challenged me formally to state that “not single Chi­ nese now imprisoned in US”. 5. Agreed Wang’s proposal next meeting Saturday May 5. Departing for Prague Friday morning. Gowen 588. Telegram 1825 from Geneva1 Geneva, April 26, 1956, 6 p.m. 1825. Comments on today’s meeting. Would characterize Wang’s presentation today as tending more toward unwillingness under any circumstances (even including agree­ ment our part to FMC) unconditionally renounce force in Taiwan area, that is, also vis-­a-­vis GRC. However, one statement (para 10 Mytel 1823) could possibly be interpreted as reaffirmation of position toward which he sometimes in past appeared to be tending, that is, willingness 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/4–2656. Confidential.
