676  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
have about 500 missiles and before our Ballistic Missile Early Warning 
System is in full operation. Thereafter, the curve rises again under the 
assumptions that the BMEWS system will be installed as scheduled, 
and will be operational.
The smaller intelligence estimates of November lead to the upper 
estimate of aircraft available. Here, because until 1961 there is no sig­
nificant force of Soviet missiles, the upper curve continues to follow 
SAC’s present estimates of the number of aircraft to be available in two 
hours. The continued rise in the curve reflects SAC’s expectations for 
improving readiness.
After January 1961, the Soviet missiles begin to take their toll, 
while, on our side, BMEWS is going into operation.
So far we have been discussing the force of aircraft which we could 
mount in retaliation. As our missile forces build up, they contribute to 
the picture, as shown on the overlay. Following the lower curve, we 
find a final total of about 70 missiles surviving and available for retali­
ation. These correspond to that half of the Polaris force which, because 
it is at sea, escapes attack.
Under the lighter Soviet attack of the upper curve, a fraction of the 
hardened Titan missiles also are likely to survive attack. This fraction 
diminishes as the forces available to the Soviets increase.
We find, in the end of the period, a retaliatory force estimated at 
about 700 bomb carriers. Such a force is not to be dismissed lightly, but 
we must recognize that there are many factors which can influence the 
actual size of this force and cause it to differ from these estimates. We 
will want to discuss some of these factors, not with the aim of degrad­
ing these curves to a more gloomy picture of our condition, but in order 
to illustrate our main thesis.
As we said at the start, our main thesis is this: that our true stra­
tegic position is unclear, and that our estimates of it are set about by 
doubts. Our actual position is greatly sensitive to factors over which 
we have no control, necessarily then our estimates of this position are 
sensitive to the assumptions we make about these factors.
We feel that there are several things further that this country can 
do to remedy the situation, but before discussing solutions, I would like 
further to explore the anatomy of the problem.
What are the main sources of uncertainty in our situation as illus­
trated by these charts?
First, we are greatly dependent upon warning and upon decisive 
and impressively rapid response thereto.
Every blue aircraft on this chart is one that took off after a decision 
that attack was imminent or that war was unavoidable. When the real 
attack comes, every minute of indecision costs us about 40 bombing
