World Hunger and Food Policy —Secretariat characterized situation as not offering room for complacency, particularly since per capita production in the least developed countries continues to fall, and overall, the developing countries were increasingly dependent on food imports. Many developing countries argued for more external assistance to help attain food selfsufficiency, and for a larger share in international trade so they could better afford the food imports they needed. A trade resolution with emphasis on protectionism was adopted with U.S. and other Western countries expressing reservations. Improvements in share of trade and terms of trade, were urged by many developing countries as essential elements in the New International Economic Order (NIEO). Most developed countries cited actions, mostly through MTN that could help the LDCs in their aspirations for more trade. —Concerning fertilizer situation, many developing countries cited rising costs and argued that FAO program essential to help them get fertilizers they needed at prices they could afford. Secretariat noted that while voluntary contributions to the IFS lagging, they had received contributions to begin their “options system” which would also help low income countries to get fertilizer at less cost. —Forestry discussion highlighted need for greater understanding of the role of forests as contributing to food and fuel and to conservation of croplands. Djakarta Declaration received unconditional support.6 Most speakers of developing countries urged strengthened FAO program in forestry. 4. Agriculture: Toward 2000. This exercise by FAO designed to provide agricultural basis for new international development strategy under preparation for the General Assembly, to meet aspirations of New International Economic Order. Assumptions and conclusions in draft document were thought by many delegates to be optimistic. Revisions planned, including a scenario with lower economic growth rates and considerations of energy costs. U.S. also questioned assumption of constant weather and constant prices in devising model. 5. Fisheries—Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ).7 Discussion reflected relative priority of aquaculture vis-a`-vis new FAO program for development and management of fisheries in EEZ, and the relative priority of small scale fisheries within EEZ program. A U.S. co-sponsored resolution was approved on FAO’s program of assistance for development and management of fisheries in Exclusive Economic Zones. 6 The Eighth World Forestry Congress, held under the auspices of the FAO, took
