World Hunger and Food Policy
859
—Secretariat characterized situation as not offering room for com-
placency, particularly since per capita production in the least devel-
oped countries continues to fall, and overall, the developing countries
were increasingly dependent on food imports. Many developing coun-
tries argued for more external assistance to help attain food self-
sufficiency, and for a larger share in international trade so they could
better afford the food imports they needed. A trade resolution with em-
phasis on protectionism was adopted with U.S. and other Western
countries expressing reservations. Improvements in share of trade and
terms of trade, were urged by many developing countries as essential
elements in the New International Economic Order (NIEO). Most de-
veloped countries cited actions, mostly through MTN that could help
the LDCs in their aspirations for more trade.
—Concerning fertilizer situation, many developing countries cited
rising costs and argued that FAO program essential to help them get
fertilizers they needed at prices they could afford. Secretariat noted that
while voluntary contributions to the IFS lagging, they had received
contributions to begin their “options system” which would also help
low income countries to get fertilizer at less cost.
—Forestry discussion highlighted need for greater understanding
of the role of forests as contributing to food and fuel and to conserva-
tion of croplands. Djakarta Declaration received unconditional sup-
port.6 Most speakers of developing countries urged strengthened FAO
program in forestry.
4. Agriculture: Toward 2000. This exercise by FAO designed to
provide agricultural basis for new international development strategy
under preparation for the General Assembly, to meet aspirations of
New International Economic Order. Assumptions and conclusions in
draft document were thought by many delegates to be optimistic. Revi-
sions planned, including a scenario with lower economic growth rates
and considerations of energy costs. U.S. also questioned assumption of
constant weather and constant prices in devising model.
5. Fisheries—Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ).7 Discussion re-
flected relative priority of aquaculture vis-a`-vis new FAO program for
development and management of fisheries in EEZ, and the relative pri-
ority of small scale fisheries within EEZ program. A U.S. co-sponsored
resolution was approved on FAO’s program of assistance for develop-
ment and management of fisheries in Exclusive Economic Zones.
6 The Eighth World Forestry Congress, held under the auspices of the FAO, took
place in Djakarta, Indonesia, October 16–28, 1978. The Djakarta Declaration endorsed an
enlarged concept of multiple-use forestry in order to cultivate additional crops.
7 An EEZ is a sea zone over which a state has rights over exploration and marine
resources; it extends out to 200 nautical miles from a state’s coastal baseline.
