574 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV bargaining stability, and (3) stable deterrence at different levels.3 He suggested that to avoid getting bogged down, we should discuss the various issues in these terms. He noted that the message he got from the previous day’s briefs was that there are many weaknesses in our C3 system that imply a very poor capability to manage a nuclear war today. He noted that these weaknesses imply a weak bargaining position for us in a crisis, and this in turn implies a weakening of deterrence. Thus, the three questions are related. Admiral Turner questioned whether the connection between war management, crisis stability and deterrence stability was one that existed in reality or we created ourselves. Dr. Brzezinski noted that while one could think of this problem in many ways, the connection between war management, bargaining in a crisis and deterrence exists, and the Soviets must realize that. He also said that moreover they may have an incentive in a crisis to exploit this connection. Mr. Aaron observed that a bounding case was presented by the ability of one side to completely defeat or destroy the forces of the other. In this situation we would be unable to bargain successfully in a crisis and the Soviets would not be deterred. At this sort of extreme the connection must exist. Short of this extremes, we must weigh the tradeoffs involved in improving war management capabilities and how such improvements will affect crisis management and deterrent stability. Secretary Brown observed that weighing the role of war management capabilities is a matter of judgment and that he personally places little stock in many controlled war scenarios. He did feel, however, that large asymmetries in enduring war management capability could affect crisis bargaining and conflict outcomes. In any case, the side that perceived itself inferior in this respect would be extremely nervous in a crisis. Dr. Brzezinski commented that in democratic societies such nervousness would spill out into the public with obvious political effects. The discussion then turned to the first agenda item: China in the SIOP. Secretary Brown summarized the DOD point paper noting that at present there are [4 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown judged that the current US/Soviet strategic balance argued that SIOP weapons now allocated to China would be better used against Soviet targets, but he asked whether the military gain from such a shift, should it become public, would be worth the possible political problems created. Dr. Brzezinski asked about the security of such information. 3 See Document 118.
