Comprehensive Test Ban
405
Del this week, Soviet Delegation now clearly seems to appreciate that
our position on PNEs is firm. Although not necessarily related to this
development, Morokhov’s remarks on PNEs and other issues have
been subdued and defensive. US Delegation plans next week to keep
up the pressure on the Soviet PNE position, while outlining our views
on verification. End summary.
1. In terms of the positions taken by the three Delegations in the
plenary meetings and restricted sessions, first week of talks was rela-
tively uneventful. There were no apparent departures in substantive
positions, and little evidence of Soviet flexibility on any of three major
issues. US and UK Delegations devoted week to elaboration of views
on peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs), while Soviets delivered low-
key statements on “political” aspects of PNE questions and verification.
2. Despite routine character of week’s meetings, there seems, at
least for the moment, to have been a shift in the character and tone of
discussions on PNE question. During July round, Morokhov took an
aggressive posture from the start, predicting confidently that “new”
Soviet proposals for eliminating military benefits would solve PNE
issue. There were several indications that Soviets did not believe that
negative position taken by US Del in July reflected a firm consensus in
Washington. Now, however, Soviets seem clearly to recognize that US
position is firm.
3. Chief contributing factor has, of course, been strong line on
PNEs taken by the President both in his meeting with Gromyko and his
UNGA speech. (Both were cited to us by Soviet Deloff as evidence of
firm US position). When US Deloff showed text of President’s state-
ment [to] Soviet Deputy Chairman Timberbaev, latter remarked, “I see
that President Carter has changed his position.” When asked what he
meant, Timberbaev said that President’s early press conference re-
marks indicated that PNEs could be accommodated. Half-jokingly, he
said ACDA must have gotten to him. Deloff replied that there is no dis-
agreement within USG on PNE questions, and that clear position stated
by the President at UNGA reflects strong and unanimous recommen-
dation of all US agencies interested in problem.
4. Aside from President’s position, Soviets seem to have been im-
pressed by hard line taken by Amb Warnke in plenary statements and
private conversations.4 Warnke has emphasized in plenary that, in
view of inevitability of acquisition of military benefits and serious set-
back to non-proliferation efforts that would result from PNE exception,
PNE ban is indispensable component of effective CTB. Warnke has also
expressed the view that it is hard to see how us could possibly be party
4 Warnke’s statement at the opening plenary is in telegram 8405 from Geneva, Oc-
tober 3; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770360–0447.
