International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 725 Approve (recommended by Treasury, DPS, USTR, DOT, DOL, Commerce) Disapprove (recommended by CEA, Alfred Kahn, State, OMB, Henry Owen (see separate memo))14 IV. Likely Perception of the Proposal Overall, this package will be well received by auto interests, although there will be some criticism that it does too little. In this regard, the trade issue is critical. Our perception of how the various parties affected by the proposals will receive them is as follows: A. Industry—In general, they will be supportive and perceive the Government as being concerned and reacting promptly. In several areas, they will be disappointed that more was not done. They wanted more in the regulatory area, and legislative tax proposals. All were concerned with the problems of credit which prevailed at the time of the May 14th meeting, but these concerns have since eased. For at least two companies, Ford and Chrysler, the treatment of the trade issue will be particularly critical to their perception of the overall package. There will, however, be something there for each of the companies. —GM, by virtue of its strong financial and market position, will benefit from all actions the government takes. It has made tax and regulation its two top priorities. —Ford’s overwhelming concern is the trade issue (including cab chassis). Regulation and the problems of the dealers were also issues they raised, but much lower priority. Ford will view our response on these areas as positive. —Chrysler, AMC, and VW will benefit from the regulatory changes and the improved availability of dealer credit. B. Unions and Employees—Import restraint is the most important item in their set of priorities. They will support the dealer credit element and adjustment aid for communities, as well as the formation of the auto committee. Historically, the unions have been critical or negative on tax breaks for industry. C. State, Local, and Congressional—They will see the overall program as positive but weak without the import restrictions. V. Contribution from Industry and Labor All members of the EPG feel that it is important to ensure that our program is perceived as a cooperative effort to which all parties contribute and not simply as a series of concessions by the government to the automobile industry. During past weeks we have discussed with 14 The memorandum was not found.
