124 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 31. Memorandum of Conversation1 Moscow, March 28, 1977, 11 a.m.–1:45 p.m. SUBJECT US-Soviet Relations PARTICIPANTS U.S. USSR Secretary Cyrus R. Vance General Secretary L.I. Brezhnev Ambassador Malcolm Toon Minister A.A. Gromyko Mr. Paul Warnke Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin Mr. Phillip Habib Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov Mr. William Hyland Mr. G.M. Korniyenko Mr. William D. Krimer, Mr. O.M. Sokolov Interpreter Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter [Omitted here are Brezhnev’s expressions of condolence for the 300 Americans killed in an airliner collision in the Canary Islands and his introductory remarks on the status of U.S.-Soviet relations.] Secretary Vance first wanted to thank the General Secretary for the frankness and openness with which he had addressed the various important questions before us. He, too, would try to speak frankly and openly, because he believed this to be the best way of achieving results. First, before beginning to set forth the views of the United States regarding the relations between our two countries, the Secretary wanted to transmit to Mr. Brezhnev a letter from President Carter.2 (Brezhnev took a few minutes to read the translation of the President’s letter and passed it on to Minister Gromyko). The Secretary said that all of us were heartened by Brezhnev’s foreign policy remarks in his recent speeches. Last winter, as Governor Carter prepared to assume the presidency, he had been impressed and gratified by Brezhnev’s public statement on the importance of good relations between our two countries. In particular, he was encouraged by 1 Source: Department of State, Shulman Files: Lot 81D109, Vance to Moscow, March 28–30, 1977. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took place in the Kremlin. Drafted by Krimer; reviewed in draft by Hyland; approved by Twaddell on April 12. Printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 17. For subsequent memoranda of conversation, see ibid., Documents 18–23. Vance departed Washington on March 25 and attended an NAC meeting in Brussels before arriving in Moscow. Following his meetings with Brezhnev, Vance met with West German, British, and French officials in Bonn, London, and Paris before arriving in Washington on April 2. For the text of Vance’s news conferences while in Moscow, en route to London and Paris, and upon arrival in Washington; the joint U.S.–Soviet communique´ issued on March 30; Carter’s March 30 press conference; and Brzezinski’s April 1 news conference, see Department of State Bulletin, April 25, 1977, pp. 389–421. 2 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 15.
