690
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
March 11, 1979; 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., Cabinet Room, Jerusalem, Israel
(full memcon6 available)
American Side
Israeli Side
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Full American Delegation
Cabinet Defense Committee
Subject: President Carter and Secretary Vance present full package
of proposals. Prime Minister Begin reacts negatively to changes in
notes to Article 6; rejects language in draft letter on West Bank/Gaza
concerning implementation in Gaza first and possibility of Egyptian li-
aison officers.
The Prime Minister begins meeting by introducing his Cabinet.
The President thanks him for his hospitality and his working
throughout the previous night. He stresses close ties with Israel. He
notes that we are now at a historic point. Peace can be achieved with
Egypt and then with others and that in turn will enhance the relation-
ship with the U.S. All of this is important to regional stability.
We recognize your need for security and for oil, and we will guar-
antee it. We will do our best to contain the negative Arab reactions. You
have been forthcoming and we appreciate it.
The President then reviews specific points of the agreement.
He notes the extreme importance to the U.S. of the Gaza issue. The
deletions are of great importance to the U.S. There must be access to the
people of Gaza. The omission of the liaison officers would be a serious
loss to us and to Egypt. I cannot send Secretary Vance otherwise to
Egypt. I consider this to be crucial.
The Cabinet earlier agreed to withdrawal in stages. We need to
know what these stages will be so that we can resolve the issue of
ambassadors.
Oil issue: The demand for permanent pledge by Egypt is rejected.
The U.S. is prepared to provide guarantees.
Only issue to be resolved: access to Gaza. This is not only for the
U.S. but for Egypt.
Begin responds by noting that after normalization the Egyptians
would be free to travel anywhere. He is very rigid on the subject of the
letter and will not accept the inclusion.
The President: To me this issue is crucial. Your response is not ade-
quate. Only once have we taken such a position. Unless negotiating
teams have access, I do not feel I have fulfilled my obligations.
6 See Document 204.
