160 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement P.S.—June 2, 1958— On Friday morning, the holiday, Ambassador Victor Andrade came in and we had an extended conversation, first with reference to our visit in his country, and second regarding my talk with W.K. Whiteford, President of Gulf, which had taken place the day before. The Ambassador related some of the problems with which the present Government of Bolivia is confronted, speaking now from a political standpoint. He hastened to add, however, that he was not a technical man and was not certain as to whether or not he understood the point of view put forth by President Whiteford of Gulf. It occurred to me, and I immediately stated, that rather than attempting outline the position of Mr. Whiteford, since neither the Ambassador nor I were technicians in this field it would be far better to get the two men together and therefore he, the Ambassador, could get the story first-­hand. There is one point in the conversation that impressed the Ambassador very much, and that was that the amount of money necessary to develop this oil field which is now under the exclusive control of Y.P.F.B. would be ten or-­fifteen times the amount suggested as a present loan, namely $10 million. While we all know the difficulty that might be encountered from a political standpoint if the Government of Bolivia made further commitments in the semi-­proven territory now being worked by Y.P.F.B., nevertheless it seems to me that if the government officials could attract from $100 million to $150 million in outside capital without completely losing the identity of Y.P.F.B., it might be the possible lifesaver for this little country. In any event, this morning I reached President Whiteford in New York, related my conversation with Ambassador Andrade to him, gave him the Ambassador’s address and telephone number, and received the promise that he would get in touch with the Ambassador at the earliest possible date. I think this is as far as anyone in the Export-Import Bank should go, particularly at this juncture. A copy of this letter and postscript is being sent to the Department of State in order that they may be fully informed. I explained to Mr. Whiteford over the telephone that these documents carried a confidential classification and therefore could not be distributed outside of government circles. He replied that he understood, that he was certain that the transaction had been reported and recorded as we agreed upon during our first talk. S.C.W.
