308 Colombia: U.S. Relations with Colombia CO–1. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot)1,2  Bogotá, January 16, 1958. PARTICIPANTS The Minister of Government, Brigadier General Pioquinto RENGIFO The American Ambassador, John M. Cabot General RENGIFO assumed office on January 8, and I today called on him at my request in order primarily to discuss the question of the closed Protestant churches. General Rengifo had been Governor of Antioquia at the time that I had accompanied Dr. Milton Eisenhower on his mission around South America,3 and we therefore briefly exchanged reminiscences. I then said to General Rengifo that he doubtless knew that the subject I had come to discuss was the question of the Protestant churches of Colombia. This was a matter which was of great interest to millions of Protestants in the United States since they had sent money for the construction of many of these chapels, and other contributions, and many had American pastors or other American connections. For decades the Protestant churches had existed in Colombia without any serious ­trouble - indeed, the Presbyterians had been invited by the Government 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 821.413/1–1658. Confidential. 2 This memorandum was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 596, January 16. In the covering despatch, Ambassador Cabot stated in part the following: “The Department will note that General Rengifo gave me no explicit assurances, and that we may be faced with further indefinite stalling on this question. Nevertheless, he seemed to take a somewhat more affirmative position than his predecessor, and I am hopeful that he will be willing at least to reopen some of the churches in the non-­mission territories within the foreseeable future. I shall of course continue to press this matter as much as I feel is likely to produce favorable results.” 3 Reference is to Milton Eisenhower’s visit to South America, June 23–July 29, 1953, to conduct a fact-­finding mission for the President. For documentation on the visit, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. IV, The American Republics.
