would be an improvement if this work were consolidated and placed under
the direction of a single commission.
FRENCH SPOLIATION CLAIMS
During the last session of the Congress legislation was introduced looking
to the payment of the remaining claims generally referred to as the French
spoliation claims. The Congress has provided for the payment of many
similar claims. Those that remain unpaid have been long pending. The
beneficiaries thereunder have every reason to expect payment. These claims
have been examined by the Court of Claims and their validity and amount
determined. The United States ought to pay its debts. I recommend action
by the Congress which will permit of the payment of these remaining
claims.
THE WAGE EARNER
Two very important policies have been adopted by this country which,
while extending their benefits also in other directions, have been of the
utmost importance to the wage earners. One of these is the protective tariff,
which enables our people to live according to a better standard and receive
a better rate of compensation than any people, any time, anywhere on earth,
ever enjoyed. This saves the American market for the products of the
American workmen. The other is a policy of more recent origin and seeks to
shield our wage earners from the disastrous competition of a great influx of
foreign peoples. This has been done by the restrictive immigration law. This
saves the American job for the American workmen. I should like to see the
administrative features of this law rendered a little more humane for the
purpose of permitting those already here a greater latitude in securing
admission of members of their own families. But I believe this law in
principle is necessary and sound, and destined to increase greatly the public
welfare. We must maintain our own economic position, we must defend our
own national integrity.
It is gratifying to report that the progress of industry, the enormous increase
in individual productivity through labor-saving devices, and the high rate of
wages have all combined to furnish our people in general with such an
abundance not only of the necessaries but of the conveniences of life that
