738  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
time. The US government will not enter into a treaty that would require 
it to sacrifice our cooperation with the United Kingdom or limit it to the 
present program. We proposed a solution which goes beyond previous 
solutions. This represents the only path to conclusion of a treaty. There 
is nothing further to say.
Do you have anything to tell us on other START issues?
Karpov: I would like to address the ban on stationing strategic 
offensive arms on third country territory. This is not a new subject, 
it has been discussed in Geneva. A ban on stationing would not pre-
vent port calls of warships or carrying out joint maneuvers involving 
strategic offensive arms, or prevent testing of strategic offensive arms 
in the territory of third countries. The ban would represent a ban on 
stationing, and not interfere with freedom of navigation, the practice 
of flights above open seas, of the passage of warships. These com-
ments are meant to exclude any possible misinterpretation of a ban 
on stationing.
Bartholomew: Let me simply say that you are aware of our posi-
tion, and I note the points you have made. Burt and Nazarkin can 
address this.
Karpov: With respect to elimination of warheads, let me empha-
size that in the process of reductions, it is necessary to eliminate the 
frames of warheads and ALCMs. This is important for ratification by 
the Supreme Soviet. What are actually reduced are not only the deliv-
ery vehicles but also the warheads.
Bartholomew: But ALCMs and ALCM warheads are not limited in 
the treaty.
Karpov: I am refering to ALCMs, refering to the counting rules. 
Each nuclear cruise missile is counted as 1 warhead within the 6000. We 
are proposing that when we eliminate a heavy bomber, we also elimi-
nate the number of long-­range ALCMs attributed to that type of heavy 
bomber. For example, if 10 ALCMs are attributed, 10 ALCM warheads 
and frames would be eliminated. If 8 ALCMs are attributed, 8 ALCM 
warheads and frames would be eliminated.
Bartholomew: Amb. Nazarkin and Masterkov know from the dis-
cussion in Geneva that we do not agree to ALCM elimination. This will 
have to continue to be discussed among them.
Karpov: We are aware of this. This is a very serious issue. It serves 
as a litmus test of the seriousness of the treaty, the destruction not only 
of delivery vehicles but warheads themselves.
(Break until 7:30 p.m.)
