Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Pot or Amin, although there may have been some glimmering in the latter case. The point here is that we are able to do less about countries that (a) receive no aid or other benefits from the US and/or (b) are ruthless enough to keep outsiders from finding out what is going on in their countries. Clearly Chile and Korea are less egregious offenders than Kampuchea or Eq. Guinea. But you would never know it by reading the international press or reviewing the list of US actions taken. Unfortunately, there is no ready answer to this. Nor, for that matter, to the unwillingness of LDCs to cast stones at others’ glass houses. We just have to keep plugging away. Another weakness of the policy is that we find it much easier to punish than to reward. I know, offhand, of no case where a country has unambiguously gotten a larger aid program because it performed well on human rights. On the other hand, the generosity shown to Sri Lanka and India is not unrelated to human rights considerations. Some creative thinking about this would be very useful—assuming, of course, that we will have any money available! Another scarce but extremely important resource in this regard is Presidential attention. About the only substantive things that I have gotten involved in at all relate to the two Presidential trips that occurred in the past month— the Vienna Summit and Korea. In both of these cases the bureaucracy was prodded to take adequate note of human rights considerations (Mark Schneider of Derian’s staff is excellent at this) and in both cases the President performed admirably, probably going beyond what anybody expected of him. This points up one thing that you should follow carefully—whenever the President is meeting with somebody who has a human rights problem, insist on getting a shot at the briefing book and talking points. See that they give the President some tough things to say, if he feels so inclined. A large volume of work is generated by people who write letters on human rights issues—overwhelmingly Soviet cases. Generally this is handled directly by State with an info copy to us. You will want to monitor this though. Occasionally, especially on Congressionals, an answer from here is more appropriate. Don’t, however, spend too much time on it. There are some issues that I have not gotten involved with but will concern you. One is the Madrid CSCE conference and our preparations for it. There was a lot of flak about Belgrade and Arthur Goldberg’s performance there. And, of course, the Congressional group is hovering in the wings. Another one is the Moscow Olympics—freedom of access issues, etc. There is a certain amount of file material available on this but, again, get Jessica to brief you. There are two major operational issues. One is the annual submission of a human rights report to Congress on countries receiving US
