Chapter 6, June–December 1990  935
– Each B–1 heavy bomber not equipped for long-­range nuclear 
ALCMs will be exhibited once to confirm the distinguishing features.
 US heavy bombers equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs will 
each count as 10 against the 6000 ceiling, and will not be equipped for 
more than 20 long-­range nuclear ALCMs, and may be equipped for 
additional nuclear weapons other than long-­range nuclear ALCMs.
 Soviet heavy bombers equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs 
will each count as 8 against the 6000 limit, and will not be equipped 
for more than 16 long-­range nuclear ALCMs, and may be equipped 
for additional nuclear weapons other than long-­range nuclear ALCMs.
 Up to 180 Soviet heavy bombers equipped for long-­range nuclear 
ALCMs will each count as 8 against the 6000 limit. Beyond 180, such 
heavy bombers will count as the number of long-­range nuclear ALCMs 
for which they are actually equipped. This represents a proportional 
adjustment down from 210 Soviet heavy bombers, to compensate for 
the increase in the maximum number of long-­range nuclear ALCMs 
from 12 to 16 per Soviet heavy bomber. The US number (150) is not 
changed.
 The parties further agree that, with regard to heavy bombers, the 
provisions of Paragraph (-----) of article IV of the treaty shall not pre-
clude the temporary stationing of heavy bombers outside the territory 
of a party for purposes not inconsistent with the treaty. If a party sta-
tions heavy bombers outside its national territory for a period in excess 
of 30 days at any one time, it shall advise the other party through dip-
lomatic channels before the end of the 30-­day period, except that, if a 
party stations more than 30 heavy bombers outside its national terri-
tory at any one time, it shall advise the other party within 48 hours.
Data Denial
 After each flight test of an ICBM or SLBM, the sides will exchange:
– Tapes of all the telemetry broadcast from the flight.
– Information sufficient to derive the numerical values and engi-
neering units of the telemetry recorded on those tapes. Re-­entry vehicle 
data would be excluded from these requirements. Re-­entry vehicle data 
are those measurements made from within the re-­entry vehicle. These 
issues will be dealt with in Geneva.
– An acceleration profile for that flight, with the parameters 
described in the US proposal in Geneva.
 In the exceptional event that a side determines that disclosure of 
an anomaly during a specific flight test would create significant national 
security concerns, it would be allowed to delete from the information 
exchange those specific portions that, in its judgement, are necessary to 
protect data relating to the national security concern. This exemption 
would be used rarely, and only in cases of genuine risk to security.
