Hungary
483
161.
Letter from Representative Mary Rose Oakar to
President Carter1
Washington December 15, 1977
Dear Mr. President:
I am outraged by the State Department’s announcement today that
the Holy Crown of Saint Stephen will be returned to Hungary on
January 6th and 7th of next year. Deceit and deception have character-
ized the entire handling of this issue by your Administration. Just as
this decision shows gross insensitivity to the plight of the people in
Hungary, so the manner in which the issue has been handled shows
a total lack of concern for the millions in America and throughout the
world who feel so strongly about the Crown and object to its return.
On November 9, I, along with several other Members of Congress,
personally heard you tell the Hungarian-American leaders I brought
to the White House that you wanted them to list the conditions under
which they felt return of the Crown would be acceptable, and that you
would listen closely to what they had to say.2 Believing you to be a
man of your word, these men and women who represent thousands
of concerned citizens carefully and thoughtfully composed messages
to you on the conditions they felt should be imposed upon return of the
Crown. Also in response to your request, on November 29 I personally
delivered to your representative, Mr. Robert King of the National
Security Council staff, a letter to you in which I summed up the views on
the Crown that were unanimously expressed to me by the Hungarian-
American community.
I never received a reply to this letter from you.3 Because the Crown
was not returned during Secretary Vance’s trip to Europe in early
December as had originally been planned, I began to believe that you
were indeed going to listen to our views before making a final commit-
ment on the Crown. Earlier today, just an hour or two before the State
Department’s announcement, a member of my staff called Mr. King
to ask when I could expect to receive a reply to my letter. She was told
that no reply could be sent yet because the Hungarian government had
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR,
and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary, Crown of St. Stephen, 12/77. No
classification marking. A stamped notation on the letter indicates that it was received
at the White House Congressional Liaison Office on December 19. Hunter forwarded
the letter to Brzezinski under a December 20 covering memorandum, recommending
that, in light of his December 15 letter to Oakar, no response was necessary.
2 See Document 152.
3 Brzezinski signed a letter to Oakar on December 15. See Document 160.
