904
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
1954, between General Fazlollah Zahedi, Prime Minister of Iran, and
myself.
Respectfully yours,
Loy W. Henderson
Enclosure
Memorandum of Conversation
Tehran, January 7, 1954.
SUBJECT
Conversation with Prime Minister Zahedi on January 7, 1954, regarding present
status of the Qashqai Khans
During a conversation which I had on January 7th with General
Fazlollah Zahedi I asked him what was the latest development with re-
gard to the dissident Qashqai Khans.
The Prime Minister said he assumed that I was aware that Nasser
Khan, the former Senator who had been acting as chief spokesman for
the four brothers, had been in Tehran for some time. Following his ar-
rival in Tehran Nasser had approached the Prime Minister and in-
formed him that he would be prepared (a) to call upon the Shah if the
latter would receive him in order to promise upon his solemn oath that
he and his brothers would loyally serve the Shah and obey the laws of
the country, or (b) if the Shah would not receive him, in any event to
promise that he and his brothers would be loyal citizens of Iran, would
obey the laws of the country, and would live quietly in their tribal areas
in the south, or (c) to leave the country if the Shah should so desire. If
they were to leave the country they hoped that the Government would
be willing to purchase some of their possessions with foreign currency
so that they would have the means for supporting themselves abroad.
Nasser had insisted in talking to the Prime Minister that his
brothers were prepared to join him in pursuing any of the above-
mentioned courses which might be agreeable to the Shah. They would
prefer of course to be permitted to swear allegiance to the Shah and to
prove by their acts that they desired in the future to be loyal subjects
and law-abiding citizens.
Zahedi told me that he had discussed this matter with the Shah
who had taken the position that no matter what the Khans might
promise the Qashqais were not to be trusted, and that therefore three of
the brothers, Nasser, Khosrow, and Mahammed Hosein, should leave
the country. The Prime Minister said that he had imparted this infor-
