Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II objectives. The provision conveniently coincides with the Administration’s interest in internationalizing our efforts, which will be indispensable to success of our policy and will at the same time obviate the need to be out front, as we are now, in exercising human rights initiative through the IFIs. Having already done some initial work in establishing standards for human rights performance and for meeting basic human needs, we should, of course, take an active role in multilateral efforts in this regard. In referring to the reporting requirements on progress made on “internationalization” of our human rights policies, the Congress recognized in Sec. 703(b) that the achievement of this goal would be gradual. The stress in the legislation on this effort is on “initiation” of a wide consultation. A necessary first step to comply with this provision would be to consider mechanisms for a general approach to internationalization and vehicles for initiating international consultations.4 As indicated at the outset, I believe that the Interagency Group should address both issues promptly. To start the process, Treasury will prepare proposals5 for dealing with both the substantive and procedural aspects involved. We will submit drafts to the Group as soon as possible, for review and discussion by the several agencies concerned.6 C. Fred Bergsten 4 Christopher placed two parallel lines in the left margin of the portion of this paragraph that begins with “The stress” and ends with “consultations.” 5 Bergsten sent a copy of the Department of Treasury’s initial proposals, entitled “Human Rights Objectives: Strategy for Implementing Title VII, PL 95–118” and “Basic Human Needs: Strategy for Implementing Title VII, PL 95–188,” to Christopher on December 6. (Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1980 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D180, IAGHRFA—History & Organization) 6 Christopher placed two parallel lines in the left margin of this paragraph.
