504 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV treaty ratified. There are some very powerful arguments why we shouldn’t make a separate missile decision, however. (C) First, while the Congress generally supports proceeding with the M–X, it has already made clear that it does not want to put the M–X into the MM silos, and some on the Hill will worry that starting a missile now is a step in that direction. Others will be concerned that by starting a missile now, you may gain enough support to get SALT ratified, but then would not carry through to full deployment in a new basing mode. Neither group would want to say no to the missile, however, and both could be strongly motivated to table SALT II until the basing issue gets resolved. (U) Second, Harold told the Congress last year that it was unreasonable to proceed with a missile before settling the basing mode issue. This argument would surely be thrown back at us and it has some validity.4 If we proceed with MAP, we will want a considerably larger missile than if we proceed with the air-­mobile system. While the funds wasted by carrying both designs along for a few months would probably be modest by DOD standards (a few million)—­the fact that money is being wasted will be obvious and very easy to criticize in the current budget environment. (U) Third, proceeding with a missile before you have chosen a basing scheme does not give the appearance of an orderly decision process no matter what the realities—­and the value of an orderly process, particularly with as important a decision as this one, is very high. (U) I therefore believe that you should make these decisions together, if the basing decision can be made fairly soon—­but that is the next question. (U) Timing for the Basing Decision There are too many uncertainties about the alternatives to MAP to make an immediate decision. The Air Force did some very detailed studies of the air-­mobile concept several years ago. However, the cost estimates and SALT impact analysis that were done are out-­of-­date, and DOD has been re-­examining the concept for only a few months. (U) At the other extreme, delaying the decision until the end of 1979 as proposed by OMB seems virtually impossible without jeopardizing the SALT II ratification vote, or significantly delaying it. (C) Making both decisions in late March or early April, as Harold now proposes, seems like the only reasonable course of action. The Air Force believes that with a 60–90 day final examination it can reduce the uncertainties about the air-­mobile system and MAP systems to the 4 Carter drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the previous sentence.
