366  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
for driving weapons choices. Left out entirely is the perspective of plan-
ning for a theater nuclear campaign within and as part of the US strate-
gic campaign planning.
4. The “I” Concerns in C3I at NORAD.
Rosenberg can probably be more helpful on this point, but the sat-
ellite reconnaissance budget is obviously a relevant place to follow up 
NORAD’s worry about gaps in coverage of missile launches.
SALT and ASAT negotiations are also affected by the projected 
degradation of our capability to monitor space activities.
Telecommunications policy is an area for action to prevent deg-
radation of NORAD ground communications, but after a chat with 
Bill Perry, I have reached the view that the AT&T monopoly—­which 
allowed the DOD to set high standards for connectivity, hardness, and 
system interoperability—­will erode and the National Communications 
System (including NORAD) will have to adapt. It is not clear to me 
what precise actions to take at present on this matter.
This is an initial hasty list. Several of the points need better staffing 
before you decide on precise follow-­up actions.
83.	
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
(Jones) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
JCSM–284–78	
Washington, August 23, 1978
SUBJECT
Defense Programs and the Military Balance (U)
1. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the pending decisions 
on the FY 1980 Defense Budget will exert a pivotal influence on the 
national security options available through the 1980’s and beyond. Col-
lectively, therefore, we wish to expand on observations made individ-
ually to you during the recent Program Review process and to draw 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, 
Box 5, Defense Department: 9/78. Secret. Thor Hanson sent the memorandum to Aaron 
under cover of a September 8 handwritten note that reads, “Dave, This is the memo Dr. 
Brown mentioned to you. He has passed a copy of it directly to the President.” (Ibid.) 
Brown gave the memorandum to Carter at Camp David on September 8. (See Document 
87.)
