North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
1113
355.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Your Last Aid Budget (U)
The FY 1982 AID budget will be your legacy in a field in which you
have demonstrated effective leadership. This memo deals with the few
areas in which I believe that a change in the OMB mark is needed to
strengthen this legacy. (U)
1. Agriculture and Energy. One of your main accomplishments has
been to focus bilateral development aid on helping LDCs produce more
food and energy. Increases in our aid for these purposes should be a
main feature of your FY 1982 aid budget. These increases are needed to
meet urgent problems; they will leave a clear signal to the Congress, the
public, and our successors that this is the right direction for the future.
There is also a good chance they would be approved by the Congress:
Support in America for aid for food production is widespread, spear-
headed by your Hunger Commission and explicitly reaffirmed by
spokesmen of the new Administration. The benefits of helping LDCs
increase energy production are coming increasingly to be recognized
on the Hill, as a means of reducing pressure on global prices. (C)
a. Agriculture. The AID program for assisting food production
within the OMB mark involves an increase of $74 million over our FY
1981 aid request to the Congress. IDCA’s “leadership proposal”, sup-
ported by State, recommends an additional increase of $380 million.2
This commitment would, if continued, significantly reduce the number
of malnourished people in the world. It would enable AID to give
enough aid to certain key countries, e.g., Bangladesh, to enable them
soon to attain food self-sufficiency. I support this proposal. If it is not
fiscally feasible to provide the full $380 million, I propose a more
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Proj-
ects, Henry Owen, Box 1, Budget Appeals Session 1982: 12/80. Confidential. Sent for
information.
2 On December 4, Muskie sent McIntyre a proposal for “a significant increase in our
development assistance programs.” In his cover letter, Muskie argued for the proposal,
which expanded on a “leadership proposal” advanced by the IDCA, on the basis that it
was “essential to protect increasing American interests in the Third World, to capture the
initiative for our policies there, and to gain additional efforts by other industrial nations.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P
Director Anthony Lake, 1977–January 1981, Lot 82D298, Box 7, S/P-Lake Papers—
12/1–15/80)
