Options Identified Admiral Turner suggested that we might wish to encourage trade unions around the world to join with our own unions to boycott Iranian shipping. Secretary Miller said that Iranian commerce is well contained for the moment. There is virtually nothing moving from the U.S. to Iran. Secretary Brown agreed that it was a trivial trickle. Some corn was moving from the West Coast. Admiral Turner noted that another step would be to have Navy ships interrogate all ships bound for Iran. This would not interefere with shipping, but it would raise insurance rates and increase apprehension about shipping to Iran. Secretary Miller noted that Lloyds has already quadrupled insurance rates and declared Iran a war zone. Secretary Vance noted that we need to generate additional pressure on the trial question. We need more public demands that there will be no trials. Mr. Powell noted that the tickers were very heavy with news that there will be trials. That is an important question today. It has a short fuse. Secretary Vance said we should go to various countries and have them weigh in. The President said this concerned him. We need to get our timid allies to speak out. We must let them know what we would do if there are trials. He knew that the group was more timid than he was. We should get the EC Nine. Dr. Brzezinski interjected a reminder that we had told them before what we would do. Secretary Vance noted that the Ambassador of Sri Lanka has received a commitment for favorable action from the Iranians and he proposes to go to Tehran with a representative of the Secretary General. The Secretary did not know if the Ambassador had overstated Ghotbzadeh’s position. We can also ask for a freeze on military shipments. He could do this while he is abroad, as well as getting in touch with the Pakistanis, Turks and others who have been approached. Admiral Turner noted that a Pakistani delegation is scheduled to go to Iran soon. Secretary Brown said he would be seeing the Turks soon and would raise the issue. Secretary Vance said we should pursue our case in the World Court. They will meet on Friday or Monday.7 In addition, we should
