780
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
course in these talks. Without explanation, the US declined to hold the
previously agreed meeting of heads of delegation on September 25.3
We would appreciate clarification by the American side of its mo-
tives for its recent conduct with respect to the negotiations, which were
begun at the initiative of the US, as well as its views regarding further
prospects for these negotiations.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated conventional arms transfers.]
3 According to telegram 247872 to Moscow, September 21, the Department of State
postponed the Bartholomew-Mendelevich meeting because it believed “that it would be
inappropriate to have CAT HOD [Head of Delegation] meeting while Cuban question is
unresolved.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840142–2418) Ref-
erence is to the discovery of the Soviet combat brigade in Cuba.
316.
Editorial Note
On December 28, 1979, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance submitted a
report to the United States Congress on the progress of comprehensive
arms restraints discussions. “The principal objective” of the talks, he
explained, had been “to bring about reductions in worldwide arms
transfers, particularly those that could worsen regional instabilities or
stimulate regional arms races, introduce new levels of weapons tech-
nology into a given region, or prove susceptible to misuse by ter-
rorists.” The United States and the Soviet Union, he reported, had held
four rounds of talks, and had begun to draft “common texts” on the
need for conventional arms restraint. However, “the sides were unable
to move forward on the important third part of the framework, re-
gional application of criteria, because they were unable to agree on can-
didate regions for restraint.”
Vance, nevertheless, said that the two sides had made “progress”
by agreeing that “arms transfers are an urgent international problem,”
had “developed a framework for addressing arms transfer issues,” and
had “begun to develop a common text of criteria that define the legal
principles and the kinds of transfers that are of critical concern.” While
he conceded that “[m]uch remains to be done in the bilateral talks,”
Vance contended that a policy of comprehensive arms transfer restraint
“has and will continue to serve U.S. interests.” (“Report by Secretary of
State Vance to the Congress: Multilateral Discussions on Conventional
Arms Transfer Restraints,” December 28, 1979, Documents on Disarma-
ment, 1979, pp. 828–834)
