Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1031
On March 8, Carter wrote Schmidt that he remained “profoundly
concerned with the spread of sensitive enrichment and reprocessing fa-
cilities which are capable of producing materials which can be rapidly
used in nuclear weapons.” In particular, Carter worried that despite
safeguards, such materials could either be diverted to weapons pro-
duction or agreements could be abrogated by “governments tempted
by ready access” to nuclear materials. Transfers of nuclear material, the
President argued, would “establish a very adverse global precedent at
the very time when we should be moving to lessen the risk of nuclear
explosions.” Carter instead urged Schmidt to defer “the enrichment
and reprocessing elements of your nuclear agreement with Brazil
pending joint examination of the alternatives,” and noted that Christo-
pher would travel to West Germany at the end of the week to discuss
non-proliferation. Carter, however, stressed that he sought neither “the
abrogation of your agreement nor commercial disadvantage for Ger-
many or Brazil.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Country File, German Federal Republic: 1–3/77)
Brazilian President Ernesto Geisel, meanwhile, announced what
Ambassador John Crimmins called Brazil’s “steadfast views on nuclear
policy.” In particular, Geisel reiterated his government’s determination
to develop a peaceful yet independent nuclear program. Crimmins
warned that Geisel’s statement indicated that the “FRG–GOB agree-
ment is all or nothing, and a lack of equitable international nuclear
cooperation could frustrate arms nonproliferation objectives by stimu-
lating the development of unsafeguarded nuclear technology.” (Tele-
gram 1898 from Brasilia, March 10; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770083–0431)
Carter raised the proliferation issue in a meeting with West Ger-
man Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher on March 14, in which
he repeated his call for “multilateral solutions” to the problem of nu-
clear non-proliferation and pledged that the United States was “pre-
pared to do more than we have in the past.” Genscher replied that the
Federal Republic of Germany had historically been committed to non-
proliferation, and said that it would fulfill its agreement with Brazil. He
also argued that “the more certain Brazil is” that Bonn would fulfill its
nuclear agreement, “the greater will be Brazil’s willingness to abide by
multilateral restraints.” The Federal Republic of Germany, he stressed,
could be “more flexible if it is not perceived to be under United States
pressure.” Carter promised that he would make “special efforts to indi-
cate that we trust Brazil and regard non-proliferation as a world-wide
problem. We do not distrust any nation, but we do not want to add an-
other country to the list of those that can explode bombs.” (Memo-
randum of Conversation, March 14; Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Re-
public, 1–3/77)
