794
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the memorandum for Secretary Vance at Tab I.5
5 Attached but not printed is a February 17 memorandum in which Brzezinski
informed Vance that “your recommendation for two U.S.-Yugoslav Economic/Commer-
cial Working Groups” was approved and noted that “while this approach may be
discussed and agreed with the Yugoslavs now, public announcement should be reserved
for President Tito’s visit to Washington.”
249.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
Belgrade, February 24, 1978, 1600Z
1570. Subject: Tito Visit—The Bilateral Relationship.
Overview:
1. Tito’s visit to the U.S. culminates more than a year of substantial
improvement in most areas of our bilateral relationship. The Yugoslavs
were quick to perceive in the foreign policy of the Carter administration
a more positive approach than they felt had existed in previous years
toward the development of good bilateral relations and toward a num-
ber of international issues important to them, such as the nonaligned
movement, North-South dialogue, and problem areas in the Middle
East and Africa. This perception, reinforced by concrete steps demon-
strating the importance both sides attached to a strengthened relation-
ship and expanded cooperation—notably the Mondale, Kardelj and
Brown visits and the Presidential correspondence—generated a
momentum that has led to what is widely regarded by Yugoslavs as
the best state of U.S.-Yugoslav relations since World War II. Against this
positive background, however, two major issues—ExImBank operating
procedures and Krsko fuel supply—remain unresolved on the eve of
the Tito visit, while a third important issue—military cooperation and
sales—awaits tangible implementation.
Political:
2. The tone of political relations with Yugoslavia has improved
profoundly in the past year. Issues now regarded by the Yugoslavs as
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780086–0612.
Secret; Immediate.
