Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
649
the law. After two or three days we could get them out and lock them
up and hold them until our own people were released. Rushing in
would just get people killed, and it could make us look even more
stupid.
Mr. Cutler said that killing someone would put the hostages in
greater danger.
Dr. Brzezinski said that tear gas did not kill people. He could
imagine being forced to close off Massachusetts Avenue for several
days during an armed siege. They could have stockpiled food and
drink. It could take many days to get them out. We would look ridicu-
lous if we could not enforce the law right in our own capital. We
should use tear gas in the evening, preferably on the first day rather
than the second.
Mr. Powell said we should make a judgment expeditiously when
the situation arises.
The President said we would not foreclose the option that the
situation might develop peacefully. If we take violent steps at the start
we allow them no opportunity to leave on their own. However, if there
is a barricade situation, we would not reject the use of forceful actions.
If they hurt our hostages, they will be hurt severely. If we hurt them
at this point, we open a new likelihood that our hostages will be injured.
We should do it peacefully but firmly.
Secretary Vance said that the diplomats are required to depart
from Dulles.
The President asked if we would escort them to the plane.
The Attorney General said yes. We are also prepared to put an
escort on board if necessary. We also have contingency military air-
craft available.
The Vice President said taking action in the evening makes sense.
During the day there are people in and out. There is a chance they
could grab innocents and hold them. If we moved at night, the innocents
would be out of the building.
Mr. Cutler said that would also avoid any possible interaction with
the proposed demonstrations.
Dr. Brzezinski said it was inevitable that the demonstrators would
congregate in front of the Embassy.
The President said we should prevent any assembly or demonstra-
tions around the Embassy and Consulates. He wondered if the
announcement should be postponed until 8 o’clock this evening.
Mr. Powell said there would be lots of speculation throughout
the day.
The Vice President said that would also avoid the heavy evening
traffic and the danger of a shooting incident.
