528 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Tab A Egyptian Proposal7 December 4, 1978 1. The peace treaty between Egypt and Israel will be signed after effecting the amendments8 requested by Egypt in Articles 4 and 6. Simultaneously, identical letters will be exchanged between Egypt and Israel (witnessed by the US) providing for the election and inauguration of a self-governing authority on the West Bank and Gaza. The letters will provide for the holding of the elections not later than September 1979 and the establishment and inauguration of the self-governing authority within one month thereafter. The military government and civilian administration will be withdrawn from the West Bank and Gaza as specified in the Camp David Framework. The letters will also state that a withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will take place and there will be a redeployment of Israel’s remaining forces into specified locations, as provided in the Camp David Framework. Simultaneously with the signing of the peace treaty and the exchange of letters, Israel will sign a letter addressed to the United States on measures it will take for the purpose of improving the political situation in the West Bank and Gaza. 2. Within one month after the exchange of instruments of ratification of the peace treaty, the parties agree to start negotiations to work out the modalities for establishing the elected self-governing authority and to define and agree upon its powers and responsibilities as well as related issues, prior to the elections, in accordance with the Camp David Framework. The parties will agree to negotiate continuously and in good faith. 3. Unless otherwise agreed, the interim withdrawal in the Sinai shall take place as provided for in the Camp David Framework simultaneously with the establishment and inauguration of the selfgoverning authority, possibly starting in Gaza. In order to facilitate the transfer of power to the self-governing authority in Gaza, Egypt will maintain a police force and a liaison office there. 4. One month after the interim withdrawal is completed, resident ambassadors will be exchanged. This will be covered in a separate exchange of letters and not in the letter referred to above.9 7 Secret. 8 An unknown hand put brackets around “amendments,” and inserted “interpretations” in the margin above it. 9 An unknown hand put brackets around this sentence.
