Options Identified
291
of Iranian, Panamanian, and U.S. high-level representatives to discuss
“the manner in which the hostages might be liberated.” Royo wanted
to know what the United States thought of this proposal. (Telegram
10324 from Panama, December 19; ibid.) After consulting with Vance,
Moss informed Royo that “the proposal had all the earmarks of a
scheme to try to negotiate for the extradition of the Shah in return for
the prisoners’ release.” Vance, he told Royo, thought that the “plan
would be very counterproductive.” (Telegram 10330 from Panama,
December 19; ibid.)
However, Ghotbzadeh apparently had developed a specific plan.
He told Professor Richard Cottam on December 21 that the Revolution-
ary Council had developed “a settlement scenario in which several
things might appear simultaneously.” This involved the extradition of
the Shah, some form of examination of the Shah’s crimes and U.S.
policy toward Iran through perhaps a Senate-House Committee, and
the coincidental release of the hostages alongside this Committee’s
operation. (Memorandum for the Record, December 21; Department
of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Memoranda of
Conversation) Royo told Moss that a representative of Khomeini would
be arriving in Panama December 24 and that his presence was to be
kept “completely secret.” Moss countered with the information that
Ghotbzadeh’s position was “shaky,” implying both his belief that Ghot-
bzadeh was the representative and that he would be unable to deliver
on any negotiated deal. (Telegram 10422 from Panama, December 21;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840171–0384
and N790010–0290)
The Iranian representatives who subsequently appeared in Panama
were Bourguet and Villalon. “The more important delegation,” Royo
told Moss, “probably would not come.” The two lawyers brought an
extradition request which Royo announced Panama would “consider,”
meaning “request and study as if it were a complaint filed in court.”
(Telegram 10540 from Panama, December 28; National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]) Royo told Moss,
Bourguet, and Villalon that Panama would “not hand over the Shah
under any circumstances but would be willing to accept and consider
an extradition request as a ‘face-saving’ device providing the GOI put
itself into conformity with international law by releasing the hostages.”
The lawyers then returned to Iran with this message. Royo, who
believed the “face-saving” concept had to be handled in person,
intended to send Marcel Salamin to Tehran. (Telegram 2 from Panama,
January 2, 1980; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P870108–1063)
Moss told Royo that Salamin’s trip to Iran was “very bad news,”
and there was serious concern in Washington that the Panamian-
