330  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
faithfully implement provisions agreed announcement so that these 
persons could in fact freely return to homeland.
20. Wang said he had clearly stated many times principles gov­
erning handling by his government of cases 19 Americans who had 
committed crimes. If US Government refused respect Chinese law and 
insisted on unconditional return these persons this idea doomed failure 
and would never succeed.
21. Then referring frequently to prepared statement Wang said topic 
he suggested on preparations for higher level meeting was not proce­
dural matter but most important matter of substance in relations of two 
countries. He could not agree to removal of subject from agenda. Regard­
ing our proposal on so-­called renunciation of force he said his govern­
ment fully endorsed principle no recourse to force or threat of force in 
international relations. China did not intend to resort to force against US 
or any other state. State of tension in Taiwan area was not at all caused by 
Chinese threat use force against US. Tension on contrary was caused by 
US use force against Chinese territory of Taiwan. Therefore, in line with 
the principle of non-­recourse to force the point in question was not one to 
be solved by declaration by Chinese not to use force against its own ter­
ritory, but rather by removal of US forces from Chinese territory, China 
had not made withdrawal of American forces from Taiwan a prerequisite 
for Sino-American conversations on easing tensions in Taiwan area as 
that would have blocked efforts to have negotiations.
22. He said he did not deny that tense situation in Taiwan area might 
lead to extremely grave danger of conflict between China and US. It was 
precisely for this reason he had proposed that our talks should make 
preparations for convening conference at higher level. Major problem of 
easing and limiting tension between China and the US should be dis­
cussed at higher level. In this conference at higher level both sides should 
raise questions which could be discussed to ease tensions in Taiwan area.
23. Wang said my second subject of “accounting for US personnel” 
had been dealt with under agenda item one and, therfore, there was no 
point in raising again so-­called accounting for Americans. Moreover, 
they had at very beginning of talks given full list of all Americans in 
China so there was no point at all in having a continuous accounting on 
Americans in China.
24. I said that I had put forward what he had termed concrete opin­
ions regarding the implementation of the announcement. First sugges­
tion I made was that he should confirm that 19 remaining Americans 
be given full text agreed announcement in language they understood. 
Second suggestion was that we be assured arrangements established so 
19 could communicate or otherwise have access to UK Charge. Third 
suggestion was that, if in accordance terms agreed announcement US 
wanted facts investigated, UK Charge would be permitted interview
