476 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Richardson’s release from prison and Espaillat’s placement in reserve status. Naval mission now receiving more cooperation than anytime heretofore. On other hand Air Force MAAG completely inactive.3 Farland 3 In telegram 227 from Ciudad Trujillo, December 16, 1958, Farland reported to the Department on his conference on the military agreements with Generalissimo Trujillo, President Trujillo, Vice President Balaguer and Foreign Minister Herrera. The telegram stated in part, “Following completely frank discussion, Generalissimo stated that he believed better approach would have been re-­negotiation. I informed Generalissimo that Department had heretofore agreed to re-negotiation but this had been superseded by GODR’s request for termination.” (739.5–MSP/12–1658) Telegram 191 to Ciudad Trujillo, December, 24, 1958, stated in part, “Ambassador Farland is commended for his handling of meeting with Dominicans and for the position he took in declining to offer to Generalissimo a solution to the problem as requested by him, as well as for the effective presentation of Ambassador’s position vis-à-­vis Dominican request for loan of ships and with regard to future Air Force MAAG.” (739.5–MSP/12–1858) DR–7. Despatch from the Chargé in the Dominican Republic (Lofton) to the Department of State1  Ciudad Trujillo, May 26, 1959. No. 481 SUBJECT An Assessment of the Political Future of the Dominican Republic. An assessment of current thinking concerning the possible political future of the Dominican Republic is set forth below in view of the intensification of Communist efforts in Latin America, invasion threats now circulating, the increasing age and pressures under which the mortal Generalissimo works, and the apparent failure of Trujillo to take any public steps toward designating a successor. On the theory that many minds are better than one, one of the reporting officers (Mr. Barfield) has just completed a survey of available qualified opinion. Four key questions were asked in the survey, but some of the contacts were of such delicate nature that specific questions were omitted. The group queried (a total of twenty four) was comprised 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.00/5–2659. Confidential. Drafted by Harry M. Lofton, Chargé d’Affaires, and John D. Barfield, Second Secretary of the Embassy.
