1148 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement correspondent to whom I talked last week. I told him first that it was my clear understanding that our conversation was, as in the past, entirely background, and secondly, I had a very clear recollection that when he had asked me concerning the effects in the Taiwan area I had refused to discuss it even for background, saying only that he could speculate on that as well as I could. When I raised this with him today he admitted, as confirmed by the PAO here, that when arrangements were made for him to see me it was understood that it was not an interview but that during the course of our conversation I had at a couple of points said “don’t quote me on this” and therefore he assumed that it was alright to quote me on other points! This is pretty thin and I told him so. With regard to the alleged remarks concerning Taiwan, he agrees that I did not say this in our conversation but that I had said something to that effect some five or six months ago which he had quoted to TIME at that time and that based on my statements to him that there had been no substantive change with respect to the negotiations during recent months TIME had now picked up and used the quote. This is even thin­ ner and I have asked him to let TIME know in very definite terms that I am very perturbed over it. I am sorry that it happened as I have thus far been fairly successful in my relations with newsmen here and dis­ like having this mar the record. I certainly agree that the issue of American correspondents travel­ ling to Communist China has created a real stir. They timed this very cleverly and the results have probably exceeded their rosiest expecta­ tions. As I indicated in my telegram from Prague, I think the damages to us and their purposes are already largely accomplished and the issue of whether newsmen now go or not is now substantially secondary. I would hope we could find some way of recovering from the situa­ tion, but the only thoughts I had in this regard were contained in my telegram. I know that it must be terribly difficult to handle, particu­ larly with the Secretary away, and you have my full sympathy. I suspect that Wang will find it difficult to resist the temptation to throw it at me tomorrow, and my present inclination is to counter by noting the vir­ tual unanimity of the press on the importance of imprisoned Americans being released and thus try to get back to implementation. I feel this might be somewhat more profitable than confining myself to the line suggested in the guidance for tomorrow’s meeting, although I will of course also use that as necessary. With regard to the Chinese in prison, I agree that considering all the circumstances it is probably better for the Red Cross alone to see them. I am glad to know that visits are now getting underway. My thoughts with regard to handling it from thereon are as follows: If any desire to go to Communist China I doubt the wisdom of hav­ ing them write to the Indian Embassy to obtain passage money. While I am thoroughly sympathetic with the idea of the Chicoms being made
