1977 99 pretended. He called attention to the paper prepared on this subject that focused on US objectives for strategic forces, namely: —Deterrence of attack on US, its forces, and our Allies. —The control of escalation and the limitation of damage to the degree possible if deterrence fails. —Avoiding the perception of an imbalance in the strategic forces in order to inhibit efforts at coercion of the US and its Allies. Secretary Brown noted that consideration of how to satisfy these objectives and the accompanying illustrative forces had produced a series of questions for consideration specifically: —To what extent should US forces be procured to achieve these objectives; in particular, to avoid perceptions of a US/Soviet asymmetry that would have no military significance but could have political significance. —What is needed to deter Soviet conventional and nuclear aggression. —With relation to the first and second of these questions, the degree to which the US should procure hard target kill capability and the dangers to stability which might result. This was not simply a question of all or nothing, since we could want some hard target kill capability vice an efficient hard target kill capability (i.e., the ability to put all Soviet ICBMs at risk). —How much defensive capability to limit damage should be procured since offensive forces cannot do this job. —The need for a strategic reserve force. —What our declaratory policy should be with respect to strategic forces. —The relationship between strategic and general purpose forces. He noted that we are now talking about parity in overall US/ Soviet military capabilities in contrast to the situation in the early 1960’s where US had a clear strategic advantage. Among the issues that arise in the current situation are such things whether to have a Dyad or a Triad, how to respond to certain Soviet advantages, whether we should match them or somehow compensate for them, and furthermore, whether we should match them in military capability or simply in perceived capability. He noted that if we look at real scenarios, then such issues as command and control and attack assessment become as important, if not more important, than some of the actual numbers of strategic systems. He then asked the various agency representatives what their views were of the current strategic situation and the issues under consideration.
