XII Sources Records Administration, yield significantly more documentation on a wider range of human rights and humanitarian issues, including the deliberations of the Inter-Agency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. The files of Director of the Policy Planning Staff Anthony Lake contain briefing memoranda, Policy Planning Staff-authored studies, and the Department’s responses to the world hunger and international health programs. The Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs files provide the best documentation on the Bureau’s establishment and history, staffing patterns, responses to Congressional inquiries, and coordination of the annual Human Rights Reports. The files for this period contain subject files, country files, and the chronological and official records of Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Patricia Murphy Derian. A number of additional Department of State lot files are also of value, including the records of Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie; Under Secretaries of State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology Lucy Wilson Benson and Matthew Nimetz; and the Bureau of International Organization Affairs UNESCO and IDA files. The Department of State’s Central Foreign Policy File, consisting of D, P, and N reels, replaced the pre-1973 paper subject-numeric file. The P (Paper) reels consist of microfilmed versions of memoranda of conversation, letters, briefing papers, airgrams, and memoranda to principals. In addition to the paper files cited below, a growing number of documents are available on the Internet. The Office of the Historian maintains a list of these Internet resources on its website and encourages readers to consult that site on a regular basis. Unpublished Sources Department of State, Washington, D.C. Central Foreign Policy File. These files have been transferred or will be transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration in College Park, Maryland. P Reels D Reels N Reels Lot Files. These files have been transferred or will be transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration in College Park, Maryland. HA Files: Lot 80D177 Human Rights Subject Files and Country Files, 1976–1977 S/S Files: Lots 80D135 and 84D241 Records of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance,1977–1980 S/S (I) Files: Lot81D117 Memoranda to/from S, D, P, E, C, T, and M
