1978 263 a uniform policy along the lines of your Wake Forest speech,5 and that our actions on foreign policy issues as well as on Defense program and budget issues be as consistent with that approach as we can make them. Visits by you to U.S. forces in Germany, and to Ft. Bragg or to Ft. Hood and Nellis Air Force Base, which I am proposing in detail in a separate memo,6 can reinforce this approach. I believe it would be extremely useful for us to talk about these observations, which I take very seriously, along with Zbig, Cy, Ham Jordan, Frank Moore, or anyone else you think should be present. Harold Brown 5 Reference is to Carter’s March 17 address at Wake Forest University. (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, pp. 529–535) The speech is also printed in part in Foreign Relations, 1977– 1980, vol. I. Foundations of Foreign Policy, Document 72. 6 Not found. 62. National Intelligence Estimate1 NIE 11–4–78 Washington, May 9, 1978 [Omitted here are the cover pages, table of contents, and the preface.] KEY JUDGMENTS 1. Soviet leaders appreciate that military strength is the foundation of the USSR’s status as a global superpower, and will remain through the coming decade the key to its prospects in the world arena. They are sensitive to the view of some Westerners that other, nonmilitary factors, particularly international economic ones, may be acquiring a dominant role, and they know that the Soviet Union has little hope in the foreseeable future of becoming truly competitive with the advanced nations 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, Huntington, Box 44, Net Assessment II: Strategic Balance, US/USSR. Secret; Noforn; Nocontract. According to one of the cover pages, the Director of Central Intelligence submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all members of the National Foreign Intelligence Board, unless noted otherwise in the text. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Treasury, Energy, and Defense, and the NSA participated in the preparation of the estimate. The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy; and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force, also participated in the study.
