812 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 249. Memorandum for the Files by Sol Linowitz1 Washington, May 3, 1978 RE President’s Commission on World Hunger On Tuesday, May 2nd, I had a meeting with the President at the White House to talk about his suggestion that I become Chairman of the new President’s Commission on World Hunger.2 Earlier Dr. Peter Bourne, Special Assistant to the President for Health and Related Matters, had conveyed to me the President’s desire that I take on the Chairmanship and I had said I wanted to talk it over with the President.3 Before the President came into the Cabinet Room in order to meet with the Time Newstour Group, I was called out to see him in his office and to talk about the Hunger Commission. I started out by telling the President that I appreciated his taking a little time to talk to me about it and he said, “You can have a couple of minutes or a couple of hours whenever you want to do it. Just pick up the phone”. We sat down and I told him at the outset that I wanted to be helpful to him in any way I could, but that I wanted to be sure I was doing something where I might uniquely have something to con- 1 Source: Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Linowitz’s Subject Files, Box 42, Members of the Commission [3]. No classification marking. Drafted by Linowitz. 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, the conversation took place from 11:32 to 11:40 a.m. in the Oval Office. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) Linowitz was at the White House for a meeting of the Time Newstour Group with the President. Following his conversation with Carter, Linowitz rejoined the group. The subsequent meeting took place in the Cabinet Room from 11:40 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. (Ibid.) No record of this conversation has been found. Linowitz served on the Board of Directors for Time Incorporated. Time’s “Newstours” allowed U.S. business, educational, and philanthropic leaders the opportunity to assume the role of “guest journalist” in order to interview key political figures in their respective nations. Linowitz accompanied the 1978 Newstour participants on their tour of the Middle East and Africa. (“A Favorite Trouble-Shooter of Presidents: Sol Myron Linowitz,” The New York Times, November 7, 1979, p. A–6) 3 In a May 1 memorandum for the files, Linowitz noted that he and Bourne had discussed various aspects of the Commission and the proposed Presidential message to Congress on world hunger. (Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Linowitz’s Subject Files, Box 42, Members of the Commission [3]) Linowitz’ previous government service included appointments as Ambassador to the Organization of American States (OAS) and Representative to the Alliance for Progress’ Inter-American Committee during the Johnson administration and co-negotiator of the Panama Canal Treaties in 1977.
