International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 117 after the USITC compiled data on the domestic specialty steel industry for calendar year 1976.4 This data is now available. PROCEDURES FOR INITIATING A REVIEW The first step involved in any reduction or termination of the quotas prior to its scheduled three year duration (from June 14, 1976 to June 13, 1979) would be to request the USITC’s advice on the probable economic effect on the domestic industry of such action. (By law, advice is also required of the Secretaries of Commerce and Labor.) It will likely take the USITC at least three months to produce its advisory report. NATURE OF USITC ADVICE The USITC’s recommendation is not binding, and you can support, reject, or simply not act on it. To give you maximum flexibility we are recommending that your request for USITC advice pertain to all product categories and that the advice be given on a product-byproduct basis. TIMING OF A REQUEST TO THE USITC If you agree to initiating USITC review, the major issue is timing. Arguments for an immediate review are: —It would be interpreted by the public as an anti-inflation measure. The U.S. steel companies would see it as a signal of strong Administration concern about price increases and it may inhibit further price increases in the steel industry.5 —Our trade relations with the EC would be improved and immediate impetus would be given to post-Summit momentum towards trade liberalization. The EC would be more likely to again defer seeking compensation or retaliation under international trading rules. —An early USITC review would strengthen our hand in urging the EC to resist protectionist measures in dealing with its own steel problems. It would provide an improved environment for international 4 On February 14, in response to the February 7 EC request for a review of the U.S. specialty steel quota situation (see footnote 3 above), the EPG decided “to proceed expeditiously with shortfall reallocation,” as well as “to postpone decision on request to USITC for advice on reducing or termination relief until 1976 annual survey results are available in March.” (Telegram 36061 to USEC Brussels, February 17; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770056–0814) 5 In a May 17 memorandum to Carter, Eizenstat and Ginsburg urged an “immediate review, primarily because that will clearly indicate to the steel industry (and the general public) your concern over inflationary price increases and your willingness to vigorously use international trade as a tool to keep domestic prices down.” (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 284, Steel/Chrome (CF, O/A 24) (4))
