1244  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
The action of the Government Junta was not preceded by pub-
lic discussion of the measure and it came as a complete surprise. In 
February 1958, Admiral Larrazábal, then President of the Government 
Junta, had given explicit assurances to the oil industry that the pro-
visional government intended to maintain, without modification, the 
then prevailing laws affecting the petroleum Industry. On various occa-
sions since the provisional government gave the foregoing assurances, 
government spokesmen, both publicly and privately, have acknowl-
edged the moral undertaking of the Venezuelan Government to respect 
the 50–50 principle and reaffirmed the intention, in any event, to leave 
fundamental decisions for the elected government which was to take 
office early in 1959.
4. Action Taken to Date
The U.S. has expressed no opinion on the substantive provisions 
of the tax law amendment. However, our Embassy in Caracas, on 
first learning of the measure, expressed to the Venezuelan Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs surprise that action on an issue as sensitive as 
this, which not only directly affected U.S. investments in Venezuela, 
but which could have an adverse effect on U.S. interests in other 
parts of the world had been taken without consultation. Further, the 
Embassy pointed out that failure to consult was inconsistent with 
Venezuela’s insistence on consultation before U.S. action on matters 
affecting Venezuela’s interests. Similar representations were made 
to the Venezuelan Ambassador by the Department. The Venezuelan 
Government has taken the position that the decree was a general tax 
reform affecting all Venezuelan tax-­payers, including oil companies, 
and, therefore, within its sovereign power. In reply, we have said that 
we do not question Venezuela’s sovereign right to take the action, but 
are seriously concerned over the failure to consult in advance and the 
manner in which the decree was promulgated.
On January 5, Assistant Secretary Mann met with representa-
tives of U.S. oil companies having operations in Venezuela in order to 
exchange views on the effect of the recent tax decree on the Venezuelan 
oil industry and on world trade. The consensus of the meeting was that, 
although the tax amendment would obviously result in immediate and 
short term fiscal benefits for Venezuela, the long term effect would be 
adverse in view of the harmful effect it would have on Venezuela’s com-
petitive position in the world oil market, and the lessened attractive-
ness of Venezuela in the future to investors. It was considered unlikely 
that the elected government, which is to take office early in 1959, would 
find it politically possible to undo the decree itself, even if the new gov-
ernment were so inclined. It was agreed that the main objective of the
