518 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 2. I discussed what we were doing in the Iranian covert action with respect to Bakhtiar. I gave him my estimate that we had a number of months in which we could drag this out without much problem. He agreed with the way in which we were proceeding and recommended that we not take too many details of these tactics up with the President until it became a “strategic decision.” I told him that at some point in the next month and one-half we were probably going to have to put up some more money to Bakhtiar for his organizational purposes, not for a coup. Brzezinski agreed that at that point we would need to go back to the President. [portion marking not declassified] 3. Let’s discuss. [portion marking not declassified] Stansfield Turner 203. Editorial Note The activities of the United Nations Commission of Inquiry in Tehran culminated in the events of March 7–11, 1980. On March 7, at 10:15 a.m., lawyer Hector Villalon notified Henry Precht, Director of the Office of Iranian Affairs, that the hostages would be transferred to the control of the Revolutionary Council on March 8. (Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 3/80) Villalon called Precht again at 1 p.m. that afternoon to relay the following scenario: After the transfer of the hostages that night, the Commission would visit them on Sunday, March 9, at the Embassy compound (where they would remain temporarily). A team of physicians would see them immediately after the transfer, and the Commission would then make an official visit to the Foreign Ministry. “Sometime soon” thereafter the hostages would be moved from the Embassy compound to a government guest house. The Commission would leave Tehran on March 10. (Memorandum for the Record, March 6; ibid.) As noted in Iran Sitrep #245, this scenario did not guarantee the departure of the hostages from Iran. (Telegram 61042 to all diplomatic and consular posts, March 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800117–0370) The next day, March 8, Ghotbzadeh announced his intent to put this scenario into operation: As a representative of the Revolutionary Council, and acting under the Ayatollah Khomeini’s orders, he would take charge of the hostages and the compound and move the hostages to a secret location for questioning by the Commission members. The students in turn announced that they would turn over the hostages
