forward by the Chinese delegates to this end which are in harmony with the spirit and letter of the Washington Treaty. “His Majesty’s Government also wish it to be clearly understood that in the event of the Chinese delegation on the resumption of the Conference tabling a proposal for the immediate enforcement of the Washington surtaxes, they have no intention, after agreement on such proposal has been reached, to suspend the proceedings of the Conference or to break off negotiations for the conclusion of a Tariff Treaty, which have been interrupted by recent political developments in China.” Mr. MacMurray, at the conclusion of the British statement, said that, in view of the attitude taken by the Japanese and British Delegations, it appeared that a deadlock had been reached and that further progress at that time was impossible. Mr. MacMurray said that the situation was most disappointing to the American Delegates who had hoped that the draft protocol of May 15 might be adopted as a first step toward tariff autonomy. He voiced the opinion that under present circumstances no further progress could be made until a new Chinese Government should come into being and he particularly warned the Delegates that if a discontinuance should lend itself to further nationalistic and bolshevist propaganda in China serious consequences might ensue. Mr. MacMurray then inquired whether the instructions of the Japanese and British Delegates were so categorical as to permit of no compromise which would enable an agreement to be reached with respect to the Washington surtaxes and thus avoid the danger to which reference has just been made. After general discussion of the question, Mr. MacMurray suggested that the chairman request the various Delegations to reply definitely to the following questions: 1. “Are the foreign Delegates prepared to agree among themselves to take the first opportunity to negotiate with the Chinese Government, when one is recognized, for the implementation of the Washington Conference Treaty on the basis of the draft protocol accepted ad referendum by the foreign Delegates on May 15?”
