232  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
the Mainland that he will be in no position to press for immediate dis­
cussion of the topics which might be considered under Item Two. We 
will want to know for example how and where the Chinese Commu­
nists have given publicity to the announcement; the nature of arrange­
ments for the imprisoned Americans to communicate with the British 
Charge in Peiping; the nature of the financial settlement requested of 
Miner; the status of the exit applications of Mrs. Huizer and Bishop 
Walsh; the whereabouts of the jailed Americans; the movements of 
Americans following the issuance of the announcement; their various 
ETA’s at the Hong Kong border; arrangements for the British Embassy 
to “investigate the facts”, and to make representation as necessary; etc. 
Of course we will expect to send you information about the arrange­
ments for the fulfillment of the Indian Embassy role in this country 
too, although we will be careful not to bring up anything concerning 
Chinese who have not taken the initiative to return to the Mainland. 
The idea is for you to keep Wang so engaged in demonstrating that the 
Chinese Communists are making good on their obligations under the 
Agreed Announcement that they cannot yet get you involved in Item 
Two. For the time being you should refuse to get engaged in any discus­
sion of what topics might be acceptable for discussion under Item Two.
Your Letter No. 6 of August 31 arrived September 6 and was illu­
minating and useful to all of us who are working with you. Everybody 
feels that you have done notably well in bringing Wang to the brink 
of agreement without sacrificing anything essential. I hope our 693 
strengthened your hand and allayed some of your misgivings.
You will be glad to know that WSR returned to duty on Tuesday 
the 6th looking very well and rested. He plunged into your problems 
immediately and of course is actively in on every decision and message.
We are in an extremely bad way in CA, with no replacements yet 
for Clough or Forman, with Joe Nagoski (who has been doing the leg 
work on Geneva matters) down with an ailment variously diagnosed 
as stomach ulcers and malaria, and with Steve Comisky suffering 
from asthma. We hope to get some reinforcements and I would not 
think of asking you to give up either Ralph or Doug, with a very diffi­
cult stage of the discussions now looming on the horizon.
Regards, accolades and good wishes from all of us,
Sincerely,
Walter P. McConaughy
