3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 880 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI viets to step up their pressure on the Polish leadership to curtail the new unions. [handling restriction not declassified] These variables will interact in a complex, protracted process, the specific developments of which cannot be predicted with any certainty. Moscow’s perception of this process may be quite different from ours or the Poles’. No one of these factors is likely to develop by itself. But a combination of developments could suggest to Moscow that a trend toward liberalization was approaching the point of irreversibility and that Soviet vital interests were at stake and that the situation could only be put right by military intervention. [handling restriction not declassified] A Decision to Intervene Once the Soviet threshold of tolerance is crossed, Moscow would take direct action. The Soviets would first demand that the Polish leadership contain the liberalization process. If Warsaw either refused or was unable to bring the situation under control, the Soviets might opt for still another change in leadership, believing that only a more hardline group could put a stop to the erosion of power. [handling restriction not declassified] Past experience suggests that the Kremlin would resort to political and military pressure to get the Poles themselves to bring the situation under control before sending in troops. This would probably include high-level visits between Moscow and Warsaw, increasingly explicit warnings in the Soviet press, and possibly threatening military movements. Several factors probably would be at work here—among them a hope that the Poles would back down when faced with a display of overwhelming force. The absence of unanimity within the Soviet Politburo could also be a vital factor. It would be no easy matter to get the entire Politburo—or perhaps even a significant majority—to agree that armed intervention was the only way to hold the Poles in line. This certainly seems to have been the case in 1968, when Kosygin, Suslov and others reportedly held out to the last moment in opposing the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia. [handling restriction not declassified] The Soviet leaders, in reaching a decision to use military force, would have to weigh the constraints, which are substantial. They must assume that: —the strongly anti-Russian Polish people would fight, as might part or all of the Polish Army. —Poland’s submission would require the largest military operation by the Soviet armed forces since World War II and would involve protracted combat. —Moscow’s effort to salvage detente in one of its most critical areas—Europe—would receive a setback from which it would be a long time recovering.
