620  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
The coup d’etat followed over two months of demonstrations by 
anti-Government and student and labor groups, initiated on August 
16 by a protest against the existing regime and the OAS Meeting of 
Foreign Ministers at San Jose. President Lemus was finally goaded, 
principally by the Salvadoran press, into using repressive measures 
against the demonstrators, including the arrest and exile of agitators, 
the enacting of a law restricting the right of assembly, excessive force by 
members of the security units, and the establishment of a state of siege, 
which soon alienated most of Lemus’ own supporters and created mar-
tyrs for continued anti-Government agitation. Temporary truces were 
effected by a civilian group composed of representatives of the Church, 
prominent businessmen, and representatives of the leading families, 
which intervened in an effort to mediate the differences between the 
Lemus Government and the demonstrators. These efforts, and less vio-
lent measures by the Security Forces, produced over a month of rel-
ative calm immediately preceding the unexpected coup d’etat, which 
appears to have been carried out as a preventative measure to insure 
that pro-Castro and pro-Communist elements would be unable to cap-
italize on the constantly deteriorating stability of the Lemus regime.
The files of U.S. intelligence agencies contain reports indicating 
that the three civilian members of the Junta and a number of the mem-
bers of the new cabinet have been accused of being “Communists,” 
pro-­Communist, and/or associates of Communists. Such accusations 
have been levelled at one time or another against almost all “liberals” 
or “leftists” in El Salvador who have advocated change in their still 
largely semi-­feudal social order, opponents of the regime in power, and/
or students politically active in the affairs of the traditionally leftist-­
oriented, anti-­status quo, and anti-Government University. The term 
“Communist” is frequently used synonymously with “leftist” in El 
Salvador. As a result some of the best friends of the U.S., and some of the 
most effective anti-Communist leaders in El Salvador (including former 
President Osorio and several of his trusted associates), have been bit-
terly denounced as “Communists”. Therefore, ARA believes it would be 
a grave error to consider, without further substantiating evidence, that 
the new Government or its members are suspect for this reason, in the 
absence of their identification with purely Communist objectives.
From information now being received from a variety of sources it 
appears that able Ex-President Oscar Osorio is emerging as the domi-
nant personality behind the Coup. However, the political orientation 
and likely policies of the new government, while controversial, indicate 
a definite swing to the left in El Salvador. On the other hand, ARA 
[Remaining is missing in source text]
