this right be utilized, to pay at first 10,000,000 schillings annually and subsequently 15,000,000 if the federal finances justify it. In the event payments are thus anticipated, interest at the rate of 8 per cent is to be deducted from the before-mentioned 1,000 million schillings due as of 1943. It is figured out that the estimated interest of 152,000,000 schillings would be greatly reduced and of course the annual instalment beginning from 1943 would be substantially cut down. As I have heretofore reported, the Austrian Government hopes ultimately to avoid paying interest on its relief credits, taking into account their intrinsic character. I think there is some question however whether any advance payments will ever be made. It is hoped nevertheless, by a proposal of this kind, to meet the bankers’ views. The Chancellor said to me significantly on Monday that the position of the bankers was helpful to his government. The fact that the Schüller telegram had been sent was communicated to me on the evening of the 8th by the Finance Minister, Kien-böck. I promised however that I would not cable any statement of the situation, which was given me in the strictest confidence, and indeed there was no reason for doing so as it was anticipated that something definite would transpire at the adjourned Relief Credit Committee meeting on Monday, the 12th. This anticipation was realized. The Committee took cognizance of the relief credit settlement proposal as made by Schüller, and stated that it would be transmitted to the various governments represented on the Committee for action. I expect to be able later to transmit the exact formula of this proposal; something, as I understand, that was left to Schüller’s discretion. The Committee further passed a resolution authorizing the subordination to the projected new federal loan for a period of thirty years of the Austrian assets or securities pledged for the repayment of the relief credits. This last action was taken by the Committee although the Dutch and Swiss delegates were without authority to vote affirmatively for the resolution. The Committee apparently had reason to believe that the written assent of the Dutch and Swiss governments would be presently forthcoming. … Apparently the fear expressed to me by Dr. Kienböck that parliamentary assent of other countries than the United States might be found to be necessary, proved to be groundless.
