612 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 10. Prospects: We believe the Soviets are not likely to initiate any significant new proposals on the major outstanding negotiating issues, especially those concerning verification, until they judge the overall political climate has improved and the chances are good that the U.S. and UK would reciprocate. York 248. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, April 11, 1980 SUBJECT SCC Meeting on CTB (U) The SCC met on April 3 to review the UK national seismic stations (NSS) issue in the CTB negotiations.2 As a follow-up to his discussions with Lord Carrington during the Thatcher visit in December,3 Cy wants authorization to commit us to provide, at no cost to the UK, equipment for three additional NSS stations in exchange for the British finding suitable sites in the Southern Hemisphere and agreeing to offer four sites, vice one, on UK territory.4 You will recall that the Soviets have said they refuse to pursue further negotiations on NSS until the UK falls off its position. OSD and ACDA strongly supported this approach, but JCS and DOE opposed the proposal. (S) DOE’s concern was that although the total cost of the added UK stations (about $8 million) is small, it would be difficult to defend on the Hill since they would contribute little to CTB monitoring. However, as Frank Press pointed out, these Southern Hemisphere stations would augment our NPT monitoring capability for events such as the Sep- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 11, SCC 297, CTB, 4/3/80. Secret. Sent for action. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum. 2 No record of this meeting has been found. 3 See Document 242. 4 Telegram 25369 from London, December 21, noted that Vance and Carrington had agreed that “USG would consider problem of financing additional UK NSS while UK would consider additional locations, FCO was beginning to look again at various sites.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]) No other record of this meeting has been found.
