International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
523
In this connection, we believe the lesson we have learned should
be communicated to our trading partners, particularly those in the Eu-
ropean Communities. We strongly urge you to tell them that in this ef-
fort on this very important issue, both Houses of Congress approved
the extension of the countervailing duty waiver on two separate occa-
sions.4 Being familiar with the many issues involved in those votes, we
believe the proper interpretation of them is that the Congress wants
above all else an international discipline over subsidies which distort
international trade.
On that note, we would hope that you would indicate to your col-
leagues in the negotiations our belief that our Members are prepared to
be understanding of the concern over the termination of the waiver au-
thority. Particularly, we believe that the Congress would be willing to
extend retroactively the treatment provided in the new code to those
cases involving the assessment of countervailing duties which under a
new international code of discipline would not be subject to counter-
vailing duties.
Bob, we do not believe those doomsayers on the failure of the ex-
tension of the waiver on countervailing duties. We all worked very
hard (including my staff and your own staff—Alan Wolff, Dick Rivers,
John Greenwald and John Donaldson). We believe we were unsuc-
cessful because of forces beyond our immediate control. We just feel
strongly that we should focus on concluding the negotiations and leave
any legislation on countervailing duties to the implementing phase.
Sincerely yours,
Charles A. Vanik
William A. Steiger
“Congress Lacked a Unifying Philosophy Amid Concern Over Inflation, Spending,” The
Wall Street Journal, October 16, 1978, p. 18)
4 Both the House of Representatives and the Senate passed legislation that included
provisions extending the countervailing duty waiver, but the provisions were in different
bills. (“Treasury Is Seeking Way to Blunt Impact Of Countervailing Duties on Trade
Talks,” The Wall Street Journal, October 17, 1978, p. 3)
