723.2515/1688: Telegram
[Document 251]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
WASHINGTON, November 25, 1925—7 p.m.
For Pershing: Following telegram, dated November 24, noon, just received from
Collier:
“Santiago papers daily devote pages editorially and in despatches as to
impasse. All contend that Chile can make no further guarantees nor
participate further until Commission ‘begins to do that for which it was
established, namely, enacts election law and proceeds to hold plebiscite’.
[Here follows a summary of newspaper opinion which has been omitted.]
[Paraphrase]
I know, nevertheless, that many Chileans feel that Chilean Government has
made a mistake and that it should give every reasonable guarantee of
fairness; it is felt by all that Commission should not delay holding plebiscite,
that Peruvians should not be allowed to provoke incidents, and that
Americans who accompany Peruvians should be sent home at General
Pershing’s request. As long as they are there, although they are private
citizens, it will be impossible to make Chileans believe that our Government
is impartial.
President of Chile and Minister for Foreign Affairs have both given out
statements that Chile will adhere to position she has taken unless and until
Commission shows desire to hold plebiscite promptly. Both state with
evident seriousness their desire to retain friendship of America; and I believe
that bad as situation is, it can be saved by firmness and consideration. Recent
speech of President of Peru on occasion of receiving new Bolivian Minister
in which he offered Peru’s help to Bolivia to recover Province of
Antofogasta, has created bad impression here. Utterances of this sort are
cause of police surveillance of Peruvians in Tarapacá and of deportations
from that province.
The Brazilian Ambassador, the Uruguayan Minister, and the Colombian
Chargé have come to see me about recent developments. In talking with them
I said that I had no instructions but that General Pershing was animated
solely by desire to hold absolutely impartial plebiscite, and that I regretted
