Chapter 6, June–December 1990 863 In the recent Bartholomew-Karpov discussions in Moscow, the Soviets offered to accept future U.S. cooperation with the U.K. if it were specifically limited to SLBMs, apparently permitting a follow-­on to Trident, but prohibiting any transfers of other systems, such as nuclear ALCMs. We have repeatedly assured the British since SALT II in the late 1970s that we would accept no limits on the existing pattern of U.S./U.K. cooperation. Options 1. Maintain the present U.S. position. 2. Offer a package that would resolve both non-­circumvention and heavy ICBMs: We settle for the already agreed limitations on heavy ICBMs (but permit continued flight-­testing) in return for Soviet acceptance of the U.S. position on non-­circumvention. 3. Offer a U.S. (and possibly a U.K.) unilateral statement of plans along the following lines: The U.S. has no plans to transfer strategic offensive arms to a third country, over the duration of the Treaty, beyond the existing obligations (to the U.K.) related to SLBMs. (A U.K. unilateral statement could indicate there were no plans for cooperation with the U.S. on strategic modernization beyond SLBMs.) 4. Agree to a binding limit on future cooperation with the U.K. to SLBMs. Attachment Paper Prepared in the National Security Council7 Washington, September 17, 1990 Heavy ICBMs The Soviets have agreed to cut their heavy ICBM force by 50 percent to 154 missiles with 1540 warheads, ban new types of heavy ICBMs, and ban mobile heavy ICBMs. We need to decide what additional constraints on heavy ICBMs, if any, are necessary to complete the START agreement. NSD–40 states that an acceptable package of constraints for the U.S. would be the agreed constraints plus “such limitations on the modernization of existing types of heavy ICBMs as may be agreed between the sides.” The Soviets resist all further limits in START, saying the 50 percent cuts are already drawing domestic criticism and any further limits must be deferred to follow-­on talks. The June 1990 Summit joint statement on future negotiations calls for measures related to the question of heavy missiles and MIRVed ICBMs. 7 Secret.
