independent organization will make the appropriate order in the premises. Section 2. In case documentary evidence or the testimony of any official of Canada is desired in the United States under the provisions of Article V of the Convention, request therefor will be made by the proper officer of the Department of Justice to the Secretary of State, who will transmit it through the Consul General of the United States at Ottawa to the Minister of the Canadian Government under whom the documentary evidence is to be found or the officer or employee is employed. After consideration thereof the Minister will make the appropriate order in the premises. Section 3. Whenever any officer or employee of the United States is required to go to Canada under the provisions of Article V of the Convention, and whenever any Canadian officer or employee is likewise required to go to the United States, transportation from his official station to the place to which he is required to go, or sufficient money to pay the same, shall be furnished to him by or on behalf of the Government requesting his attendance before he leaves his official station. All other expenses required by Article V to be paid by the requesting nation shall be paid in full before he departs from the place at which his testimony was required. ARTICLE VI Section 1. If, under Article VI of the Convention, a narcotic agent or other officer of either the United States or Canada desires to convey a prisoner charged with an offense against the narcotic laws of his own Government across the territory of the other Government. as provided by the Treaty of May 18, 1908 (35 U. S. Stat. Part 2, p. 2035), he may, in having the warrant or process endorsed, or backed, by a judge, magistrate or justice of the peace, or in obtaining the authority of the Secretary of State or of the Minister of Justice, as the case may be, at the expense of his own government, call upon the nearest United States Attorney or the Department of Justice of Canada for advice and assistance. Section 2. A United States Attorney or the Department of Justice of Canada, so called upon by a narcotic agent or other officer of either Government, will give advice and render assistance in accordance with the law and the Treaty of May 18, 1908.
