Afghanistan 17 more than ordinary attention in the third world, since a ministeriallevel meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement had been scheduled to meet in Kabul May 6–10.3 One immediate task is to share our information and our assessments with the Paks and Iranians and try to dissuade any hasty moves on their part. Our Embassies’ initial assessments are that neither will move under present conditions. Such moves might set off a chainreaction in the area. We will also be closely watching the Afghan/ Soviet border for signs of any Soviet troop movements. Afghanistan had been making slow but steady economic progress. Iran and other OPEC countries had promised the Daoud Government substantial economic assistance and they now may have second thoughts. Our USAID program runs about $20 million a year and is concentrated on agricultural, public health and educational programs in rural areas. In addition, we have about 95 Peace Corps volunteers in Afghanistan almost all of whom work in Kabul. The only significant U.S. commercial interest is that Pan American has a 49% share of the Afghan national airline. In the next few days we will have to make decisions on the following matters. 1. Diplomatic Recognition—We usually recognize new regimes if they control the machinery of government and the countryside and if they agree to honor international commitments made by the previous regime. It is still too early to know whether or not the new government is in full control. If there are public perceptions that the new regime is Communist, there may be political pressures to withhold recognition. The Soviets may extend recognition very soon. 2. Safety of Americans—There are about 1,000 Americans in Kabul. There are no reported American casualties and the foreign community in Kabul has not been threatened. If heavy fighting resumes, we will have to consider whether or not to try an evacuation. 3. The Soviet Angle—There have already been speculative press reports describing this as a “communist coup”. As mentioned above, we have no evidence of Soviet involvement, although the new leadership may include leftists. However, the public and Congress may perceive this as another Soviet victory and there may be pressures to do something about it. 3 The meeting was rescheduled for May 15–20 in Havana.
