Peru  1069
tax enforcement measures recommended by Costa6 and approved by 
Gallo Porras, many of which have not yet been given effect, and was 
delighted to hear about them.
Ending price controls on meat and raising the controlled price on 
bread and rice to a realistic level should ease the deficit by from 100 to 
200 million soles.
Nevertheless he believed he would need an additional one billion 
soles (roughly $40 million) for operating expenses until next June 30. 
He was determined not to resort to the Central Bank. IPC had agreed 
to lend $20 million for this purpose. He wondered whether IPC could 
make it $40 million. I said the Company’s manager7 here had had dif-
ficulty persuading the head office to approve the $20 million and felt 
that one company alone should not be called on for the whole amount. 
He thought small amounts might be raised from others such as Grace, 
Cerro de Pasco, Southern Peru Copper, and the Telephone Company 
(he volunteered that he hoped for an early solution of the telephone 
problem) but probably not much.8 Could the U.S. Government make a 
loan for operating expenses? I suggested that we first explore the pos-
sibility of using the existing EX–IM credit for this purpose. He read-
ily agreed. He would agree to any reasonable conditions attached to 
any U. S. loan and could write some himself. He recalled his article in 
“Foreign Affairs” in 1956 in which he had written that the conditions 
attached to U. S. loans were of more value to the recipients’ economy 
than the loam itself.
He realizes that the 1960 budget will be a major problem and 
battle. He does not think he can reduce it below this year’s total and 
believes that, given this year’s wage increases, it will be a major victory 
to hold it to that level. He is counting on increased business activity, 
some based on renewed confidence and some otherwise stimulated, 
and non-­inflationary financing to provide the revenue. His social pro-
gram, particularly in housing, should also stimulate business.
Social Program
Beltran feels strongly that unless the reactionary feudal attitude 
of the Government and ruling class is changed quickly, there will 
be a social explosion, sparked by the Communists but participated 
in by most of the underprivileged 95 per cent of the population. He 
hopes to follow the British pattern of “social progress by conservative 
6 [illegible in the original] United States Operations Mission in Peru.
7 Jack Ashworth.
8 Compañía Peruana de Teléfonos (Peruvian Telephone Company), a subsidiary 
of International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, sued the Government over a 
December 23, 1958 decree setting up a committee to establish new procedures for rate 
changes, as reported in despatch 1049 from Lima, May 22, 1959. (923.30/5–2259)
