National Security Policy  577
strengthen the strategic position of the USSR. The Soviets will therefore 
continue to provide substantial military aid to the Satellite and Chinese 
Communist military establishments, including weapons, equipment, 
and training assistance. They will continue their efforts under the 
Warsaw Pact to develop and maintain reliable and effective forces in 
the East European Satellites, but they probably do not contemplate any 
significant expansion of these forces. It is unlikely that Soviet planners 
would count on East European forces in general to make an important 
contribution to Soviet military operations, except perhaps in air defense 
and in maintaining security for lines of communication.
117. The Soviets probably regard the increasing military capabili­
ties of Communist China with mixed feelings. While Chinese military 
strength is a valuable addition to the power of the Communist Bloc, as 
this strength grows it will also give China increasing weight within the 
Bloc. It will be many years before the Chinese have a large and modern 
arms industry of their own, a development the Soviets might view with 
misgivings in any case, and in the interim the Chinese will press for 
Soviet aid to effect a costly modernization of their forces. We believe 
that the Soviets will probably try to restrain the pace of Chinese military 
development in order to prevent the Chinese from achieving too large 
a degree of military independence. But they will probably also feel that 
they have no choice but to support such development. It is probable 
therefore that they will continue to assist the Chinese in developing and 
producing certain types of modem equipment. They will also probably 
begin to supply such Soviet-­made weapons as jet medium bombers, 
advanced fighters and guided missiles for air defense, and possibly 
short-­range missiles for offensive use as well. The USSR would prob­
ably retain control over any nuclear weapons based in the territory of 
Communist China or other Bloc nations.
SPECIAL WEAPON DEVELOPMENTS
Nuclear Weapons
118. The USSR is known to have conducted more than 70 nuclear 
tests since August 1949 in its program to develop a variety of nuclear 
weapons. Two test series were conducted during 1958. In the first series, 
13 tests were conducted at two widely separated proving grounds 
during the three months preceding the USSR’s announcement of a uni­
lateral test suspension on 31 March 1958. The Soviets resumed testing 
in a second series which began in September 1958. Explosions in the 
latest series have included two of about seven megatons, about twice 
the yield of the largest Soviet explosion detected previously. The latest 
two tests were of low yield and were conducted in the general vicinity 
of Kapustin Yar. From the present technical evaluation of the 1958 tests, 
it appears that the Soviets made further advances in the development
