Chapter 7, January–May 1991 1001 respond. However, there is no good reason to believe that an extended exchange with the Soviets about the U.S. downloading proposal would produce Soviet acceptance. The “deal” that Bessmertnykh proposed to Baker, which would have the U.S. accept the Soviet downloading proposal, constituted an implicit rejection. In brief, we may be at an impasse with the Soviets over an issue that could be, and perhaps should be, a treaty-breaker. Your meeting should decide whether and, if so, how the current U.S. position should be modified. A discussion paper on this subject is attached at Tab II. Option A is the current U.S. position. The talking points that presented this proposal to the Soviets appear as the last page of the discussion paper. Option B is a version of the current U.S. position that should be more attractive to the Soviets in two respects. First, it would allow the Soviets to download up to 1000 RVs on any combination of ballistic missiles, rather than limiting downloading to the SS–N–18. Second, it would give the sides a continuing right (rather than a one-­time opportunity) to download additional existing types of missiles as previously downloaded types are retired, subject to the 1000-RV cap. The U.S. would be able to download either all MM-IIIs, or 300 MM-IIIs and approximately half the Trident force under Option B. Option C adds to the current U.S. position by giving each side the right to download up to 500 RVs in addition to grandfathering the downloaded MM-III and SS–N–18. It would permit both sides to download a total of about 1500 RVs. The U.S. could download all 500 MM-IIIs plus half the Trident force. Option D (2 RVs per missile on 3 existing types) is the alternative that had been previously generated by OSD and JCS in an effort to find a middle ground that limited downloading while fully protecting the ability of the Navy to download SLBMs as a hedge against possible START II constraints. Moscow would argue (with some justice) that it gives the U.S. far more flexibility to download than the Soviets. Your recent meeting rejected this option because it allowed both sides far too much freedom to download. Other START Issues I can review other issues that the Ungroup has been discussing and deciding in preparation for the Geneva trip. Your meeting should be aware of, and perhaps should ratify, the approach we intend to take to two issues in particular. New Types. If the Soviets could easily get a follow-­on variant of an existing missile treated as a “new type” under START, they could accomplish many of the same objectives as they apparently seek with
