1044 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Latin America and a positive response from Japan and several other industrial country members. We have prepared a favorable response which should go to the IDB shortly.7 • Research Institutes: The President may reiterate at the Summit your Seattle speech recommendation on regional LDC energy research and training institutes. We also plan to test this idea in bilateral conversations and at the UNCSTD. If the developing countries respond positively to this idea, we may make a specific proposal at UNCSTD for a more detailed evaluation of this approach. We may also be in a position by autumn to make specific proposals in your UNGA speech on this and other energy initiatives. • Conference on New and Renewable Energy: A US strategy paper is now being drafted for the 1981 Conference.8 We would hope that the Conference would endorse progress made in the expansion and creation of regional research centers and in experiments with energy finance (such as those undertaken by the IBRD and regional banks), and might establish some kind of global coordinating mechanism to set priorities and coordinate funding for research on LDC energy problems (probably along the lines of that which exists for agriculture). • Assessments: DOE has completed an assessment of national energy needs and resources for Egypt, is wrapping up the Peru assessment, and is about to get one underway with Argentina. In addition, an assessment program is probable for Portugal and possible for Yugoslavia and South Korea. AID is launching a major assessment project with Indonesia, and assessment components are included in a number of specific technical assistance projects (see Thailand below, for example). More funds could be effectively used in these programs as well as in the technical assistance and demonstration programs below. • Technical Assistance and Demonstration Programs: AID is undertaking a $26 million program in 30 countries this year, and plans to expand this to over $40 million in FY 80. A major new program in Thailand provides a good example of our bilateral activity—it will include technical training, building institutional capacity to analyze energy programs and formulate policies, and will particularly highlight rural energy needs, including a fuelwood technology component. • Tax Policy: Another idea that may warrant serious consideration—but is likely to encounter domestic opposition because it could appear to help the oil companies—is for the US to give more favorable foreign tax credit treatment to income earned by US companies from 7 Not further identified. 8 The paper was not found. The UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy met in Nairobi in August 1981.
