1044
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Latin America and a positive response from Japan and several other in-
dustrial country members. We have prepared a favorable response
which should go to the IDB shortly.7
• Research Institutes: The President may reiterate at the Summit
your Seattle speech recommendation on regional LDC energy research
and training institutes. We also plan to test this idea in bilateral conver-
sations and at the UNCSTD. If the developing countries respond posi-
tively to this idea, we may make a specific proposal at UNCSTD for a
more detailed evaluation of this approach. We may also be in a position
by autumn to make specific proposals in your UNGA speech on this
and other energy initiatives.
• Conference on New and Renewable Energy: A US strategy paper is
now being drafted for the 1981 Conference.8 We would hope that the
Conference would endorse progress made in the expansion and cre-
ation of regional research centers and in experiments with energy fi-
nance (such as those undertaken by the IBRD and regional banks), and
might establish some kind of global coordinating mechanism to set pri-
orities and coordinate funding for research on LDC energy problems
(probably along the lines of that which exists for agriculture).
• Assessments: DOE has completed an assessment of national en-
ergy needs and resources for Egypt, is wrapping up the Peru assess-
ment, and is about to get one underway with Argentina. In addition, an
assessment program is probable for Portugal and possible for Yugo-
slavia and South Korea. AID is launching a major assessment project
with Indonesia, and assessment components are included in a number
of specific technical assistance projects (see Thailand below, for ex-
ample). More funds could be effectively used in these programs as well
as in the technical assistance and demonstration programs below.
• Technical Assistance and Demonstration Programs: AID is under-
taking a $26 million program in 30 countries this year, and plans to ex-
pand this to over $40 million in FY 80. A major new program in Thai-
land provides a good example of our bilateral activity—it will include
technical training, building institutional capacity to analyze energy
programs and formulate policies, and will particularly highlight rural
energy needs, including a fuelwood technology component.
• Tax Policy: Another idea that may warrant serious consider-
ation—but is likely to encounter domestic opposition because it could
appear to help the oil companies—is for the US to give more favorable
foreign tax credit treatment to income earned by US companies from
7 Not further identified.
8 The paper was not found. The UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of
Energy met in Nairobi in August 1981.
