720  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
fundamental human rights and freedoms which we have achieved and 
preserved at great costs.4 As an immediate demonstration and as tangi-
ble evidence of our sincere devotion to this objective I recommended, 
and the Congress of the United States approved, the authorization of 
$500 million for this purpose.5
It would indeed be a tragedy for us all and a great triumph for 
Communism if your country having once freed itself of the Communist 
yoke should again find that yoke reimposed. You may be sure that the 
needs of Guatemala, both for the immediate and for the long term, will 
be given prompt and sympathetic attention by my Government, which 
has responded willingly in the past to Guatemalan needs. As you know, 
just a few days ago approval was given of a total of $9.6 million in 
loans and credits by the Export Import Bank and by the Development 
Loan Fund.6 Active consideration is being given to other loan requests 
already filed with our lending institutions.
Regarding your current situation, I suggest that through your 
Ambassador here in Washington you provide the specific details of the 
needs for special assistance referred to in your letter to me. Ambassador 
Alejos has shown himself to be a most energetic and conscientious rep-
resentative of your government and he is already well acquainted with 
those officials charged with the responsibility of handling such requests 
and the procedures involved.
Again, I would like to assure you of my sympathy and of my deep 
concern over the enormous difficulties you are facing so resolutely. I 
extend to you my cordial best wishes for your personal health and hap-
piness, together with my wish for the continued prosperity and peace 
with justice of the Guatemalan people.
With assurances of my highest esteem.
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
4 For documentation on the Committee of 21 meeting at Bogotá, Colombia, 
September 5–13, 1960, see Documents ETA–32–34, 38, 42–44, 49, 55; GT–31; HA–29; NI–1.
5 Reference is to P.L. 86–735, approved September 8, 1960; for text, see 86 Stat. 74.
6 In a memorandum of October 28 to Under Secretary Dillon, Milton Barall, 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, stated the follow-
ing: “The Eximbank, in August 1960, authorized for the El Molino-Rio Paz Highway 
$2.6 million to cover the foreign currency costs and the DLF $2.1 million to cover the 
estimated local currency costs. The Eximbank portion of the funds was provided from 
an allocation of a $7.5  million line of credit for transportation and communications 
project in the Government of Guatemala’s four-­year investment program.” (ARA/OAP 
Files, Lot 63 D 146, “Financial: Guatemala, 1960”).
