March 27–December 31, 1979 943 and Ambassador Strauss said we agree entirely; our common objective is to make Camp David work. Secretary pointed out that Israeli fears that the US is trying to make the West Bank and Gaza into an independent state are unfounded and reviewed history of negotiations that led up to the accords. 5. Secretary said he would like to discuss Lebanon. Weizman said he expected that and asked if he could lead off. Obviously primed for the subject, Weizman then launched into a long and impassioned discourse. Fact that situation is currently quiet in southern Lebanon is mainly result of Israel’s policy, Weizman argued, though efforts of US had contributed. Basic problem is that there is no authority in Lebanon. Lebanese Government doesn’t control the country, Palestinians have wrought havoc and Syrians are in occupation of large areas; order reigns only in the Haddad area, Weizman said, terming Haddad a “genuine nationalist” and a “great man.” On top of all this there are ten to fifteen thousand armed Palestinians in Lebanon and when bombs go off in Israel terrorist headquarters in Tyre, Sidon and Beirut claim credit. What, Weizman asked, can you do with a country that harbors thousands of armed terrorists and allows its territory to be used freely to attack its neighbor? Haddad was doing a good job but couldn’t stop all attacks on Israel. UN was doing its best but there were 500 armed PLO in their area; and Israeli forces were working overtime to prevent attacks. In the past four months Israel had gone out and gotten the terrorists, and for that reason terrorists had not managed to carry out any major actions against Israel during that period. As a result the PLO had taken out its frustration on Haddad and “made life miserable for him,” Weizman said. 6. The question for Israel, Weizman said, is what does it do when it gets information that a terrorist group is getting ready to hit it? Should it wait and try to catch them or go out and get them? After returning to this point several times, Weizman said that if terrorists keep quiet, Israel will too. But if it learns that terrorists are on their way to kill Israelis he would not recommend to the cabinet that the IDF simply wait for them to arrive. Weizman repeated that in his view the current quiet is a direct result of the hard hitting done by the IDF. 7. The Secretary said we don’t question Israel’s right to defend itself but realistically both the Israelis and we know that Israel has been hurt badly by the devastation it has wrought in Lebanon. The war in Lebanon has been covered on prime time TV both in this country and in Europe, and people’s attitudes have been seriously affected by what they’ve seen. Secretary stressed that Israelis must find some different way to deal with the terrorist threat. Secretary explained that we have mounted a major effort to bring about a truce, a lasting end to the violence, and that we have been dealing through third countries in an ef-
