International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 347 you of this morning.2 On the basis of Solomon’s presentation of the extremely gloomy mood among money managers, I would add to the list of measures I recommended moderately restrictive fiscal and monetary policies. This means at a minimum not allowing the budgetary deficit to increase and raising interest rates slightly. It seems to me that the President will soon be faced with a tough decision: Option 1: In order to stabilize the dollar and avoid a deterioration of our national security position, take measures to restrain economic growth and freeze unemployment at the present level with the resultant undesirable domestic economic and social consequences. Option 2: In order to keep the economy growing and unemployment falling, let the dollar continue to depreciate with the risk of a major flight from the dollar with all of the serious economic and political repercussions that would follow. The policy dilemma is put in stark terms for clarity. In reality, I think that economic growth could be restrained somewhat and unemployment held at present levels without serious economic or political consequences. A higher rate of economic growth and lower level of unemployment could be pursued after the dollar had stabilized and after the current account disparities had been reduced to tolerable proportions. I recommend that you give serious consideration to my recommendation that the President create a “council of war” to consider and decide on an integrated, comprehensive program to stabilize the dollar. 2 In his March 14 memorandum to Brzezinski, Renner proposed a number of measures, in addition to an oil import fee, to stabilize the dollar: the convening of “a ‘council of war’” to devise a comprehensive stabilization program; a Presidential effort to encourage the energy bill’s passage; a subcabinet investigation into executive action to accelerate oil conservation; a report from Blumenthal on increasing U.S. foreign exchange reserves so as to augment the government’s ability to intervene in the exchange market; Treasury market intervention “to stabilize the dollar in an acceptable range;” foreign government cooperation; wage and income guidelines to stem inflation; and a major Presidential statement. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 21, Treasury Department: 2/77–3/78) On March 15, Renner sent Brzezinski and Owen a revised version of the program (which omitted the report from Blumenthal, but suggested that Carter “clamp a firm ceiling on the budgetary deficit,” as well as a moderate interest rate increase by the Federal Reserve); in his cover memorandum, Renner noted Solomon’s “100 percent” agreement with the proposals. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 68, PRC–058, 3/16/78, Monetary Situation)
