44 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII with a presumption that it bodes ill for Pakistan. Even those Paks who perceive their own paranoia point out that paranoids can have real enemies. 5. There is great disappointment among our Pakistani contacts that the U.S. has not said more in criticism of the bloody events in Kabul at the end of April. Officially, we have been pressed, bilaterally and in the CENTO context, for some concrete evidence of what we propose to do about the change that has come about in Afghanistan to ensure that the pox let loose there in April does not spread to Iran and Pakistan in the months and years ahead. While as a practical matter, the Pakistan Government has publicly adopted a wait-and-see attitude much like our own and Iran’s, Pakistan’s leaders feel let down that even in private conversations we have had nothing more to offer than a willingness to consult and an assessment which Ambassador Sullivan has correctly termed “thin gruel.” 6. Many Pakistanis want a close and continuing U.S.-Pak relationship of trust, cooperation, and confidence, so our reaction thus far has been doubly disappointing. Some will, of course, see it as but the latest U.S. let-down of Pakistan, going back to our support of India in 1962, our failure to aid Pakistan in 1965 and 1971, and our pressure now to deny Pakistan the nuclear reprocessing plant it feels it needs. Many also see it as part of a wider lack of resolve on the part of the U.S., and outgrowth of our Watergate, Angola, and Vietnam traumas; U.S.- Pakistan differences on policy toward the Horn of Africa will also be cited as evidence of this lack of U.S. resolve. And this comes from those who are still friendly to our interests here. 7. Those Paks who actually oppose our interests here and who have long sought to cut Pakistan loose in a sea of non-alignment accommodationism may well see an opportunity in the current situation to demonstrate conclusively that the U.S. is, in fact, an unreliable partner which has lost its zest for the struggle. They will argue, as [less than 1 line not declassified] notes the Foreign Secretary already has, that Pakistan must stop looking to the U.S. (and CENTO) for reassurance, but rather must accommodate to the rise of Soviet and the decline of American influence in the world. 8. Policy implications: I do not suggest or recommend that we be streamrollered by events in Afghanistan into taking steps in Pakistan or in this region to resurrect an earlier era of U.S.-Pak relations. The world is a different place than it was in the 1950s and early 1960s, and besides, nostalgia has a way of making that earlier relationship appear better than it probably was. We have substituted for the earlier objective of containment of Communism the more realistic formula of promotion of regional stability. Events in Kabul have undermined that stability, and so far we seem unable to think of actions to shore it up.
