112 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI this point outside of the NSC staff, we believe Brent continues to have reservations and may think that the 1600 limit is too low.) The 1600 limit will accommodate plausible alternatives for the post-START U.S. force structure. However, there is a long-­term tension between the 1600/4900 limits and deMIRVing options which the Deputies are scheduled to discuss next week. We do not anticipate extensive discussion of this issue. You may want to confirm consensus on 1600, drawing on the following points. — The paper concludes that we should retain the 1600 limit on delivery vehicles, at least for now. It is not in our interest to expend the political capital at this point to raise a limit agreed at the highest levels, which may constrain the Soviets more than the U.S., and which may encourage the Soviets to reopen issues resolved in our favor. — In our discussion of the Defense Strategy Review (NSR-12) on May 20 there was consensus that we should retain 4900/6000 and that we should retain 1600 for now. — Certain options the PCC is developing that could encourage a shift to single warhead ICBMs may make increases in 1600 desirable. The Deputies Committee will discuss these possible new initiatives next week. 2. ICBM Warhead Sublimit. Should we offer to trade the 3000–3300 ICBM warhead sublimit for an appropriate Soviet concession? Our proposed sublimit will not constrain the U.S. under any foreseeable post-START force and the Soviets have stated that they will not exceed 3300 ICBM warheads. However, the Soviets have refused to accept our sublimit unless we also agree to parallel limits on SLBM warheads and ALCMs, which have been unacceptable to us. All agencies agree that we should not simply withdraw the 3000–3300 sublimit when we return to Geneva. Agencies in the PCC disagreed, however, on the value of the sublimit. JCS, State, DCI and ACDA see it as largely tactical, and favor giving the negotiator flexibility to trade it for a Soviet concession. They have made a case that the sublimit does not impose additional significant constraints on Soviet capabilities given the 4900 warhead limit and throwweight limit, and that gaining Soviet acceptance of a limit that affects only ICBMs would cost us more negotiating capital than it would be worth. OSD, DOE and Ambassador Rowny have argued in general terms that a larger ICBM force would probably only be useful as part of a first strike strategy and, therefore, we should retain the sublimit. It is not clear, however, whether their opposition is primarily substantive or tactical. We recommend that you use this discussion to draw out the Deputies on the substantive importance of this limit. If anyone believes this is a critical element of the U.S. proposal, we need to know
