Human Rights
551
will want to review briefly the guiding principles of the policy as it has
developed over the past two years, the effectiveness of tools we have
used to implement it, the impact it has had in the United States and
abroad, and our outlook for the future.
The Guiding Principles
—We are concerned with all three categories of fundamental
rights: the right to be free from governmental violations of the integrity
of the person; the right to fulfill one’s vital needs such as shelter, food,
health, and education; and civil and political rights.
—These rights are internationally recognized in the Universal Dec-
laration of Human Rights, adopted by the UN in 1948, and other inter-
national instruments.
—We prefer to use positive measures to promote human rights in
other countries, but where these have no effect we will not shrink from
consideration of sanctions or other ways to distance the United States
from human rights violations abroad.
—We apply our human rights concerns flexibly and realistically to
the particular circumstances presented by the country in question,
taking account of our interests with respect to the country and the his-
torical and cultural conditions involved.
—We encourage other countries that share our human rights
values to join us in our efforts to promote human rights.
Tools for Advancing the Human Rights Policy
—Private diplomatic discussions with virtually all countries.
—The Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assist-
ance, chaired by Warren Christopher, which brings human rights con-
siderations to bear on our foreign assistance projects in accordance
with legislative restrictions on providing assistance to countries with
serious human rights problems, and in keeping with the Presidential
directive to adjust our assistance levels to reflect positive or negative
human rights performance.
—Symbolic acts, such as meeting with opposition leaders or in-
viting foreign leaders to visit the U.S.
—Public comment, for countries such as Uganda and Cambodia,
where our private diplomatic efforts are unavailable or unavailing.
—Approaches in multilateral bodies, such as the UN, the OAS, the
multilateral development banks, and the Belgrade conference to review
implementation of the Helsinki accord.
Impact of the Human Rights Policy
—There has been an increase in awareness of human rights issues
throughout the world, which helps to curb existing abuses and acts as
