710 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement and searched. It was the Treasury Department view that the general port security policy should be continued in its present form rather than to leave it in some indefinite status. Mr. Hoover, referring to Secretary Herter’s comments on the Polish passenger vessel calling at a Canadian port rather than at the port of New York, noted that the vessel in question was the Batory. He said that when the Batory earlier called at our ports, it was used to get Gerhard Eisler out of the country; that when its master defected to the British, he reported that his entire crew was under the direction of the Polish Intelligence Service which, in turn, was supervised by the Soviet Intelligence Service; that the master of the crew had no control over his men except for purposes of operating the ship. [text not declassified] The President asked whether, if the Polish policy were liberalized, such vessels would be limited to our major port areas and whether they would continue to be boarded and searched. Mr. Scribner replied in the affirmative saying that such vessels would only be permitted to enter where we have boarding and searching crews and that they would in fact be boarded and searched. The President asked if they would be permitted entry only at specified ports, and Mr. Scribner replied in the affirmative. [text not declassified] [text not declassified] The President said at this point that the only change being recom­ mended related to a limited increase in the number of Polish vessels with the understanding that those vessels could come in only at specified ports; that they would be boarded and searched; and that they would be permitted to engage in some general trade rather than be limited to carrying only cargo specified by the U.S.-­Polish economic agreements. Secretary Herter concurred in the foregoing, stating that the number of ports of entry would not be enlarged. Mr. Scribner confirmed the forego­ ing, stating that entry would be limited to the ten major port areas. The President observed that this came down to the matter of our general policy wherein we were trying to get the Poles to feel a little better toward us, and in the process we were trying to drive a wedge between the Poles and the Soviets. The Vice President observed that underlying another aspect of the proposal was the realization that it would be more profitable for the Poles to bring their vessels here if they could take out cargo additional to that specified in the economic agreements, and that an increase in the number of such vessels entering our ports would make for some increased problems for our security and intelligence services. The President said he did not believe that by itself an increase in the number of Polish vessels would be critical unless the increase became so great that the Treasury people could not handle the boarding and searching of such vessels and the processing of the people thereon.
