3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
782
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
know we were buying grain from you. They only learned about it when
our press carried reports of your statement. Furthermore, we are not in
the least concerned about your various economic measures against us.
It has not exactly escaped our notice that your allies are crawling all
over each other trying to replace the US for commercial benefit, he said.
You have been reading our press and you must know the effect this has
had. Before Afghanistan, both Dobrynin and I had some influence in
toning down the way our journalists treated US affairs. But now they
have full freedom to give vent to their bitterest feelings about the
United States, Bessmertnykh said. (S)
I had indeed noticed the way our leaders have been treated re-
cently in the Soviet press, I replied, and consider it most unfortunate.
Personal attacks on the President or his close associates do not serve
any useful purpose. I am not sure what your journalists think they are
doing, but they should understand that personal slanders of the Presi-
dent cannot have a good effect on future US-Soviet relations, and this is
not just a question of the next several months. (S)
I agree that some of our writers may have gone overboard about
some Administration figures and that this really serves no purpose,
Bessmertnykh replied. Nevertheless, you should understand that we
follow what is said about us very closely, and it is difficult to restrain
our journalists. We certainly understand and anticipate that we are
dealing with an administration that will be here for another five years.
It is our prediction that President Carter will be nominated and re-
elected, and our expectation that Dr. Brzezinski will be a part, an im-
portant part, of the new administration. Nevertheless, our feeling is
that the rhetoric you have used about the USSR has exceeded what was
really necessary. You have to understand that we are no longer living
in the world of the 1950s and 1960s. At some point we will return to a
detente relationship. It may be in two years, it may be four years from
now, but we have to live together in this world. We have no choice
about that. But it will never be the same as it was. It will have to be an
entirely different track, Bessmertnykh said. (S)
Based on a close reading of your press and of what I know about
Afghanistan, what is not clear to me, I responded, is whether you fully
understand that the current low state of US-Soviet relations is entirely
the fault of the USSR. It was, after all, the USSR which invaded Afghan-
istan and brought about the very dangerous situation which now faces
both of us in Southwest Asia. (U)
Afghanistan is only the latest in a series of events, Bessmertnykh
rejoined. Relations were on the way down beginning last summer and
they have gotten steadily worse ever since then. We had absolutely no
choice but to take the action we did in Afghanistan. It was a state along
our borders. Our vital interests were involved. Hostile states were dis-
