894  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
could never be sure where they were. The President said it would be a 
simple matter to reconnoiter them.
He went on to say that when we put our forces in Europe in 1951 
we said they were being put there temporarily. Since that time, how­
ever, our government has taken the stand that we must not pull any­
thing back, that the shock to the Europeans would be too great. Admiral 
Burke commented that the 6th Fleet also has amphibious lift, which 
is very expensive to maintain. No one else has it. The British capabil­
ity is nothing short of pitiful when one considers that this is a type of 
force they particularly need. The President said the French, Germans 
and British are all steadily increasing their gold reserves. Their budg­
ets are not being overstrained. In 1951 and 1952 we made sacrifices. 
It is hard for him to see why they do not now pick up a fair share of 
the burden. He thought there is no reason we could not cut down the 
number of our carriers on station. What troubled the President is that, 
in America’s anxiety to make the free world safe, we make ourselves 
vulnerable to our allies taking advantage of us. There is, of course, 
no possibility of doing anything suddenly. The Europeans have told 
their people too long that their safety depends on the U.S. He recalled 
that de Gaulle said he was unhappy with regard to command arrange­
ments and thought these should be more on a national basis than at 
present. The President told him that there would then be no reason for 
U.S. forces to be in Europe. Admiral Burke said he had been meeting 
with Admiral Lambe of Britain and Admiral Nomy of France. Nomy is 
in an extremely embarrassing position because he recognizes the logic 
of collective defense as against the de Gaulle proposals. The President 
said he had told Admiral Lambe when he saw him that he was asking 
our people to restudy our naval position in the Mediterranean. Admiral 
Burke commented that the French naval people want to work closely 
with us. The President said he is trying to save something in annual 
costs and simply wanted to know if we had to pull down somewhere 
what we would then do with the 6th Fleet. He wants the other countries 
to pick up responsibilities. Admiral Burke mentioned that in this bud­
get the Navy is reducing its strength by fifty destroyers. The President 
said we tend more and more to get other people into the habit of expect­
ing us to pick up the responsibilities and the costs. We should main­
tain the reserves for the whole free world, and rely on local people to 
provide the localized elements of defense, especially on the ground. 
We should provide air, naval and mobile land forces. In that way we 
would be putting our strength into the types of forces that give greatest 
over-­all strength. He asked Admiral Burke to make a further study of 
this matter.
The President next raised with General Lemnitzer the question 
of the strength of the National Guard and Reserve forces. General
