390 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Recommendation: That you give your approval to both the PD and the Human Rights Foundation Proposal, and recommend same to the President.7 7 Brzezinski added “and recommend same to the President” by hand. In a February 9 memorandum to Brzezinski, attached to a February 3 memorandum from Huntington, Tuchman, and Putnam to Brzezinski indicating that they had redrafted the January 24 memorandum regarding the Human Rights Foundation (see footnote 8, Document 107), Clift indicated that Mondale had concurred in the proposed human rights PD and continued to express reservations concerning the Human Rights Foundation. Clift suggested that Mondale’s continuing reservations be incorporated in any subsequent memorandum to Carter regarding the Foundation. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: Policy Initiatives: 1/77–10/78) Mondale’s concerns are reflected in the undated memorandum Brzezinski sent to the President; see Document 114. 113. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, February 10, 1978 SUBJECT Human Rights Attached for your consideration are redrafted versions of both the human rights PD (Tab A) and the proposal for a Human Rights Foundation (Tab B).2 Regarding the PD, this draft has been refined with a particular view to the consequences of a possible leak. The language has been worked over and tightened, so as to minimize the problems that would arise if the entire document were to leak, or if certain sentences were 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1978. Confidential. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. The President added the following handwritten notation in the right-hand corner of the first page: “Zbig—I made substantial changes. Let me have comments from you & Cy. J.” Tuchman sent the memorandum to Brzezinski under a February 10 typewritten covering note, indicating that it constituted a “redone version of the human rights package.” (Ibid.) 2 Tab B is not attached but is printed as Document 107.
