1214  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
and supported by the civilian elements which shared this concern, the 
same military group which had brought Acción Democrática to power 
proceeded to overthrow the Gallegos government, in November 1948.
15. The military junta which took power in 1948 had no program 
other than to destroy Acción Democrática and to ensure its own continu-
ing control of the country. Although initially welcomed by the social 
elements and political parties opposed to Acción Democrática, it was 
unable to secure any substantial and enduring civilian political sup-
port. Seeking to legitimize its rule, the Junta, in 1952, held an election 
for a constituent assembly, expecting that pro government candidates 
would be returned by a people grateful for its beneficent administra-
tion. When it became apparent that, instead, the assembly would be 
controlled by parties demanding a return to democratic government, 
a news blackout was imposed, the election returns were falsified, and 
Col. Marcos Pérez Jiménez assumed the presidency “by decision of the 
armed forces.” Although Pérez Jiménez subsequently went through 
the form of a “constitutional” election by his hand-­picked assembly, 
his regime was a scarcely veiled military dictatorship under which all 
political parties were eventually suppressed or stultified.
16. Constantly increasing petroleum income enabled the Pérez 
Jiménez regime to undertake spectacular programs of public works 
and of industrial and agricultural development, but these resulted in no 
substantial improvement in the living conditions of the masses of the 
people. All elements of society were antagonized by the ostentatious 
benefits conferred upon the favored few, and by the ruthless police state 
methods of the regime. In 1957 the approaching expiration of Pérez 
Jiménez’ “constitutional” term stimulated opposition activity. On May 
Day the Archbishop of Caracas ventured to denounce the pretense that 
Venezuela was a workers’ paradise. The suppressed political parties 
began to concert their activities through a clandestine Junta Patriótica. 
Even within the military establishment conspiracy against the regime 
began to develop. In December Pérez Jiménez re-elected himself to a 
second five year term by means of a yes or no plebiscite, but this totali-
tarian proceeding made his opponents only the more determined to be 
rid of him before inauguration day.
17. The regime itself precipitated the revolution by arresting the 
commander of the Army, Brigadier General Hugo Fuentes, the second-­
ranking Air Force officer, Colonel Jesús Maria Castro León, and other 
officers for conspiring against the government. A disorganized coup-­
attempt by their supporters was easily suppressed. Despite this victory 
of the regime, respectable civilian professional groups were stimulated 
to demand a restoration of democratic liberties. In consequence, there 
were recurring crises between the regime and its military supporters. 
The climactic manifestation of popular hostility was a general strike
