Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1143
7. At a time in which the ratification of the SALT II Treaty has been
indefinitely postponed,2 it is extremely important that the United States
not reduce its support, so often proclaimed and invoked, of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco. And, today, the only formally effective way of undoubted
transcendence of realistically manifesting this support is in the ratifica-
tion of Additional Protocol One. All the credibility of United States
policy on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in Latin America is
compromised, at the present time, if it does not proceed with urgency
to ratify Additional Protocol One. End text.
8. Comment: While we believe the OPANAL memorandum is
more a product of Ambassador Gros’ own making than a reflection of a
ground swell of opinion among Latin American States, the Ambas-
sador’s message provides food for thought. Gros indicated, inciden-
tally, that he will be discussing with Mexican Foreign Secretary Cas-
taneda next week (in addition to a possible reply to the U.S. statement
on transit rights in connection with Soviet adherence to Tlatelolco Pro-
tocol Two)3 the possibility of a multilateral approach to Cuba on Tlate-
lolco signature. The possibilities for such an approach, he said, appear
heightened in the wake of Nicaraguan and Jamaican endorsement of
Tlatelolco signature by all states of the region in joint communique´s
with the GOM, January 24 and February 6 respectively. Gros added,
however, that U.S. ratification of Protocol One would appear to be a po-
litical, albeit not a juridical, necessity in order to undertake such an ap-
proach to the Cubans.
9. Action requested: please inform us of the current status of Pro-
tocol One ratification and provide us with text of reply, if Department
desires to make one, to OPANAL’s memorandum. (Drafted: Jon D.
Glassman)
Ferch4
2 On January 3, Carter requested that the Senate delay consideration of the SALT II
treaty after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, p. 12)
3 Not found.
4 On February 19, the Department of State replied that “it would prefer not to re-
spond to OPANAL memorandum in writing. Please inform Gros Espiell that Department
has received memorandum and will take appropriate opportunity to pass its substance
informally to Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which as Gros Espiell is aware is con-
sidering ratification of Protocol.” While the United States remained committed to Pro-
tocol I, it could not guarantee quick ratification given the “number of other treaties which
would be ahead of Protocol I on the Senate Calendar.” (Telegram 44793 to Mexico City,
February 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, D800088–0296)
