In the discussions on Cartels, appeared also differences between workers and operators. In addition to this, the subject was relatively new and untried, so no accurate definition was possible. We recognize that there are certain physical and geographical conditions in particular situations that might make it desirable and economical for some form of international industrial agreements to be made; but we are apprehensive of the dangers of restricted output and the tendency to monopolistic exploitation. The resolution on Cartels sets out most of the objections and points out that the success of Cartels will be conditional on the character and policies of the Management. Early experience in the United States in agreements of a similar character resulted in restrictive legislation. Because of this and the conviction that governments would participate in Cartels, our Delegation felt that we could not by our actions approve international Cartels and we took a definite position against international Cartels with Governmental participation. The Committee on Agriculture adopted resolutions in support of international extension of co-operative marketing, in favor of enlargement of agricultural credits in countries where these are still inadequate and urging the world-wide collection of comparable statistics on production, movement, stocks and consumption of farm products. The full text of the resolutions reached by the Conference and in each case the degree of agreement reached is shown in Annex 2.87 In conclusion we have appreciatively to acknowledge the contributions of the various departments of the Government in Washington. Before the departure for the Conference, sub-committees were set up to explore the questions set forth in the Agenda on which were experts from the following Departments of the Government, State, Treasury, Commerce, Agriculture, Labor and the United States Tariff Commission. These sub-committees held many meetings before the delegation convened in Washington. Before leaving Washington, the members of the Delegation had two meetings with the expert members of the sub-committees. In the eight days crossing the ocean the Members of the Delegation and the experts accompanying the Delegation held fourteen meetings for the discussion of the documentation
