886 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement it is. The problem is not one of design, but one of management and production. Dr. Kistiakowsky next said that the Federal Council for Science and Technology is making some progress, putting emphasis for exam­ ple on oceanography, materials research and the atmospheric sciences. The Council gets agreements in principle, but little then seems to hap­ pen. There are obstacles in practice, many of them genuine, since the agencies have their own fields and laws. Progress is very slow and laborious. The President said that if this situation is due to specific obstacles or attitudes, he will take quick action if the group will simply advise him where action is needed. If on the other hand it is just due to the nature of our enormous federal government, and its built-­in bureau­ cracy, then all he could advise is to keep nagging. Dr. Kistiakowsky said he believes it is almost entirely the latter. He said there is, for example, no uniformity in practices regarding grants and aids to private research. Some grants include provision for construction of facilities; others prohibit this. The President said there would seem to be need for a group, perhaps under Dr. Kistiakowsky, to survey these grants before commitments are made, against such questions as whether adequate talent—both individual competence and num­ bers of people—exists. In many cases mediocre talent is no good at all. He could take a look at the programs at Defense, at AEC, Agriculture and Public Health Service as a start. A very exact and clear-­cut check should be made as to whether talent exists, whether it will have to be robbed from other programs, whether skills are of secondary caliber, etc. Dr. Kistiakowsky mentioned in this connection that he is com­ ing to believe that the real question regarding technical manpower is whether there is in fact a shortage. He knows of great hoarding by industries. Defense contracts in fact encourage this since they are on a straight cost basis. The President asked Dr. Kistiakowsky to give him the questions and suspicions that he has. He said he would be quite ready to get the senior officials of Defense and the AEC in to his office and ask them to explain this. A.J. Goodpaster Brigadier General, USA
