Chapter 7, January–May 1991  959
broaden the applicability of the ten percent or more criterion, which 
I understood to be a confirmation of the ten percent length criterion 
that you and I discussed in Houston and Washington, and acceptance 
of all of the elements of the “new types” definition. But the Soviet side 
in Geneva is proposing to add throw weight to the list of criteria, which 
we agreed in Washington to set aside because it would lead to the same 
ambiguities and disputes that such a provision caused in SALT II.
– On data denial, my letter outlined a synthesis discussed and agreed 
by our experts in Houston, which includes your proposal for a three-­year 
transition period. In my letter, I highlighted certain issues that need to 
be resolved to complete the treaty, and I look forward to their prompt 
resolution in Geneva. We also must reach agreement on the question of 
exemptions.
– On downloading, we said we would analyze the proposal you 
made in Houston, and these issues can be dealt with in Geneva. We con-
tinue to believe that if the SS–N–18 is to count as three rather than seven 
warheads, this should be dealt with in the context of downloading.
– On heavy ICBM silos, I note that your letter reflects the ideas that 
you and I discussed in Washington.
– Both sides contributed to the Houston package. For our part, we 
made difficult decisions on PPCM, on the maximum number of ALCMs 
on Soviet heavy bombers, on data denial, and on other issues. We rec-
ognize that the Soviet Union also made difficult decisions. As a result, 
following Houston it seemed that START could be completed for the 
February summit.
– Now Soviet backtracking in Geneva has taken us off the path to 
completion of START, and so I have to now look to you to conform the 
Soviet position in Geneva to what was discussed in Houston. In that 
context, we are prepared to engage in intensive negotiations in Geneva 
on the remaining issues to complete the START treaty that our leaders 
want.
– On the question of a meeting between Amb. Obukhov and Amb. 
Bartholomew, I agree that such a meeting could be useful. However, 
our experience has been that such meetings are usually more produc-
tive when held in close conjunction with a meeting of ministers, as in 
Houston, and I would prefer to proceed in that context. In any event, 
the first order of business should be to get the Houston package back 
on track in Geneva, and I hope you can move toward that end.
Sincerely,
James A. Baker, III
Baker
