534 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Turkey-Cyprus reports were a particular source of trouble. So was the report on Israel (the West Bank). And there were several others. The Administration is caught in a Catch-22. If the reports are honest enough to satisfy the domestic constituency, they will disturb important bilateral relations. If they are diplomatically drafted, they will be attacked in Congress as coverups. This year, in my judgment, the countries which clearly are sensitive, or may be so (depending on events between now and the end of the year), include: Zaire, Ecuador, Nicaragua, South Korea, Cyprus, Greece, Portugal, Turkey, Afghanistan, Egypt, Iran and Israel. I have two concerns: the immediate problem of how to approach this year’s reports; and the longer range question of what our policy should be towards the enactment of statutory reporting requirements? With regard to this year’s reports, I recommend that the NSC ask to review State’s semi-final drafts before they are sent back to the embassies for comment.5 This may be sensitive since the documents will not yet be cleared and will be the subject of hot intra-State controversy, but if we wait until the end of the process it will be too difficult to make major changes. The schedule is as follows: The embassies have until October 13 to return their reporting (detailed questionnaires covering every aspect of human rights). The regional bureaus at State have until November 1 to comment on them. The Human Rights Bureau (HA) has until November 20 to comment on those drafts. Then INR, together with the bureaus and HA puts together semi-final drafts for Christopher’s final cut by December 20. I recommend that we ask to see the drafts by the end of November, i.e., after HA has worked over the regional drafts. Regarding the more general problem, I can sympathize with Christopher’s conclusion of last year that we had to make the reports as thorough and accurate as possible in order to meet Congressional criticism of Administration weakness on human rights. To a certain degree we are still in the same position vis-a-vis the Congress this year, but I think the time has come to adopt a more sophisticated policy.6 Specifically, I recommend that this year we link (1) an aggressive (and if need be a critical) stance urging Congress to take meaningful action on human rights by ratifying the 5 international treaties which lie before it; with (2) a campaign to stop and then reverse the trend of enacting mandatory reports on the human rights behavior of foreign countries. (This year two new reporting requirements were added—to OPIC and Ex-Im 5 Inderfurth added the following handwritten notation in the margin: “I agree. RI.” 6 An unknown hand underlined the second half of this sentence, beginning with the phrase “the time has come.”
