Non-Proliferation
971
scheme was intended to have an evolutionary character, if Korea and
Taiwan want in, it would be hard to say no. (S)
Smith said that he also wanted to offer long-term fuel licenses; for
NPT parties he would issue licenses for the life of the reactor. (S)
Smith said that if we fail to do something along these lines, our
policy would begin to fall apart. Other countries are turning to the So-
viets; Europe is currently doing more enrichment for Europe than the
US. They are also building their own enrichment plants. He did not
think that the changes would have any affect on domestic nuclear pro-
grams such as Barnwell and Clinch River. He had talked to Con-
gressman Bingham and other staffers; we would run into some static,
but there are other Congressmen who will believe the changes don’t go
far enough. (S)
Owen asked exactly what the President is being asked to decide;
would it be authority to open negotiations. Smith said it would be au-
thority to go ahead with Congress and Japan and Europe, with the
President’s approval to be sought before we get locked in. It is hard to
define when he would come back to the President; perhaps before we
give them specific proposals. But the President would be free to change
the timing or substance as we go along. (S)
Smith said that no concessions would be agreed until everything in
the package was agreed; the “deal” is a whole package. (S)
As for the risks of public perception of a major change, Smith said
that is why he regards his proposals as planning assumptions. At
the end of the negotiation, he felt that the public would accept the
result. (S)
Asked about the acceptability of relaxing our MB–10 policy only
for some countries, and not for advanced LDC’s like Brazil, Argentina
and Taiwan, Smith said Argentina won’t be producing plutonium in
quantities until the next decade. He could not predict the future,
but full-scope would help to prevent new deals without adequate
safeguards. (S)
Aaron said that what the US would give up is clear; it is not clear
what we would require in return. There would be increased flow on
plutonium, but the regime the flow goes into is not very clear. The goal
of better cooperation for problem countries may become a constantly
moving target; others will pocket our concessions but it is not clear we
will get the desired return. (S)
Smith said that if we only succeed in getting an effective IPS, we
would be better off than now. (S)
Eisenstat said he had real concerns on the signal this change would
send with regard to our position on Clinch River and domestic repro-
cessing; he wanted to consider this further and take Congressional
