Arms Control and Disarmament 1663 systematic and rigorous feeding in of technical factors involved in arms control. The Presided asked if Dr. Killian felt that any additional charter or directive from him was needed to carry this out, expressing agree­ ment with the principle. He added that, just as military men succeed as they work themselves out of a job, the scientists should be working themselves out of the job of devoting their talents to military weapons systems. At Dr. Killian’s request, Dr. Land carried forward the discussion of the subject. He said first that he was grateful for the President’s support of scientific activity since the group first met with him about a year and a half ago. The whole attitude of the country has been turned around in the few months, and the President’s personal part in this has been the decisive factor. (At this point a note was brought in which the President read aloud to the group, indicating that Admiral Strauss’ nomination had been reported favorably out of committee by a margin of one vote; there was no generally shared reaction from the scientists.) Dr. Land went on to say that the problem is, while using science for military ends, also to recognize in a practical way the obligation of science to bring about abundance, well-­being, a better life, etc. He therefore asks whether something could be done to dramatize scientific efforts in behalf of arms control. He said that if scientists talk to our mil­ itary people about arms control, they are immediately suspect as being soft or indifferent to security—even if they are the very scientists who have made great contributions to military technology. There is every reason why the United States should take initiative on arms control, and scientists should be permitted to contribute all ideas they can— as to how to control armaments and make a better life for everyone. His specific request is for the President to work with the scientists to advance and foster arms control. The President said that if the scientists can help to show concrete ways to make progress on arms control, he will be most grateful and glad to join in the process. Dr. Wiesner next spoke, pointing out that this is a very large prob­ lem, some aspects of which caused him great concern while he was at Geneva. Our national effort in such fields as the disarmament field seems to be characterized by too slow decisions, too many conflicting objectives, and inadequate management and study of the problem. He is convinced that arms control needs study in detail. For example, he felt that U.S. policy makers, prior to the U.S. commitment last year to suspend testing, were woefully uninformed on the problem, at least in respect to any degree of detail. He said the inevitable consequence is overconservatism in negotiation. He said there is no continuing devel­ opment of technical background and studies for disarmament. Accord­ ingly, our group went to Geneva with quite inadequate technical and
