1644 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. Quarles said that he felt that we should continue our unilat­ eral abstention until October 31 and then if no progress toward agree­ ment is evident we might announce that we will abstain unilaterally from atmospheric testing indefinitely but that we consider ourselves free to conduct such non-­contaminating tests as our security interests may require. Such a move would seem to be the best combination of cold war tactics and technical requisites. It would undoubtedly be more expensive to do all our testing in the underground and outer space environments, but he felt it would be better to bear such expense than to continue to bear the onus of contaminating the atmosphere. If such a policy were too difficult in terms of development requirements it might be modified by limiting atmospheric tests to a certain amount of radi­ ation. Mr. Quarles said that in any event he felt we should reserve any such announcement until October 31. Dr. Killian said he wished to emphasize the importance of obtaining better and more solid factual information on the usefulness of under­ ground tests. He noted that there was considerable difference of opinion between Los Alamos and Livermore on this question and that AFSWP was skeptical of the usefulness of tests in this environment. Similar attention should be given, he felt, to the question of testing beyond the 50 kilometer altitude limit now being discussed for our atmospheric proposal since there seems to be a real problem of fallout from explo­ sions beyond this altitude. Mr. McCone and Mr. Quarles agreed that these questions should be urgently studied and that the mechanics for such study would be discussed further with Dr. Killian. Similarly, the prob­ lem of further exploratory programs to further our knowledge of detec­ tion of underground and outer space tests would be coordinated with Dr. Killian. Mr. McCone noted that he was often asked whether a total cessa­ tion of nuclear tests would not involve foreclosing the possibility of development of an anti-missile missile system. Mr. Quarles said that “foreclose” was perhaps too strong a word but that he felt that if we could make no further nuclear tests we would seri­ ously prejudice the possibility of developing an effective anti-­missile missile system. Dr. Killian pointed out, however, and Mr. Quarles agreed, that the primary technical problems now standing in the way of an anti-­missile missile system were engineering rather than nuclear and that we do now have a warhead which could be used with such a system. Mr. McCone said that if the U.S. depends to a large extent for its security on defense against incoming missiles he wondered how we could justify any stoppage of nuclear tests in the high altitude area. He thought that the public had been convinced of the need for protec­ tion against attacking aircraft and that an anti-­missile system would be looked at in the same light.
