394
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
127.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, May 3, 1979, 3 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Kurt Nier, GDR Deputy Foreign Minister
Patt Derian, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs
ALSO PRESENT
Ambassador Grunert, GDR Ambassador to U.S.
Ambassador Bolen, U.S. Ambassador to GDR
Joachim Elm, Planning Staff, GDR Foreign Office, Berlin
GDR Interpreter (nu)
Gisela Marcuse, Language Services
Jonathan Greenwald, HA/HR (Notetaker)
SUBJECT
Human Rights Questions including CSCE, Divided Families, GDR Restrictions
on Journalists and Dissidents, GDR Educational Policy, Jewish Claims
Ms. Derian and Dr. Nier expressed pleasure at seeing each other
again so soon after their discussions in Berlin in October.2 Dr. Nier said
that he had spent the morning in consultations with U.S. representa-
tives, headed by Deputy Assistant Secretary Goodby, on many ques-
tions important to bilateral relations.3 He could say that in some areas
we have come forward a step. The Consular Convention has visibly
neared conclusion. Ms. Derian expressed satisfaction.
Dr. Nier said that a further step has thus been taken that can
produce a positive effect upon other areas. The agenda had not yet
been completed. There would be a chance to continue with Mr. Goodby
the following day.4 His program also called for meetings with other
figures in the Department and the Executive Branch and the Congress.
It was an intensive program but one that he welcomed because he
hoped and was persuaded that it would produce not just an exchange
of views, but also concrete results.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs, 1979—Human Rights and Country Files, Lot 82D103, Box 4, Germany—East 1979.
Confidential. Drafted by Greenwald on May 9. The meeting took place in Derian’s office.
2 See Document 123.
3 In telegram 112470 to East Berlin and Bonn, May 4, the Department reported that
during their meeting the previous day, Nier told Goodby that the German Democratic
Republic agreed with the April 16 U.S. proposal on the nationality issue in the Consular
Convention. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790202–0894)
4 See Document 129.
