794  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
RVs and bomber weapons grows more rapidly and by 1989 exceeds 
that of the SALT-­limited forces by a substantial margin.
—In online equivalent megatons, the Soviet No-SALT force grows 
to a level greater than that of the SALT-­limited forces. The rate of 
increase, however, is more gradual than that shown for missile RVs and 
bomber weapons. This is because highly fractionated payloads tend to 
have less explosive power than payloads with fewer RVs.
For comparison, the SAL/No-SAL projection is also reproduced 
on the bottom two charts. It illustrates that by preparing themselves 
to break out of SALT limitations rapidly upon expiration of a SALT II 
Treaty in 1985, the Soviets could by 1989 acquire forces which, in these 
indexes, approach the forces we would expect them to acquire through 
a more gradual No-SALT buildup beginning this year. If the Soviets 
were to delay the start of a buildup because of uncertainty over the 
outcome of SALT II but began it in 1982, for example, the Soviet curves 
on these graphs would probably be between the SAL/No-SAL and the 
No-SAL curves.
28. A variety of possibilities exist for more threatening Soviet inter-
continental offensive forces. Even under SALT II limitations, the per-
formance characteristics of Soviet weapons might be better, or might 
be improved faster than our best estimates indicate. If there were no 
SALT limitations, the Soviets could deploy even more MIRVs and rel-
atively survivable launchers than in our Mod No-SAL projection. It is 
highly unlikely, however, that the Soviets could substantially exceed 
our best estimates of deployment and technological achievement in all 
components of their forces. This would strain Soviet development and 
production capacity and incur the costs and risks of very fast replace-
ment rates. Projections illustrating the upper bounds of our uncertain-
ties about Soviet technological progress and deployment rates can be 
found in chapter V in the main text of this Estimate.
Soviet Strategic Forces for Peripheral Attack
29. Soviet medium- and intermediate-­range forces for strategic 
attack on the Eurasian periphery have long been superior in numbers 
and capabilities to comparable Western and Chinese forces. The asym-
metry is increasing with the deployment of the mobile SS–20 IRBM and 
the Backfire bomber. On the basis of limited evidence of Soviet plan-
ning in the mid-1970s, and trends in production and deployment since 
then, we have projected a continued, moderately paced Soviet program 
to modernize peripheral strategic striking forces. The main features of 
this projection are:
—Deployment of about 300 launchers for MIRVed, mobile IRBMs 
by about 1985, and the replacement of the SS–20 with a follow-­on 
missile.
