638 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI modern cruise missile. Peresypkin acknowledged the concern, but said it had no place in an effort to provide certainty that no violations were occurring. Curtin acknowledged Peresypkin’s concern over the possibility that a conventional cruise missile could be converted for nuclear use, but said the Soviet ideas would not be effective to address this problem. Attachment points would not make much difference; the control mechanism, which relates to the weight of the fuel (the biggest variable in a cruise missile), would also not be very relevant. Differences in design technology might not equate to differences in mission. Therefore the U.S. side had concluded that all these inspections would not warrant the effort. The important thing was to verify, without intruding inside the missile, that nuclear weapons were not being inserted into conventional missiles. Though the Soviet proposal was very intricate, Curtin concluded, the U.S. side was not sure it was very effective. Peresypkin replied that the Soviet inspection proposal was not very intricate, and an interior inspection could be accomplished in five minutes. Curtin replied that the U.S. side did not have zippers on its missiles. Peresypkin said that, having operated these systems, he knew—­and as air force specialists the U.S. side also knew—­that it was possible to check the interface of the payload with the guidance system, by means of which a missile’s entire flight program was controlled throughout its trajectory. Peresypkin asked whether his understanding was correct that the U.S. side had concerns in two areas: — There was a technical concern that even with interior inspection of a missile there would be insufficient guarantees that the missile could not be armed with a nuclear warhead; and — The U.S. side was concerned that the other side would gain access to technology. Wheeler said he would state the U.S. concerns somewhat differently. Regarding the latter issue, he said the purpose of monitoring in the Treaty should be related to the item that is being monitored and should not go beyond that. Peresypkin said the main Soviet concern was that these weapons must remain conventional, and could not be converted to nuclear use; the goal was to see that no nuclear weapon was placed in a compartment designated as non-­nuclear. He said the U.S.-­ proposed regime would not provide sufficiently convincing evidence that such a switch was out of the question. Turning to the issue of EODs distinguishable to NTM, Peresypkin asked whether this could also include some features that would permit determination of functional military capabilities—­for example, attachment points could be such that a nuclear ALCM could not be
