March 1952–February 1953
397
139.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, November 4, 1952.
1836. 1. During my talk with PriMin this morning he said several
days ago info had come to him that Brit agent was circulating among
tribes in area of Luristan; stopping at houses of tribal leaders; asking
numerous questions re matters domestic concern; and in general stir-
ring up tribesmen. He had given orders for arrest this agent but was
later astonished to learn that foreigner in question was Amer citizen
named Dubois; who claimed to be mbr State Dept traveling in Iran.
This foreigner cld not give convincing explanation for his presence
among tribesmen. PriMin asked if I cld tell him more about Dubois.
2. I said Arthur Dubois arrived Tehran several months ago. He was
mbr Dept State engaged in research. He had not been in Iran for many
years. Purpose this visit was to spend several months in country get-
ting acquainted with changed conditions. It was not easy for researcher
in Dept to obtain accurate picture Iran from written reports. PriMin re-
marked that Dubois was therefore really a spy. I said that if US official,
friendly to Iran and working on Iranian matters in US, was engaging in
espionage if he traveled thru country endeavoring obtain first hand im-
pressions then Dubois was spy. Scores of prominent Iranians went to
US annually for same purpose and no one considered them as spies.
3. PriMin said tribal areas in Iran extremely sensitive. Amers going
into such areas likely be exploited by tribal leaders disloyal to central
govt, who by entertaining these Amers wld endeavor give impression
they had support of US. Furthermore, PriMin was afraid that Amers
going into these areas might unconsciously become agents of Brit who
no longer dare send their own nationals to tribes. He hoped that Amer
natls, particularly during this period, wld refrain from visits among
tribes other than those of official character.
4. I told PriMin I convinced that Dubois had not conducted himself
improperly or had not engaged in political activities. Dubois was plan-
ning in any event to return to US shortly after he had completed his
trip. I said I wld ask all Amer Governmental officials in Iran to refrain
from traveling among tribes merely for purposes of visiting friends,
satisfying curiosity, engaging in shooting expeditions, etc. I added that
of course it wld be necessary in pursuance of their work for various
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 25. Secret; Security Information; Priority; No Distribution. Drafted
by Henderson. The telegram is the Embassy copy as approved and has no time of
transmission.
