Negotiating Channels
513
Short Term Policy Issues
The following list attempts to identify the specific policy issues
which will require decisions soon after the hostages are released. For
purposes of discussion at the SCC, these could be regarded as areas for
possible contingency planning by the various agencies.
Diplomatic Relations. State has already done quite a bit of work in
preparation for the Swiss to take over as protecting power for us in
Tehran, on the assumption that we will maintain diplomatic relations
but no physical presence in Tehran. Alternatively, we could break
diplomatic relations. Will we continue to grant student visas? Should
we explore the possibility for direct contacts with the Iranian leadership
on neutral territory? What does State mean by a “Joint Commission”
which is mentioned in the paper?
Spare Parts. Will we continue to embargo the supply of spare parts?
If this is not part of a hostage release package, what is our asking price
to lift the embargo? Can we realistically expect our allies to continue
the embargo once the hostages are out?
Oil. Will we be prepared to make spare parts and technical expertise
available to Iran? Could we prevent it if we tried? Can we bargain our
supply of parts and expertise in return for access to Iranian oil ports
by U.S. tankers? Are we interested in attempting to resume purchase
of Iranian oil?
Allied Projects. Will we acquiesce in a return to business as usual
on the part of our allies? Could we prevent it if we tried? Is it in our
interest to encourage the allies to rebuild a Western commercial
presence?
Assets. How do we manage the unfreezing of Iranian assets? What
problems do we foresee? How long will it take? What steps can we
take in advance to facilitate management of this very complex problem?
Intelligence. [2 lines not declassified]
[1 paragraph (7½ lines) not declassified]
Longer Term Policy Issues
The following is intended as a thumbnail sketch of the kind of
policy issues which we will have to address in terms of our basic
foreign policy goals once the hostage crisis is off our backs.
CENTO Redux. A combination of mutual need and common vulner-
ability will tend to drive Turkey, Iran and Pakistan together. We will
want to consider how we can best encourage that natural tendency
and how we might best exploit it for our own interests. This will have
to be seen as an important component of our relations with Turkey
in particular.
Iraq will be a key factor, particularly if the tendency to intervene
in the oil fields evolves into outright Iraqi expansionism.
