104 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —The question of command and control which could be crucial and has not been focused on enough as well. —The question of a reserve force. He said that once we were through with these questions, then we should ask whether forces are equivalent on the two sides. Warren Christopher indicated that what he had questioned was whether there was enough of an advantage in superiority for it to be worth the cost. Secretary Brown noted that a fatality level of 100 million was much more significant than a fatality level of 10 million. David Aaron said that he was not arguing about the finite detail of questions such as these, but rather wondered whether we might still have a perceptions problem even if we solve our military and strategic problems. Secretary Brown noted that even if one side suffered 10 million casualties and another 100 million, there still might be deterrence, but deterrence was not as clear and certain when there was a substantial difference in fatalities. David Aaron noted that this emphasized the need for getting a good fix on civil defense. Dr. Brzezinski, in reflecting on the discussion in the previous two meetings, noted that while we were generally confident about being equivalent with the Soviets in a large sense at the present time, we were concerned about certain trends where we did face some dangers. This emphasized the need for long-­range force projections. In addition to the deterrence of Soviet attack on the US, we also wanted to prevent the Soviets from compelling others. In this sense, we needed an umbrella under which we could conduct limited military actions. For example, in the future we might need limited hard-­target kill capability in the event of some type of nuclear exchange. He noted that it was most important that we buy an effective and credible countervalue capability and that we adopt a posture which concentrates on attacking Russian countervalue targets as opposed to all targets in the Soviet Union. Secretary Brown noted that this was more selective than even the neutron bomb. [5 paragraphs (37 lines) not declassified] David Aaron asked whether the Soviets show any priority for protecting great Russians as opposed to others. Bob Bowie said it was hard to say about that. Randy Jayne indicated that he thought the civil defense activity correlated with new construction. Dave McGiffert said that it was the situations in which the population walks into the countryside that really affected the results. Spurgeon Keeny said that no one had really calculated what happens in terms of fatalities after the initial exchange. Bob Bowie said that Herman Kahn had done some assessment of this problem in his Country A-Country B studies and had indicated the view that he thought
