North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
953
Cy Vance, Mike Blumenthal, and I recommend that you make this
decision now. While the discussion of alternative strategies in Treas-
ury’s memo could be amplified, I doubt this would contribute greatly
to your decision since the differences among options that you will be
reviewing in these two cases are not so large as to hinge on later deci-
sions you will be making regarding much larger World Bank and Inter-
American Development Bank replenishments. Delay would prevent
you from announcing the African Fund decision during your trip and
could make it difficult to complete Congressional and international
consultation regarding the Asian Bank before the April 22 Board
Meeting.
I share, however, OMB’s desire to secure early Treasury recom-
mendations concerning the general magnitude of World Bank and
Inter-American Development Bank replenishments. I recommend that
you authorize us to indicate to Treasury that you wish its recommenda-
tions on these two larger banks to be submitted in time to be considered
during OMB’s mid-May budget reviews.
Defer decision on Asian and African Development Funds. (OMB)
Decision on these Funds, as indicated below (Vance, Blumenthal,
Owen) and request Treasury to prepare strategy and recommendations
on World Bank and Inter-American Bank before spring budget review.6
5. Asian Development Fund
a. Treasury recommends US support for a four-year $1.8 billion
overall replenishment, requiring annual US appropriation requests of
$100 million for each of the fiscal years 1980–83, inclusive. Treasury be-
lieves that this option strikes the best balance between international
and Congressional concerns.
b. The Vice President (who is interested because of his forthcoming Asian
trip),7 State, AID, and I recommend authority to agree to a four-year re-
plenishment of up to $2 billion, which would imply an annual US ap-
propriation request of $111 million annually. This course would be
more responsive to the desire of other donor countries (Japan, Ger-
many, UK, and Australia), who favor the $2.15 billion ADB replenish-
group of IFI decisions raises the fundamental problem with foreign development assist-
ance. On the one hand, you have indicated your desire for U.S. leadership in foreign aid
with substantial increases in the more effective programs, such as the IFIs. On the other,
Congress has shown strong hostility toward large foreign aid budget increases, particu-
larly for the IFIs, and may undercut your initiatives. Given this major dilemma, these IFI
replenishment decisions deserve your most careful consideration as a package with the
implications for bilateral aid also taken into account.”
6 Carter indicated his approval of both actions in this option.
7 Mondale visited the Pacific and Southeast Asia May 2–10.
