282  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
215.	 Memorandum of Conversation, George and Robertson1
Vienna, Georgia, September 21, 1955
SUBJECT
U.S.-Red China Geneva Talks
PARTICIPANTS
Senator Walter F. George
Walter S. Robertson, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs
I arrived at Senator George’s office (in Vienna, Georgia) at 10:15 a.m. 
EST and talked with him until 11:45 a.m., at which time a party of sev­
eral people arrived to see him by appointment. There was ample time, 
however, for a complete review and discussion of the Geneva talks. I 
opened the conversation by saying that the Secretary had wanted me 
to come down to see him, to bring him up to date on the progress of 
the Johnson-Wang talks, to explain the strategy we had followed and 
planned to follow, to answer any questions he might have in mind, and 
to receive any suggestions he cared to make.
I reviewed in some detail the situation with respect to Chinese stu­
dents in this country and of American nationals in China. Apparently, 
he had not been entirely clear as to the facts of either situation and was 
obviously interested in obtaining accurate information.
I reviewed the negotiations to date, calling his attention to the fact 
that, despite Chou En-­lai’s public statement that the repatriation of 
civilians could quickly be settled because of the fact that so few Amer­
icans were involved, it had taken six weeks and fourteen meetings of 
dogged insistence to get the Reds’ public commitment to release all 
civilians who desired to go home.
Senator George had not seen the full text of the September 10 
Geneva announcement and read carefully, the copy I handed him. He 
was very pleased with the implications of the wording but added that 
in view of their protestations it was surprising that the Reds should 
have taken six weeks to agree to the release of our nationals when two 
weeks should have sufficed.
I then explained the respective positions of the Chinese Reds and 
ourselves with respect to Item 2 of the agenda. I pointed out that the 
subjects likely to be discussed under Item 2 would almost certainly gen­
erate emotional outbursts and prolonged deadlocks. We therefore felt 
that we should not proceed to the discussion of other matters until we 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2155. Secret. Drafted by 
Robertson.
