88
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
his advisors now believe they have the opportunity to extract retribu-
tion from the United States for its past support of the Shah. Further-
more, Khomeini undoubtedly is using the anti-US campaign to revital-
ize his revolution and to distract attention from the country’s pressing
domestic economic problems. The Ayatollah and his entourage, increas-
ingly carried away with revolutionary zeal, are showing little concern
for the impact of their moves on Iran’s economic and political future.
[portion marking not declassified]
Economic Moves to Date
The Iranians have used a number of economic weapons—some
pre-dating the most recent seizure of the US embassy in Tehran—in
their attempt to apply pressure to the United States:
• All banks and insurance companies—including US holdings—
were nationalized prior to the current flareup. While compensation
for the value of US investments (estimated at $100 million) has been
promised, payment has not been made.
• Oil shipments to US companies were banned following US action
to prohibit the import of Iranian petroleum. While adding some pres-
sure on oil prices, this action will not have a major effect on the world
oil market so long as Iranian production is not cut.
• Withdrawal of Iranian funds from the United States and from
foreign subsidiaries of US banks was threatened. Initially causing some
confusion in currency markets and driving down the value of the dollar
somewhat, this action—even if not thwarted by a US blocking of Iranian
assets—would have had little impact as long as the funds were placed
in dollar-denominated accounts.
• Remaining US investment in Iran (estimated at $300 million)
reportedly has been nationalized. Considerable amounts of equipment
and supplies owned by US contractors also are involved. [portion mark-
ing not declassified]
The United States, for its part, has (a) frozen Iranian assets,
(b) banned the import of Iranian oil, and (c) halted all shipments of
military supplies. [portion marking not declassified]
Future Economic Moves by Iran
Although the opening salvos have been fired, neither Iran nor the
United States has wheeled out its major economic guns. Iran’s prime
economic weapon would be the complete cutoff of oil exports. Varia-
tions could include: (a) reducing oil exports only by the amount going
to the United States or to US companies or (b) extending the embargo
to cover countries supporting US policy. The impact of these measures
would depend on the reaction of other oil producers who could:
(a) do nothing (possible), (b) cut output in support of Iran (unlikely),
or (c) increase output to offset the shortfall (possible). [portion marking
not declassified]
