it is used to relieve Chile from responsibility for all the acts committed under the claim of sovereignty illegally committed by Chile since March 28, 1894, inasmuch as possession of the provinces should, under the terms of the Treaty, have been yielded to Peru at that time. It must also be noted that the Honorable Arbitrator seems to have failed to give weight to the conclusive proofs offered by Peru relative to the expulsions, spoliation of property, acts of terrorism and fraudulent colonization of Chileans on lands of the Peruvians, facts which are so notorious to the world that the Honorable Arbitrator might well have taken judicial notice thereof, and which are sufficient, if they are duly examined and appreciated, to leave no doubt as to the error of submitting this controversy to solution through a plebiscite. The manner with which the Opinion and Award has seemed to treat these acts of vandalism, outrage, and oppression has led the Chileans to renew their persecutions against the Peruvians of Tacna and Arica even since the Award was published, as if they were reassured that they could continue to commit such crimes with impunity. Indeed, through our Embassy, we have informed the Honorable Arbitrator of the recent criminal acts, among which are the following: A Peruvian merchant, Antonio Mollo, with his family, on the 11th of March was violently driven out from Putre. In Tarata the Peruvian homes of Musso, Bulis and Bravo were assaulted, and the last named was killed. The schools of Tacna have been closed. Martines Birne’s house on the Chilean side of the River Sama in Tacna was also assaulted, after the Award was handed down, by three Chilean carabineers and the master of the house and two other Peruvians, Roman y Angel Yanes, and all the occupants of the house were tied and beaten. Threats and violence were committed against defenseless Peruvian inhabitants of Tarata, the women being outraged by Chilean carabineers. The Peruvians Felix Nalvarte, Timoteo Rodriguez, Vicente Mamani, Pedro Lamrec and Lorenzo Flores having escaped from the persecutions of Chilean authorities in Arica, reached Locumba and advise that two hundred Peruvians resident in Arica were shipped from that port to the south of Chile to avoid their vote in the plebiscite. New detachments of Chilean carabineers have been established on the Ticalaco and Tarata rivers cutting off communications between Locumba and Tarata and from there are shooting in upon the defenseless inhabitants of Locumba. Chilean forces are terrorizing the Peruvian inhabitants of the territories involved in the plebiscite with the purpose of forcing them to vote in the plebiscite in favor of Chile, and when they resist they are persecuted and expelled from the territory. Steps are being now taken by Chilean officials to compel Peruvian citizens by force to sign documents of allegiance in which they request that they continue under Chilean sovereignty. Carlos Becerra, Manuel Corvacho, Felix Baluarte, Saturnino Florez, Miguel Corvacho, Nataniel Corvacho, Luciano Lira, Benjamin Navarro, Tomas Chambo y Carlos Otoya have arrived at Locumba, fugitives from Chilean persecutions in Arica, saying that their families have been cruelly outraged. They were forced to flee, making the trip on foot, to avoid being embarked for the South of Chile.
